AN ANSWER TO WILLIAM ALABLASTER his MOTIVES.

By ROGER FENTON Preacher of Grayes Inn.



AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for W. Aspley, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head. 1599.

THE CONTENTS OF THE seven Motives.
1. Of the stay of the mind in doctrine of faith. 2. Of the last resolution of
religion. 3. Of the rule of interpretation of Scripture, and of necessity of
works. 4. Of the multitude of communicants in the catholic faith. 5. Of
alteration, and reformation of religion. 6. Of the power promised to the Church
for discerning of truth, and of the means of deciding controversies. 7. Of
marks to discern heretics by: and of innovation.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS SINGVLAR GOOD PATRONES, THE REAders of Grayes
Inn.
RIGHT Worshipful, I crave your patronage and pardon both at once. I have
stolen from my daily duty unto you, unto whom I owe both my self and all
duty, certain waste hours which I have employed about this discourse. If my
pains have been fruitfullie bestowed, yet they must crave pardon, because they
were bestowed without your leave; if idly, then I must crave pardon twice,
once for them, and next for my self. Howsoever, I am sure my best desert must
plead pardon, which I most humbly beg at your hands; submitting my self, and
thaese stolen meditations to your mild censures. Which if I find favorable,
I shall be encouraged with more alacrity to apply my studies in my ordinary
duties, and with better content as well to amend what you shall find amiss in
this, as also to prepare my self to some greater task. And so with my daily
prayers to almighty God for the happy and flourishing estate of your
Honorable society, I humbly take my leave. At my chamber in Grayes Inn this
24. of November. 1599.

Your daily bounden Orator,

ROGER FENTON.

The Author to William Alablaster, prisoner in the Tower, wishes health of
soul and body.
ALbeit Aarons body mystical, whereabout we contend, might justly occasion a
much hotter conflict, then that dead body of Moses, for which Satan strove
with Michael, thereof to make an idol: yet have I rather chosen (beloved
Alablaster) to offend by over much mildnes, in this general survey, and
discovery of your grounds, then any wise in bitterness of spirit, vnderpretext
of zeal, to gaul and disgrace an adversary. Only to the end this slender
task, imposed upon me, might find the better intertainement even at your
hands: I have weighed your inducements with all indifferency, urged the force
of them so fully as I am able to conceive, and examined them by the touch and
trial of your own grounds.

Wherefore (since by this time I hope the seething of your feruencie is well
nigh over, you become more stayed then before, and able to contain your self
within some limits of moderation) my hearty wish and desire is, that you would
upon this new occasion take a sober reuiew of your own work, more advisedly
consider the premises whereupon you build, and (as God shall move you)
accordingly shape your resolution. Which thing although I have small hope my
labor should be so happy as to effect in you: yet least these your popular
fallacies should insinuate themselves into the minds of the more unstable, I
am the rather induced to publish this brief answer for the use of such tender
judgments, as shall in that kind need the same. So committing to almighty
God the happy success hereof, and submitting my self herein to the censure
of the learned,

I bid you farewell from my Chamber in Grayes Inn, November 24. 1599. R. F.

THE FIRST MOTIVE.
AS the moist and unstable bodies, because they are unbounded in themselves,
never cease from motion, until they be stayed in some other body which has
stay in it self: so the understanding unquiet by nature, passes through all
forms of opinions, until he resolve his assent upon some principle that
stands only upon his own ground.

ANSWER.
THat principle which stays the understanding in humane knowledge, contains
a truth firm in it self, manifest to the light of nature shining in us,
known to every man of mean understanding, carrying every proof, and
upholding each conclusion, which reason is able from thence by discourse to
infer. So that the understanding passing through so many forms of opinions,
by discoursing at random, is therefore unsettled, because he cannot reduce
those fareftcht conclusions to the first principle, and examine all opinions by
that truth which stands upon it own ground.

MOTIVE.
THerefore when the question of truth in controversy of faith is turned too
and fro, in the throng of so many particular quarrels, it is best to go aside,
and single out the two grand Originals and foundations, from the which all
other factions arise: that by taking the just estimate of the strength of
either, our judgment may leave to the stronger part. Al particular
controversies in themselves stand upon their yea and nay, but unto us require
proof: which proof is linked by reason, which reason is chiefly grounded
upon scripture, which scripture is authorized not in the letter, but in the
sense, because it is doubtful in the variety of apprehensions, some leading,
others drawing, many writhing their text to their several factions: The
question is at last removed from the text to the interpreter, from the
scripture unto the men. So that a mind studious of truth is now come to his
last care, to determine of the worth, merit, and authority of these that are
the exposit our and.

ANSWER.
YOu pass from forms of opinions to controversies of faith, from an unquiet
understanding by nature, to an unstable faith in religion: which inference is
not greatly amiss, if rightly taken. For as these two kinds be diverse in
nature, so be they alike in proportion. For the principles of religion differ
from the principles of reason: so does this of faith, from that of nature.
Hence an unstable understanding is not fixed upon one and the same ground in
both kinds. They be alike in proportion thus: as nature has her principles
written in the hearts of all men: so religion has hers revealed from heaven,
to al faithful men. Secondly, as the glimmering light of nature still shining
in us enlightneth her principles, and makes men's minds fully assent unto them:
So the spirit of God enformeth all Christian minds with a supernatural light
of faith, and full assurance of the first, principles of religion. Thirdly, as
the principles of nature are presented to our understanding out of the book of
nature, the volume of creatures and visible things of God, together with many
mysteries in part unfolded by the wise Philosophers in their comments upon
nature: so the first common principles of faith are evidently expressed in the
book of God, besides many high mysteries in part revealed unto us by the
learned and holy men of God from time to time. Fourthly, as the natural
understanding the further it is removed from the first principles by discourse,
and tract of consequence, the more unstable it is, and subject to error, being
not able so steadily to look back from every conclusion to the first ground:
so the minds of Christian men holding the same common grounds, by them
unfolding difficulties, and from them raising conclusio^s, according to the
variety of judgments and apprehensions, do shape so many forms of opinions,
and controversies of religion. Thus far I hope we have gone hand, in hand
without cross, or variance in any point at all. It remains them (since the
understanding even of a christian man is weak and unstable in his discourse
and apprehension) that we seek the means to establish and confirm the same,
so far forth as may stay the conscience of one studious of truth in matters of
religion. Your advise is that notwithstanding all truth in controversy of
faith be grounded chiefly upon scripture: yet the sense of scripture being
diversely taken by diverse, and therefore to us uncertain, the question at last
must be removed from the text to the interpretour, from the scripture to the
men. God forbid the question should ever be removed from the ground of truth:
which truth is contained in the first principles: which principles be evidently
expressed in scripture, not diversely taken, but agreed upon of all Churches: As
that Christ is come in the flesh: Christ is the son of the living God: his
second coming to judgment: the resurrection, and such like, the analogy of
which truths, is an infallible rule for expounding more obscure places, and a
sure ground to build upon. These principles being not doubtful in variety of
apprehensions (like other places of greater difficulty) there is no show of
reason why a christians man's mind should in any controversy be removed from
them; no more then natural reason will in any case forsake her common grounds,
notwithstanding any sect of Philosophers whatsoever, but still labor to try
and examine all opinions by her first rules. Thus much I will presume upon as
granted; if any exception be taken, I appeal to your own words. It is best to
go aside and single out the two grand originals and foundations, from the
which all the other factions arise, that by taking a just estimat of the
strength of either, our judgment may lean to the stronger part. I demand
then when your self went aside to single out the two grand originals, by what
rules did you take a just estimate of the strength of either? If religion be to
you a matter of conscience, you must needs confess, that your rules of
reason, or religion, or both did sway your mind, and make your judgment lean
(as you think) to the stronger part. So that (even by your own evidence) that
last remove of the question from the text to the interpreter, from the
scripture to the men, if it carry any show of truth, it must be interpreted
very tenderly. First, you mean not from that plain scripture, wherein the
first principles be evidently authorized, but only from those obscure textes,
whose sense is doubtful to us in such variety of apprehensions. Secondly, the
remove is not made from the scripture altogether to the men: but so, as still
we keep our sure footing upon the first grounds: in the strength and evidence
whereof divine truth both in it self and to us is evermore established.

Now further to proceed, because the Apostle commands Heb. 6. 1. 2.
us not always to stick in our first principles: we must needs confess that
the understanding of private men vnsteedie in discourse, and feeble in judging
such high and weighty matters, is of it self, as well in expounding scripture,
as setting down conclusions, subject to manifould errors and heresies. And
therefore besides those premised grounds from which we take our rise, we must
be confirmed by such means as Christ has besides provided for the members of
his Church militant here upon earth. Which means are braunched into the
assistance of Gods spirit within us: and the testimony of the Church and holy
men of God without us. These special helps God has provided for his Church,
over and above humane helps common to Christians with the sons of nature.
The former of these, I mean the assistance of Gods spirit, for enlightening our
understanding, and inabling our judgments is purchased 1. by feruencie of
prayer, 2. religious Psalm. 73. 16. Luke 24. 31. Ioh. 7. 17.
exercise, 3. holiness of life, and 4. studious endeavor. Yet notwithstanding
because both reason, and religion joined with humility will easily persuade,
that Gods spirit is more fully resident in holy assemblies then private men's
brains; that Stringe me^tem, and dabit intellectum. Origin.
spirit is to be suspected of singularity, which will not with all reverence
embrace the testimony of the Church. So then a Christian man studious of truth
does rest his conscience upon these three witnesses: First, the evidence of our
first principles expressly propounded in scripture, and written in the tables
of our hearts by the holy Ghost: Secondly, the assistance of Gods grace, and
holy spirit promised to every faithful soul, for confirming his judgment so
far forth, as may lead to happiness, and perform the duties of that place
whereunto he is called: Thirdly, the testimony of the Church and holy men of
God. And these three agree in one. But in your last remove of the question,
From the text to the interpreter, from the scripture unto the men, passing over
the two former, you have resolved your self wholly upon the worth, merit, and
authority of those which are the expositors. So that (according to your
advise) having singled out the graund originals and foundations of our two
religions, and taking (as near as I can) a just estimate of the strength of
either, I find the odds three to one of our side. For, although these three
witnesses be so linked together, as rightly taken they be never severed: yet,
least singling them out one from another we should mistake any, we lay fast
hold of all three, conferring, examining, and confirming to our selves one by
another. You contrariwise, lean your self, and rest your conscience only
upon the third, the testimony of the Church, as upon an infallible ground of
all the rest. Which if it prove a broken staff by your mistaking of it,
(either in taking the testimony of some portion of the visible Church for the
whole catholic: or secondly an unsound part, for the sound: or thirdly,
misconceauing the churches of former times) it will not only deceive you, but
the shiuers thereof wound your erroneous and naked conscience, which easily may
befall such a one, as is of no longer time, or deeper study, then you and I
are well known to be.

MOTIVE.
THe catholic part for the strength of their interpretation allege the
judgment of the Church, the definitions of councels, the consent of fathers,
the harmony of Churches, the practice of all ages, and the rule of
Apostolical tradition, left by succession as the light through the heavens.
The Protestants bring forth the several founders of their sects, Luther,
Calvin, Melancthon, and others of that strain, whose exposition they cleave
unto. Lay this in the balance and weigh together the spouse of Christ, with
Luther, Calvin, Melancthon; aecumenicall counsels with private opinions; the
reverend and learned fathers with Arius, Aetius, Vigilantius, men always in
their time burned for heretics; the harmony of Churches with the iarring of
conuenticles, of them that are in as great brawle with themselves as with the
catholics. The uniform practice of 1500. years, with the often change of
others. The tradition of the Apostles with the dregs of heretics. Now let any
man (though ouerbalanced by affection) consider with himself whether of these
should be believed in expounding the scriptures, and consequently in the truth
of the controversies which relyeth upon the sense.

ANSWER.
THis is right the wise man of Athens, who thought all the ships his own
which came to haven. Church, councels, Fathers, Apostolical traditions, all
yours. And we poor souls turned over to a few single spirits, Luther, Calvin,
Melancthon, etc. If I might be so bold with you as Sir Thomas More was in like
case with a protestant, it were time to put you in mind of one Caius, who
encountering with a scholar would needs have his first demand granted; to
wit, whatsoever had two ears was a foolish beast: For else he could not so
gallantly have come upon him, as otherways he had meant. Your demand is alike
reasonable. For you assume no more as granted but the judgment of the Church:
the definition of counsels: the consent of Fathers: the harmony of Churches:
the practice of all ages: the rule of Apostolical tradition. Which if we give
you, and leave our selves a few particular men's expositions, indeed I confess
you may conclude at your pleasure. But it is well known we do no further rely
upon those learned men's assertions, then they be authorized by the forenamed
witnesses. Which testimonies so confidently alleged for your part I hope you
are not ignorant how that all along in our apologies, defenses, and answers,
they be brought against you by our defenders: especially those witnesses of
more ancient times, unto whom we are content to appeal as most indifferent
judges, and more sincere then any of later times, being nearer to Christ, and
further from these factions. To put you out of doubt I will set down our own
words. Quam ea die Iuellus D. Whit. against Camp. rat. 5.
vocem verissimam ac constantissimam emisit, quando ad sexcentorum annorum
antiquitatem prouocanit, vobisque obtulit, vt si vel vnicam ex aliquo patre aut
consilio claram and dilucidam sententiam afferretis, non recusaret quin vobis
palmam concederet: ea est nostrum omnium professio, idem omnes pollicemur,
fidem non fallemus.

THE SECOND MOTIVE.
THe mysteries of religion do so far exceed the narrow straites of our
understanding, that because they cannot be comprehended by reason, God has
therefore appointed faith to entertain them, which faith is built upon divine
and infallible authority, the mind yielding obedience in stead of discourse,
and receiving indifferently the truth of doctrine, upon the credit and affiance
of the teacher. Therefore that religion which does not stay the assent of the
scholar, and has not irrefragable authority in all matters of faith, has
neither merit of belief in it self, nor others. But such is the discipline of
the protestants, that they afford their scholars no other but humane and
mutable authority, whereby to believe the number and dignity of the
scriptures, with the sense and interpretation of them, in which consists the
sum of all religion.

ANSWER.
THe mysteries of religion do far exceed the narrow straites of our
understanding: for without controversy great are those mysteries, to wit, God
is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, believed
on in the world, and received up into glory. Amongst which the scholars
assent to those mysteries is accounted one (believed on in the world) which you
have well expressed, appointing faith, not reason to entertain them: The mind
yielding obedience in steed of discourse, and receiving indifferently the truth
of doctrine upon the credit and affiance of the teacher. This teacher you have
determined to be the inflexible testimony of the catholic Church, of whom we
received the forenamed principles of religion, yea the scriptures themselves.
And surely that mind which would not yield obedience to the testimony of this
general voice, were (in all sound judgments) most unreasonable. For does not
reason her self tell us, That which most men and wisest agree upon is most
true? does she not add further, Those men be wisest next God (...) Plato in
Timaeo.
that are most dear unto him? Then that religion which is professed and
taught, by the most holy and catholic Church which is venerable for
antiquity: certain for succession: comely for order: admirable for unity:
approved by experience: allowed by providence: confirmed by miracles: rooted in
so many kingdoms: never doubted of but by heretics, is, in the very eye of
reason, to be embraced. How think you? Is not this reasons discourse? And a
sound discourse? You must not deny it, for it is your own. Motive 5.
If reason then build upon Church authority, how place you faith in reasons
room? If this be reasons discourse, what is that yielding obedience in stead
of discourse? Where is that great mystery of godliness (believed on in the
world) which captiuates the understanding to the obedience of faith? Let me
help you out with a school distinction, that we may clear the way before
us. The scholars assent to the Church testimony is called faith, I confess,
but such a faith as the school terms Acquisita fides: faith gotten by
discourse, and testimony of Thom 2. 2^. q. 2. ar. 4. Scotus in 3. sent. did.
23. Caietan in locum Aquin. Durand in 3. sent did. 22
the holy men of God: a faith carried along by reason, grounding upon sufficient
witness, and conuincing the understanding by evidence of demonstration: a faith
incident not to wicked men only, but the devils themselves. But the school
divines have taught a more divine faith, which they call Infusa fides,
immediately inspired by the holy Ghost from heaven: informing the mind, and
inclining the will to entertain the principles of christianity with all
perfect obedience in stead of discourse. For the begetting of which faith in
the hearts of men, that former testimony of the Church, and discourse of
argument does wonderfully dispose and prepare the mind; but yt which gives the
stroke and adds life unto it, is the celestial motion of Gods spirit, which
Saint John calls the witness 1. Ioh. 5. 10. Qui credit infillum testimonium
habet in se. Thom. 2. 2ae. q 2 art. 4. in 3. sentent. did 22. de gra. and
libero (...) ^6. ca. 2. (...). 6. can. (...).
within us, opposing it to the Church testimony without us. This is that true
faith which Aquin affirms never to be found in devils: which Scotus aueres
never to be void of christian charity: which Bellarmin proves, and Trent
defines never to be obtained without divine revelation and inspiration of Gods
spirit, upon which it is built, as upon divine and infallible authority, the
mind yielding obedience in steed of discourse, and receiving indifferently
the truth of doctrine upon the credit and affiance of this teacher. Hereupon
does our religion stay the assent of the scholar, and has irrefragable
authority in the principles of faith, wherein consists the sum of all
religion. These first principles of religion assented unto by this infused
faith (as the principles of reason by the light of nature) have taken a deeper
impression in the minds of the faithful, than the voice of the Church, or an
Angel from heaven could have made. For if we (says Paul) the Apostles of
Christ, nay if an Angel from heaven, confirmed in the state of happiness,
should preach any other Gospel, that is, lay any other principles of religion
then be all ready laid, let him be accursed. Then somewhat there is of more
certainty to us, then Peter or Paul, or any Angel. Sinos, aut Angelus. Thus
Gal. 1. 8.
far therefore you must of necessity yield unto us (except you withstand the
stream of your own Doctors) that albeit the voice of the Church be a witness
of this truth without exception, yet above and beside this, the mind of a
believing Christian is stricken with a lightning from Heaven: inspyred with
divine revelation: informed with that infused faith which far surpasses that
former faith, gotten by discourse and testimony of the Church without us. This
is the last resolution of our religion into a principle that stands upon his
own ground, to wit, into an undoubted assent of the mind informed by true
faith, fixed by the holy Ghost, upon the Axioms of Christian religion. All that
I would say to this point is by your Doctor Stapleton well concluded in one
period. Fideles enim omnes per vocem ecclesiae inducuntur ad fidem; Princ.
doct. l. 8. cap. 22.
inducti autem, and lumine inspirationis diuinae illustrati non iam amplius
propter Loquelam ecclesiae, sed propter Lumen illud diuinum credunt.

But for more remote conclusions drawn from principles by discourse and tract
of consequence, (because therein to rely upon special revelation were
dangerous) we most willingly embrace the voice of the Church (in manner as we
have said to your first motive) always acknowledging Gods spirit to be more
fully resident in holy assemblies, then private brains: promising to lead the
Church into all truth: to be resident where two or three are gathered together
in his name: which spirit for his part will never be wanting, if the Church for
her part be not defective. But whether these promises made be absolute, or with
condition, that is, suppose the Church will not be led, whether the spirit will
perforce drive her into all truth? Suppose her chieftaines assemble themselves
with preiudicate and sinister affections, not with that sincerity which is
required, whether the spirit will therein assist them? Or whether these
suppositions be possible, that God in regard of our sins will suffer such
corruptions to creep into Synodes, as may lead the^ into error, in some ages
more, in some less, though evermore preserving life in the principles of
religion, is the point in question. Upon which issue, we deny such a power of
not erring to the Church militant, as should enforce the mind to give assent to
counsel decrees in the same kind and degree of faith, as to the articles of
belief: which remains more fully to be showed out of your own grounds.

MOTIVE.
FOr they affirm that the authority of the Church, and ministry of whom
their followers receive the sacred scriptures, and their expositours be humane,
and such as may go aside into error, and sometimes do. So that of
necessity, whosoever stands in the integrity of their opinion, either have
no faith at all, or else only humane and errant. For they that have a possible
impotencie of erring in one point of faith, what assurance can they make of
distinction that they do not err in all?

ANSWER.
WE affirm the authority of the Church and ministry to be humane in the
same sense as Saint John calls it the testimony of men: If we receive the
testimony of men, 1. John. 5
the testimony of God is greater. Which testimony of men, was by all consent
the testimony of the Apostles themselves, who jointly were witnesses of the
resurrection of the Lord of life. Then if the testimony of the Apostles be
humane, I hope (in the like sense) we may call the authority of the Church
humane.

I come at the last to that grand motive, whereupon all the rest depends, the
omnipotence of not erring. Wherein that I may quickly touch the point, I spare
to prove what is granted: for we go along certain steps together without
iarring. Bell. de consil. author. lib. 2. ca. 11. ca. 12. Ibid. Bell. and Sia.
princ. doc. lib. 8. ca. 15. Bell. ibid. Bell. ibid.
First it is confessed, that any counsel particular or general may err, if it
be not confirmed by the Pope. Secondly, that Pope and counsel may err in any
by matter, beside the definitive sentence, principally intended. Thirdly, that
they may errein application of scriptures, in illustrations, in sequel of
argument drawn from scripture to infer that definitive sentence. Fourthly,
the definitive sentence it self may be erroneous, if it be defined only as a
probability, not as a point of faith. Fifthly, though it be concluded as a
matter of faith, yet there may be error in the propriety of speech, by
superfluity or want of terms: by displacing of words, or such like. Only the
very bare maine sense of the conclusion it self is cock sure from error.
Into this narrow strait they confess themselves to have been already
pursued: the consideration of which point me thinks should cause an
indifferent mind to pause a little, and think it strange at the least, that
the evident truth of the Church testimony, whereupon all catholic faith must
depend: that the first principle standing upon his own ground, into which all
religion is to be resolved, as into a pure element, should be put to so many
shifts, and hunted into such a narrow room.

But further to urge you with your own, I demand from whence a counsels
definitive sentence does receive her infallibility? Either it must be
immediately from the spirit of God: or else by means of consequence, from the
text of scripture, or article whereupon it groundeth. The first is by your
selves denied, for it is the first and special difference Bellarmine puts
twixt counsels, Canons, and canonical scripture: that the word of God is
authorized by immediate Bell. de cons. auct. lib. 2. ca. 12. Consilia ex co per
ratiocinationem deducunt conclusiones.
revelation from the spirit: but counsels derive their conclusions by discourse
from the word. Your champion answered me to this point: that indeed God would
have his Church to use those means of discourse and testimony: yet at the
vpshot the spirit does fortify the conclusion, and lets the rest go. So I hope
Paul did apply his books and parchments, used the means of study and
discourse: though that which he resolved upon to put in writing was by the
immediate motion of the spirit. Therefore still this makes no difference at
all. Then belike (if Bellarmine stand) it is the discourse, and sequel of
argument, which the conclusion must rely upon for her certainty: but that also
proves a broken staff, even in your own judgments. Bellarmine says it is
erroneous, De consil. autho. lib, 2. cap. 12. lib. 8. cap. 15.
and Stapleton resolves upon it, that from erroneous arguments counsels do
infer undoubted positions: from weak and false premises infallible
conclusions. Omnipotent power that makes the conclusion stronger then the
premises, whereupon it is grounded. But I will spare this sore, because Doctor
Stapleton says it is a Quo peccati genere peccant illi qui etc. prin. lib. 8.
ca. 15. infine.
sin to touch it. Thus it is (quoth he) but we must not Bonus ecclesiae
filius docente^ ecclesiam securus, and tutus audiet: nec solicit laborans, an
idonea media ad doctrinam suam tradendam ecclesia adhibuerit, nec curiose
inquirens an in medijs ipsis debitam diligentiam impenderit.
enquire the manner how it is, that were curiosity. Happily it is a mystery:
and it were safe for your Church it were not looked into. The consequence of
your argument (if any impotencie of erring in one, then in all) is too too
weak, there is a mean betwixt all, and none at all: you run altogether upon
extremities; all errors be not at once disclosed; nor all truths alike
necessary to be known. What say you to your Doctor Stapleton, who limits the
Church with a condition of determining such points only, as be necessary to be
believed, or belong to the very substance of faith; Quando de huiusmodi inquam
questionibus, vel consulitur, vel obiter disputat ecclesia, aberrare aliqua^do
poterit, velassereado, vel etia^ concludendo. prin. l. 8. ca. 15. initio.
else she may err both in discourse and definitive sentence, a condition which
would be looked unto, if not quite put out of his works, for it shakes many a
decree. Nay what say you to Bellarmine, who acknowledges there be some true
catholics, which hold that the Pope in a general counsel may err, when he
gives not all diligence. Which general condition if it be truly observed, in
assembling the synod without partiality: in selecting points of moment and
necessity: in consulting with all simplicity, with such like (included under
all diligence) doubtless Gods spirit for his part will never be wanting. See
now, if you would be reasonable we might happily shake hands in this point: but
you presently run back to an absolute omnipotency of not erring in any one
point, and so shall we never meet. I advise you though, do not take it for an
article of your creed, but remember Bellarmine his rule. Ea solum de causa no^
assirraamus hanc propositionem side catholica esse tenendam, quod authors qui
contrarium sentiunt nondum videamus ab ecclesia damnatos pro Hereticis. de.
cons. auth. lib. 2. ca. 5.
That is not to be held as a point of faith, against which some catholics do
hold, being reputed catholics of the Church, and not condemned for heretics:
But some catholics hold the Church may err, ca. 2.
quando non adhibet omnem diligentiam, therefore resolve not all your faith
upon this point: but alas we have your resolution.

MOTIVE.
Contrary the Catholics auouching the inflexible truth of the Church as the
voice of Christ, and direction of the spirit, do stay the minds of the
faithful from doubt and wavering. But the other making an head from the body
of the Church are rightly punished, both with belief in errors, and unbelief
in truth.

ANSWER.
SEe now your conclusion, which builds not upon that point alone, we have
already sifted, but assumeth with all a far more slipperie ground; that that
Church you have lately plunged your self into, is the only Church we have
talked of all this while: the only true universal visible Church upon the
earth. Which two uncertainties well examined and laid together, will (I fear
me) make but a sandy foundation to build upon, and an unstable principle to
stand upon it own ground, and uphold all religion. Yet this is your only
sanctuary, wherein you secure your souls of all sound belief: which stands
upon these two main pillars, first that the Catholic Church cannot err (which
is not so dangerous, if rightly conceived, as has been said) Secondly, that
this Romish Church (whereof you profess your self a member) is that
Catholic Church. Which second branch must be yet further resolved into other
uncertainties (presupposed by you as undoubted truths, whereupon the frame of
your religion does rest it self) to wit, first, that this present Romish
Church does not degenerate from the ancient Catholic: but soundly and
sincerely professes that same faith which was established in the primitive by
the Apostles: continued in the ancient Roman Church in the time of the Fathers
for the space of 600 years. Secondly, this being proved and made manifest, you
must add further, that this Church of Rome is not so Catholic, as was the
Church of Corinth, Galatia, etc. that is, not as a member communicating in the
faith of the whole Catholic, but that it self is the whole entire Catholic
Church: thereby excluding all other Churches in Christendom as heretical,
which do not acknowledge themselves subject to the Bishop of that Sea. Which
thing you must defend not against protestants only, who prove you rather to be
an Italian faction, then the Catholic Church (which John Heart does ingenuously
acknowledge to be more probable then he was aware of:) but even against your
own Doctors and Cardinals must you arm your selves in this point, who
complain there is nothing decreed in counsels, but what the Italian Nation
likes of, as Ludouicus Cardinal of Arle complained at the Council of Basil:
and Claudius Espencaeus a Doctor of your own in Paris witnesses for
Espencaeus in comment. in Titum. ca. 1.
Trent, Haec est illa Helena qua tridenti nuper obtinuit, etc. speaking of the
Italian Nation. Now if any of these points fail you (which me thinks be
very tickle) then is not the voice of your Church evermore the inflexible
truth of Christ, and direction of his spirit, which you presume to be the first
ground of Christian Religion, that does stay the minds of the faithful from
doubt, and wavering in all the rest.

THE THIRD MOTIVE.
THe infinite ways of errors draw themselves in their original into two
heads, opinion and affection: which (as two cankers) breed the one in the
understanding, the other in the will: for our judgment is easiest deceived, by
those things we esteem truest, and our inclination by what we love best. There
is nothing of more manifest presumption then the truth of the Scriptures, nor
fuller of desire then security of happiness: therefore these two being left
unlimited, the one of Canonitall exposition, the other with necessity of
means, are a direct method of indirect consequence. Such is the practice of
the later religion: they teach that nothing is to be credited, but what is
warranted in holy books, and give not infallible rules of interpretation, but
such as at last must be ouerruled by private opinion, for conference of places,
propriety of phrase, acceptations of words, can make no other conclusion, then
every ones conceit will aforde. So that of an infallible proposition, and
arbitrary assumption, must needs ensue a dangerous conclusion, though not ever
in the matter which is concluded, yet always in the manner of concluding.

ANSWER.
TO let slip your philosophical introduction (sparing in this short discourse
to catch at by matters) you have pitched your motive upon the two maine parts
of a christian soul: The understanding of divine truth: and the desire of true
happiness: assuming to your selves, and denying wholly to us, both sound
judgment for the trial of the one, and necessary means for the enjoying of
the other. Our judgment is impeached for resting it self wholly upon the
written word, being deprived also of the infallible interpretation of the same.
For the first point, we do indeed maintain the written word, as the most
perfect work of God, to be all sufficient for that end and purpose, to which
it is referred, and for which it was written: denying all other doctrine to be
in power and certainty equivalent with the same. For if we should account
those reports, which we have received by tradition from our forefathers, to be
of equal credit with the canon of Scripture: I cannot easily conceive how we
should have due and thankful regard of that inestimable benefit of committing
divine truth to writing, which almighty God did himself first ordain, and by
divine providence continually has preserved in his Church, ever since the
first age of the world, that the days of man were shortened, and his memory
waxed frail. For miserable (no doubt by this time) had the state of the Church
been, if the means of our salvation, published by Christ and his Apostles, had
been delivered to us only by way of tradition from so many reporters. We may
in some sort guess at the dangers, by those remnants of divine story, which
the heathen receiving by tradition have delivered to us in their writings: but
so broken and intermingled with cloudie phansies, and fabulous inventions, as
they do no more resemble the truth, then the rainbowe does the sun. Which
though it be the image of the sun, yet are the beams thereof so broken by
reflection and refraction in some watrie cloud, that it does alike resemble the
sun, as those ancient poetical fables do express the true scripture
story, from whence they borrowed their first light. Therefore inualuable is
the benefit of the written word above relations. The end of the writing
whereof was the perfecting of the two premised parts of a Christian man's soul:
to wit, the understanding with divine truth, and the desire with life, both
jointly set down by Saint John. 10. 31. These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God. And secondly that in
believing ye might have life through his name.

For the effecting whereof albeit the scripture be alsufficient in it self,
yet least by our ignorance we should pervert the more obscure places to our
own destruction, we do with all diligence embrace those means which God has
provided for the interpretation thereof: not only the rules of reason, and
humane arts sanctified by Gods grace, in his faithful servants, but adding
thereto also the record of antiquity: consent of fathers: testimony of learned
men: conferring places, waighing circumstances, examining translations, with
such like: not singling any one means from the rest (as you fondly imagine)
but joining them together, do always acknowledge most means to make the
strongest confirmation.

Amongst these manifold means it likes you to cull out the conference of
places, as seeming most of all to be ouerruled by private opinion. Which rule of
interpretation we are so far from being ashamed of, as in earnest I marvel
you will take any exception unto it, since Saint Austin (a witness by your
confession without all exception) has bestowed such cost upon it, preferring
it before all other rules whatsoever. In his book de Doct. Christia. laying
this ground undoubtedly, August. de Doct. Christiana. lib. 2. Cap. 9.
that all things concerning belief and life are plainly written in the word,
his first rule is, that those things be chiefly noted, which are set down
plainly, both precepts of life, and rules offaith. Secondly, that obscure and
dark sentences be enlightened and opened by the plain and manifest. Thirdly,
that doubtful textes be determined by the clear and certain. All this in one
chapter. After, if we cannot find the true meaning, yet let such a sense be
given, as agrees Lib. 3. Cap. 27.
with the right faith, approved by some other place of scripture. If that
cannot be discussed by sure testimony of Cap. 28.
Scripture, it might be proved by reason, but the safer way far, is to walk
by Scripture. In that whole work made for this purpose we find no mention of
your last Remove from the text to the interpreter, from the Scripture to the
men. But still Motive 1.
has he recourse to the scripture, making it the only Center whereupon we
must stay our selves in all discourse and interpretation. His general
conclusion is, that all places of scripture be expounded by the scriptures,
which are canonical, as being the rule of godliness, and faith. Yea from the
testimony of the greatest number of ancient fathers (alleged by Saint
Hierome) he still makes his appeal unto Scripture. Hier. Epist. 19. inter. Aug.
Hitherto have I said nothing but Saint Austin, whom you acknowledge to assure
you not of his own only, but of the common and constant faith, and confession
of ancient fathers, and Apostolic Church. Yet this was Saint Austin his
Confess. Aug. in praefat. ad Lect.
rule of interpretation, his golden rule, whereupon he so much relied,
practiced at this day in our Church: and make you this a motive to separate
your self from our Church? To put you out of doubt that this rule shall not at
last resolve into private opinion: after all diligence has been given in this
kind, we confirm the same by consent of our faithful and learned brethren,
and (if need be) by the assembly of the Bishops and clergy of our Church:
unto which our greatest clerks do most willingly submit their expositions.
Their words be, The sense will I prove by scripture according D. Reinold
against Heart.
to the rule of faith: the proof of the sense I submit to the private and
public judgment of the Church. Notwithstanding in these quarelsome days
(since each part by likelihood will draw scriptures to their several
assertions) it is a rule most indifferent (even in your own judgments) that
for points of controversy, neither your Church nor ours be judge: but that of
Campian rat. 2.
old, nearer to Christ, and further from these factions, which you know to be
our own challenge and defense, as well as yours. So that if you would lay al
these together (being al held and professed by our Church) you should find our
expositions to be neither uncertain, nor private. Upon this misconceit you
conclude us to be in a miserable case, for that of an infallible proposition,
and arbitrarie assumption, must needs follow a dangerous conclusion. It is
true indeed: but this holds only against protestants, and private spirits.
But wot you not, that a counsel, and the Pope of arbitrarie premises can
infer infallible conclusions? Cuius Doctrina in medijs discursiua, Stapl.
princ. doct. l. 10. ca. 11.
in conclusione prophetica, sine preiudicio fidei errare in argumentis potest
salua conclusione. See now, yet are you so peremptory (must needesensue,
allwaies follow) that whilst you lash out these rules of reason, you entangle
your self in high treason against his holiness. But what mean I still to
rub this gall? Sic tendimus in vetitum. Had not your Doctor forbid it, I had
not so harped upon it.

MOTIVE.
IN like manner they promise security of salvation, without respect of
repentance and works, which are inevitable consequences, if all be true that
they teach. So that he which has faith, needs no more to care for good
works, then they that have drunken a sound purgation, for going to the stool.

ANSWER.
IF you respect repentance and good works, I wonder you regard christian
charity no more, but so apparently to slander Confess. August. art. 20. Calvin
Insti. l. 3. cap. 16. Cemnitius exa. Cons. Trid. ses. 6. Luther lib de visit.
saxoni. Brent. catechis.
us, against the general voice of our writers, who protest themselves herein
greatly iniuried, and urge as great necessity of good works, as you do, or
can desire, secluding them only from the act of justification, not from the
means of security: every where teaching, that the keeping of a good
conscience in true faith does work in us that certainty of hope for
salvation, which is the rest and only peace of conscience in this life.
Notwithstanding when we have done what we can in Gods service, since we are
unprofitable, and our works imperfect, it is not any way safe to trust in our
selves, Bellarm. de iustificat. l. 5. ca. 7. propos. 3.
or rely upon them, but only in Gods mercies, and Christ's merits: in which
point Bellarmine himself does most ingenuously join with us. Tutissimum tamen
est propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae,
totam fiduciam no^ in opeirbus nostris, sed sola dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere. This is all I can find in our writers that gives any
shadow of occasion to this uncharitable slander: which in the judgment of a
clear mind will easily vanish as a miste before the sun. Your simile I
confess is too strong, and may easily overcome me, and modesty biddes me
spare to encounter it.

MOTIVE.
THese are the two fallacies whereupon Luther built his rebellion, and wherein
all the heresies of our time conspire, though otherwise at difference with
themselves: for there can be no fitter baits to beguile simple men, then
opinion; and sensual men, then ease: because every one lies open to decay in
his own vices.

ANSWER.
THus are you taken in the snare which you laid for others. For the power of
God in our ministry being to encounter with those two ugly monsters of
nature, ignorance and sensuality, it is the end of our whole profession, both
to make the simple wise to salvation, in such points as be meet for their
conceits, and expedient for their several callings: as also to convert the
sensual unto newnes and holiness of life. Thus we profess and thus we teach,
neither feeding the one kind with opinions, nor promising ease unto the other.
Therefore if you either perceiving some loosenes of life in the laity, do
ascribe that to our doctrine: or observing the due execution of this ministry
to be wanting in some of the clergy, shall therefore condemn the whole, do ye
not plainly see the two grand fallacies, wherein you beguile your self, and
whereupon you have built this Apostasy?

THE FOVRTH MOTIVE.
AMongst many loadstones, that which has the preeminence of virtue in
proportionable distance, wins the Iron from all the rest: So Christ being
lifted up in the abasing of his passion, promised by his attractiue virtue to
draw unto his service all men from all religions. For what rebellion of nature
cannot he pacify unto the unity of Faith, when he pleases to come within
compass, that has united humane nature into Gods hypostaticall union?
Therefore to gather up the effect as a thread to lead to the cause, the
greatest multitude in consent of communion, among the diverse parcels and
rentes of those that bear the livery of Christ his name, is a sufficient
demonstration of the true and natural loadstone, which must of necessity
draw more unto it then the rest, because it effects by his own virtue, when
all the rest work only by the touch thereof.

ANSWER.
THat I may the better find you in this discourse, I will express your
meaning more distinctly, which you carry in a cloud of generalities the easier
to deceive. For when I enquire what kind of believers they be, whose number
you endeavor so far to enlarge, and extend beyond others: me thinks the
resemblance of the loadstone, and that attractiue virtue of Christ his passion
out of the 12. of John, do import not so much an outward calling to the
profession of the catholic faith (which makes a visible Church) as an inward
and effectual drawing to the power thereof, proper only to the lively
members, who make a mystical and invisible body, not discernable in the eye of
man; yet so it falls out that this number of elect, and sanctified persons is
not by you intended. For many are called into the visible Church, but few
chosen into the number of the Saints: many cleansed in the fount from original
leprosy, scarce the tithe showing Stapl. princ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
due thankfulness in the residue of their lives. Whereupon (that I may take
you right) I understand you mean a visible company of catholics, that is
professors of the Apostolic faith. And then must you shake hands with Christ
his attractiue virtue (resembled by your loadstone) which is taken in the
former kind, to signify not so much the outward calling of men into the
visible Church, as an inward and forcible drawing of them into the fellowship
of the sons of God. And so has Christ, and does still by his death and
passion draw unto him men of all conditions from all the quarters of the world.
Further if you take that visible company of professors at the largest, for
all those that bear the liuerie of Christ his name, under which liuerie (says
Barnard) many do service unto Antichrist, then do you make both the Church of
Rome and ours to be members of one visible Church: al professing one Lord, that
is, Christ giving the name to all christians. Secondly one baptism, without
rebaptization of either hand. Thirdly, one faith, as it is summarily premised
in the Council. Trident. sess. 3.
counsel of Trent, and professed daily in our Church. Thus far be we knit
together by a triple band of unity, which is not easily broken. And so far
is your note of multitude common to both, and therefore not to the purpose of
this motive. It remains then in the third place, that the middle way be taken
twixt these two: understanding the company of sound believers, and
orthodoxall professors of Christ's truth: for in these three several senses is
the Church taken by diverse. The first, that is the company of Saints is too
narrow for your purpose: the second containing all professors is too large, and
for the third, that is, the company only of sound and orthodoxall professors,
if you prove that that is, and evermore has been preeminent for multitude even
in persecution, and inundations of heresies, I shall much marvel.

MOTIVE.
THis populous inheritance of such as profess the communion of his doctrine,
was given him as a royalty in the 2. Psalm. And after his resurrection he
sent his Apostles to take possession of the dowry of his Church, from
Jerusalem unto the ends of the world, and the prophets who from their high
tower of speculation might ouerlooke more then the compass of 2000. years,
and therefore took the draught of Christ his kingdom, could perceive no sign
more glorious and visible, then a multitude reaching from the East to the West,
and spreading over the earth. And yet for the straights of the throng putting
up supplication to the Church, to send some colones out to enlarge their
habitation. Angustus est mihi locus, fac spatiu^ mihi vt habitem. And because
by divine dispensation there were some sedition and factions to spring in his
kingdom, that it might not breed admiration in the new subjects by the
novelty or distraction of doubt, if the new part by number be mistaken;
therefore Christ and his Apostles have both foretold there should be
heretics, and branded them always by the note of paucitie to be
distinguished from the general multitude. For they shall come under the style
of small and thin numbers, and privileged places. There is Christ among the
Caluinistes in Geneua. There is Christ among the Lutherans in Germany. In the
desert for a thousand years since Phocas. In some secret of concealed doctrine
since the Apostles time. But believe them not, for not all, or the most part
shall be apostate, but some; not many, but such as in compare of the whole
multitude shall be as errant planets in respect of the fixed stars. Therefore
this argument from the multitude of communicants in the same faith, promised by
God, foreseen by the Prophets, confirmed by the Apostles, was esteemed of so
sufficient proof by the primitive commanders of Christ his Church, that they
used it always against the heretics: and oftentimes when they were to
encounter, they would brandish this sword as deadly and unavoidable, to amaze,
and yet not strike with it. Poteram omnes propositionum tuarum riuulos vno
ecclesiae sole siccare. For the experiment whereof, if we turn over the
succession of historyes age by age, we shall find that when any heresy was at
the highest flood, it was not comparable to the ebb of catholics, no not in
the torrent and inundation of the Arrians by Athanasius testimony. Therefore we
may presume the event of that prophecy, which has so equally proceeded
hitherto, and use it for a weapon against the heretics of our time which has
been so often died in the blood of their ancestors, and follow our fathers
herein, which so happily followed others. Deo gratias.

ANSWER
ALl these grounds (except Athanasius his testimony) I find translated out
of D. Stapleton: only Cacus-like that Stapl. D. princ. (...). lib. 2. Cap. 4.
you might not be traced, you have somewhat inuerted the order: and good cause
why: for the same author whence you borrow has himself dissolved all the
force of this motive, by adding a cautio^ in the fifth chapter, how those
forealleadged places are to be understood. That Popular inheritance promised
to the son in the 2. Psalm, discovered by Daniel to Cap. 2. Cap. 49.
replenish the earth: suruaide by Esaias from the East to the West: possessed by
the Apostles from Jerusalem to the ends of the world, is not so to be taken
(says Stapleton) as if the Church should at once in any one age enjoy those
large dominions, no not in the most flourishing age, but only in succession of
times: yet your argument is so pitched upon those proofs, as if the number of
sound believers at one and the same time, even at the lowest ebb of Catholics
did far exceed all others. An inference without the compass of those
scriptures (even in the judgment of your own Doctor) albeit himself after
do wrest them unto the same purpose. We do indeed with all due thankfulness
acknowledge according to those prophesies, the Catholic faith of Christ to be
preached and believed in several ages, in all the nations of the world truly
and sincerely: not at once (like the deluge) covering the face of the earth,
but as the water floudes in course, winning ground in one place and loosing it
in another, dried up at Jerusalem and Samaria, before it have watered the ends
of the earth: though in some ages full banck, in some at a lower ebb,
specially when it is pestered with heresies and schisms, prophesied to come in
the latter days: Insomuch that at the last dissolution, the Son of God
makes doubt if he shall find faith upon earth. And if a true Catholic faith
shall so fail, as scarce to be found, Luke. 18.
then marvel not if your glorious note of the multitude of communicants in
the same faith fail you. A glorious note I confess it is in the glory of the
Church, when the sun is in his full strength: and well might the fathers in
due time and place, brandish this sword against vpstart heretics, with Poteram
Vincent. Lirin. cap. 39.
omnes etc. but not so well strike with it, or stand upon it, as an infallible
demonstration: since they well wist that in the eclips of the Church, when
heresies get a head, and schisms distract it: when the devil waxes wood, and
the world grows old, this note of multitude with all must needs fail. Your
experiment for the torrent and inundation of the Arrians is too too weak: you
strive against a stream of auneients, Where be Initio Orationis. In (...).
they (says Gregory Nazianzene in his Oration against Arrians) who define the
Church by a multitude, and contemn a small flock? Does not Hierome witness
the whole world to have turned Arrian? what say you to Saint Hillary, who
persuaded men not to regard the outward face of the Church, either Bishops or
Priests Lib. de Synod. aduersus Arrianos. ibid. ca. 16.
through the world? It was a rare thing (says he) to find a Catholic amongst
priest or people. Did not the Emperor in Theodoret scorn the Catholics for
their paucitie, four or five to a world of Arrians? Nay your own Doctor in
this yields to Luther, that there were but a few Bishops to the Arrians, and
those few exiles.

Ecce in deserto, ecce in penetralibus, had been as glorious a play Stapel.
prin. doct lib. 2. ca. 13. Cap. 6.
for Arrians against Catholics, as now against Protestants, and to the meaning
of the text both alike. Vincentius Lirin. a man of great note amongst you, for
this one example of the Arrians does abandon that note of universality. And
think you to carry it with your bare auouching Athanasius his testimony,
neither citing his words, nor quoting the place, against so strong a tide?
This is too too slight.

THE FIFTH MOTIVE.
THis new stamp of religion which Luther and his minsters boast of to be
reformed according to the ancient coin, cannot avoid the desert of
counterfeit. Because so general a reformation, and restitution of the
primitive Church, neither can be, neither was to be expected. For although the
worship of adulterous religion have suffered many changes, either by the
admiration of some man of extraordinary account, or the intimation of Oracles,
or the ambition of superstitious, or invasion of neighbors, or change of
government, the state always fashioning religion, the fittest consequence of
policy: yet in the true religion instituted by God himself, the divine
ordinance has made only two memorable varieties: not by condemning the
former, but by preferring the latter; not in difference of substance, but
perfection: not by retraction as in change of their counsel, but adding of
timely access. The first was from the law of nature, to the subjection of the
law written. The second from the severity of the law, unto the obedience of
the Gospel (Christ being the sum of all, but with difference.) For in the
state of nature he was discerned a far of as a body. In the law he was
distinguished nearer as a man: In the Gospel he is seen face to face: Both
these chaunges were restitutions of the former, but with some perfection. For
Moses restored the decalogue, sacrifice, worship of one God, circumcision,
tenths, sabbaths, and such like, which were in the state of nature, but
arbitrarie for harmony. In the Gospel, Christ the interpretation of the law
which was corrupted, and the three great parts of religion, iustificaon by
faith, which was exemplified in Abraham, the sacrifice of himself, which was
figured in Isaac, and in the Pasca, the mystery of baptism which was
instituted in the deluge and read sea, and the Eucharist which was acted by
Melchisedech.

For like as when Thamar the daughter in law of Judah brought forth her twins,
Zaram and Phares, Zaram first put forth his hand, and the midwife tied a red
thread about it, and he pulled it in again, and his brother Phares was borne
before him: So the Sacraments of the Gospel which are bound about with the red thread of Christ his passion, did first show their hand in Abraham, and
Melchisedech, but the Sacraments of the Jews were borne before them. So that
these two be not chaunges but restitutions, and these are two earthquakes
registered in the scripture, prophesied of before, expected by the Church,
brought in with prodigious signs, confirmed by the visible presence of God in
miracles: and one more we expect, which shall change all things temporal into
eternal at the end of the world. Besides these, neither the scripture
mentions any more, neither the judgment of the Chuch and fathers did expect
other. For what prophecy either in the old testament or in the new made way
for this reformation, after 1000. or 1500. years? What prodigious signs gave
the world warning of Luthers coming? which of the creatures out of course gave
attendance at his birth? with what extraordinary power was he guarded? with
what miracles was his doctrine graced? That a religion venerable for age,
certain for succession, comely for order, admirable for unity, approved by
experience, allowed by providence, confirmed by miracles, rooted in so many
kingdoms, that never was doubted of but by heretics, never saw change but by
her enemies, should upon one man's, and such a man's credit, and authority
without greater cause, nay without any cause fly the world, and leave her
kingdom and royalty at the dispose of one Apostata and Monk, and an incestuous
Monk.

ANSWER.
THose two memorable varieties, one restoring nature by the moral law, adding
withal a veil of shadows and religious ceremonies: the second removing that
veil, and changing the moonelight of the law into the sunshine of the Gospel,
have the preeminence before all other changes whatsoever: neither is there any
past, or herafter to be expected, co^parable to these two. Notwithstanding
besides these, there have been many restitutions of the Church from errors and
heresies in all ages: you discern none at all. Yet of all others I wonder you
spied not that of the morning star John Baptist, so conspicuous above the
rest, so consonant to your own notes: Registered in Scripture, prophesied of
before, expected by the Church, brought in with prodigious signs, who made a
memorable variety, Luke 1. 17. Esa. 40. 3. Luke. 1 64. Luke. 16. 16.
not only by way of restitution in the doctrine of repentance, but also by
addition in his watrie baptism. The rising of which star was the moone-set
of Moses and the Prophets, making a period of the law. For so says the text:
The law and the Prophets lasted till John Baptist, who shined till the son of
God John. 3. 30.
appeared, and then ceased: Oportet illum crescere, meaute^ minui.

Moreover besides these three lights, if I should take upon me to reckon the
lesser lights of the Church, which have restored it from darkness and
corruption in all ages, I might as well number the stars in the firmament.
Were not Abraham and Lot lights to expel the mistes of that idolatrous age?
Did not false gods after so far prevail, that they entered into Genesis 35. 2. 3.
the family of blessed Iaacob, and possessed all that were about him, till he
rose as a star in his brightness to clear his whole family, and make
restitution of his former religion in Bethel? How many relapses in the time of
the law? not only the congregation of Israel adored a calfe, but even the
Priest himself was urged to consent (as you confess Pope Liberius was to
Arrianisme:) Did not all Israel after the death of Joshua, and that good
generation, run after Baalim? In the time of Judge. 2. 10.
Saul the Ark of God was never sought for, till that glorious Chro. 13. 3.
star of Israel king David restored it again.

How many Idols were after erected by the kings of Jerusalem and Judah? All the
abominations of the nations and the whole host of Heaven worshipped in Israel:
carved Images seated in the temple of God: yea the book of the law lost by the
priests. Yet notwithstanding as their backslidings were many, so was there
manifold restitution made by the lights of Israel, the Church still reformed
again by the Prophets and holy men of God. And can you spy never a
reformation besides those two grand ones of Moses, and the son of God? This
was the condition of the natural branches the Jews: and no less is to be
expected of the Church of the Gentiles in this state militant, but that it be
sometimes darkened and eclipsed, as well in abuse of practice, as error of
doctrine, in some ages more, in some less; and again, by divine providence
(raising up some of notable learning and extraordinary spirit) enlightened and
restored to her first integrity: so far forth as truth can prevail with
corruption of the time: such were the Catholic Bishops that restored her from
the deluge of Arrianisme.

Neither is it to be expected that any of the creatures should be out of course
to give the world warning of such reformers. For it is well known these
reformations be of a far other kind, then those former made by Moses, John
Baptist, and the son of God. For those were ever with some addition of
perfection not revealed before. Therefore no reason the world should take
notice of them without divine confirmation by signs and wonders. For had
Moses, John Baptist, or the Messiah himself borne witness of themselves,
without the testimony of miraculous works, or former prophesies; there being
neitheir Canon of Scripture to prove them, nor divine revelation to discern
them by, no reason in the world, nor religionin the Church could possibly have
entertained them. But sithence the last perfection is now revealed by the
Gospel, and that absolute Canon of Scripture given to the Church, to which
nothing must be added in pain of eternal plague: of Apoc. 22. 18. Vincent.
Lirin.
which that ancient writer (so approved by you) does auere, Solus sufficit ad
omnia satis superque: all reformations of the Church whatsoever have been
since, or hereafter shall be, must ca. 2. and 41.
come under the name of mere restitutions without addition, not instituting
any new doctrine, but restoring the ancient, not creating a new Church (as you
fondly imagine) but reducing the old unto the primitive. Therefore in this kind
there is no need of miracles, or prodigious signs, seeing our reformers bring
no new revelations of their own, but only make appeals to the judgment of
the primitive Church: and desire credit, of others, no further then they give
evidence of argument, drawn from such grounds as be received of all hands.
Then seeing their proceedings be ordinary, what extraordinary wonders are to
be expected?

Neither was it their desire and motion in this reformation, that the present
visible Church, should fly the world, and leave her kingdom and royalty, but
only this yt it should be purged: because reason tells us, and experience
has proved it, that the visible Church is not al spirit, but some flesh,
though she be informed by the holy Ghost in her holy and general assemblies,
yet she consists likewise of earthly, frail, and sinful men; and therefore
she must of necessity gather some dust, and in time grow corrupt, if she do not
cleanse and refine her self. Whereupon motion was made to the commanders of the
Church for the reformation of certain abuses, which being crept in had gotten
a head, and were grown to that pitch, that they became burdensome to the
consciences of religious men. This complaint being not harkened unto, they
persuaded themselves that the backwardnes of their brethren could not be to
them a sufficient excuse, not to reform themselves. For this cause they
protested a separation from their fellowship and communion in those points,
until such time as it should please God to move their minds, so to refine
themselves from those corruptions, as there might ensue conformity: a thing
wished and prayed for, with sighs not to be expressed.

So that the strength of this your Motive (which makes Martin Luther, and his
fellows seem so odious unto you) is resolved into these two questions. First,
whether in his time there were abuses in the Church, that required a
reformation? Secondly, reformation being denied, and unhoped for, whether they
were abuses of that nature and degree, as did bind the conscience of true
catholics, not to communicate with others in them? Which two points if they be
true, they clear our reformers from all slander, and suspision either of heresy
or schism: and until you have proved them false, this and the like general
motives to this purpose be mere shadows without substance, of no value, or
force at all.

THE SIXTH MOTIVE.
AS the cause is the pattern of the effects, upon which ground Saint Paul from
the unity of Gods Church builds the unity of faith: so may we go backwards
from the defference of effects to deny the affinity of the cause, and from
the impossibility of union in faith, take away the possibility of dependence
upon God. Such is the religion of the protestants, which has no certain
principle of unity, and therefore lacks the cognizance whereby true religion
is known. For where there is not an infallible authority, which does judge
and decide controversies by removing all actions of doubt and reply, and unto
which absolute obedience is tied: there must needs be variety of judgments
and opinions, which cannot be tied in one knot. For all unity in particulars,
proceeds from the unity of some cause wherein all agree. But there is no
such infallible authority, the judge of controversies, besides the voice of
the Church, which the protestants either put altogether to silence, or else
obey so far as they please. For the scriptures, whom they have erected to be
judges (as rebels that put down all judges, and pretend to be ruled only by
the law) cannot alone supply this place, to take away all occasionof
controversies. And if there were no other argument, their own irreconcilable
quarrels in so manifold differences among themselves might suffice to stop
their mouths herein. For as diverse parcels of silk of deeper or lighter
ground, dipped by the Dyar in the same liquour, drink in a several tincture of
color according to their former variety: so they that diue in the letter of
the holy scripture according as their judgments are before stained with
prejudice of one or other opinion, come forth again not in unity of minds, but
in the same differences as they went in, more, or less. Or as in the miracle
of tongues given to the Apostles, when many auditors of diverse languages came
to hear them, although the same men could speak no more but one idiome at
once, yet the several auditors comprehended them as if they had spoken in the
propriety of their speech: so when many of diverse languages in religion, come
to hear some one of the Apostles speaking in the scripture, although the
author use only the voice of the truth, yet every sundry faction does
conceive him as speaking in the several confusion of their opinions. Neither
can they comfort themselves with any hope to see these diverse opinions wound
up in one confession. For as the unity in conclusion in logic, cannot be
without the unity of the medium; so they cannot meet in that middle way which
should bring them into peace able composition, unless they return to the
Church. For all grant there is no way to accomplish it without a council: but
who shall call it, when there is none whom they all obey? How many factions
shall assemble? out of what sect shall the president be chosen? what number of
suffrages shall there be on every side? what rule shall be allowed for the
interpretation of the scriptures? And if all this were by a dream imagined;
yet the authority of the Canons, and conclusions shall not be so authentical,
but that any private head may refuse it, if in his own singularity he think
it disagreeing from the scripture: so desperate is the possibility of union
among them, that hope, which imagines impossible things, cannot possibly
imagine it.

ANSWER.
AS every defect and imperfection tends unto dissolution, so the good estate
of every body, as well politic and mistical, as natural, does consist in the
unity of the whole, and harmony of the parts amongst themselves. Therefore
seeing the band of unity, knitting many members into one whole, makes an
entire body: that society is of all others conceived to be most absolute,
which has attained to the greatest perfection of unity. Which kind of reason
moved the Philosopher to give the preeminence to a Monarchy before other simple
forms. So the Apostle (in the place whence you take your rise) from the unity
of Gods Church does build the unity of faith: as also the unity of spirit in
the bond of peace, urging a preservation and increase of the same, as a thing
most perfecting the whole body. This is a mark Saint Paul wills us to aim
at, and endeavor to attain the perfection of it. But you (as if your Church had
already attained it, and were perfect in this unity of faith) have fansied to
your self such an uniformity in religion, and such an infallible means to
enjoy the same, as does expel all differences in judgments and opinions,
remove all occasions of doubt and reply, and unto which perfect obedience is
tied. By this cognizance have you discerned and noted the only true catholic
Church, and thereby cut of al protestants from that body. So did Tully describe
an orator, who never yet was known either at Rome or Athens: so did Plato
imagine a commonwelth, collected of the select perfections of all societies:
and so has your chymicall fancy conceited a Church in her state here
militant, which by trial will prove a mere Eutopia, not to be found upon the
earth. For you might easily conceive even in reason, that albeit unity be
essential to a body, and consequently the unity of faith to the Church of
Christ: yet as there be many degrees of perfections in the church, so be there
likewise of unity in faith. Concerning the very body of religion, and more
material points of faith, there is in our Church an uniform accord, and
agreement: though in other branches some differences: as amongst your selves,
how many iarres betwixt Aquin and Scotus, and ye rest of that scoole, scarce
three of the^ saying one thing? How many errors condemned in your Cardinal
Caietan, by Melchior, Canus, and Bellarmin? The Iacobins and the Cordelians
could never agree about the Virgin Mary her conception. In a word, it cannot
be denied, but so many orders of friars, almost so many sects in opinions,
and deadly quarrels even at this day. Wherefore, before this your peremptory
conclusion of deposing Churches, it had bin a point very requisite, first to
have defined what degree of unity were necessary, and what kind of
differences brings the Church of Christ to utter dissolution, so that it
remain noe longer to be a Church. But you taking a course most easy to
deceive your self and others, discourse aloof in generalities, and take the
perfection of unity at the highest pitch, to make a more glorious show.

So then the weight of this your argument rests it self upon these two
points. First that the providence of God has provided for his Church militant
a perpetual and infallible means of unity in faith, and such a unity as
takes away variety of judgments and opinions, remoues all occasions of doubt
and reply: and unto which absolute obedience is tied. Secondly, that this
means is to be found in the Church of Rome, and not else where. Let us briefly
examine the first ground: which if it prove sandy, the whole frame of this
your building falls by it own weight. Saint Paul his argument in the fourth
to the Ephesians, from whence you have raised this whole discourse (in your
own sense) makes directly against you. For as from unity of Gods Church he
builds the unity of faith: so does he likewise the unity of spirit in the
bond of peace. Then if from the defect of unity in faith you will go backward
to deny the Church, you must deny it likewise (by virtue of the same text) upon
any quarrels or contentions, civil or eccleasticall, which do impeach the
unity of love in the bond of peace. But I wot you will be better advised, and
grant there may be a visible Church, though the unity of peace be not in
perfection. And may there not be one also amongst us in some differences of
judgments? yea much more; since variety of opinions rise commonly from
ignorance and weakness of judgment: whereas those other quarrelles proceed
rather from malice and envy, and therefore are less venial, and more likely
to take away the possibility of dependence upon God. Let us then leave to
strain at gnattes, and ingenuously acknowledge thus much at the first: that
all differences do not take away the nature of the true Church. Next that all
unity does not prove a Church. For there may be aswellconspiracie in error,
as unity in faith. Yea the kingdom of Satan is at unity with it self: Or
else (says our Savior) it Mark. 3. 24.
could not possibly endure. If this policy be the strength of his kingdom, no
marvel if the same be found amongst his instruments, as the prophet Nahum
speaks of the enemies of Gods people the Assyrians, comparing them to a fur
bush or Nahum. 1. 10.
heap of thorns twined or folden one within another.

Your next shift will be that differences of judgments among catholics before
definitive sentence given, be neither damnable, nor concern matters of faith:
but after the Church has given her voice (unto which perfect obedience is
tied) then such a truth so determined is presently to be embraced without reply
or further inquiry. Which conceit seems to make void the end of that
divine dispensation, by which you affirm some sediitons and factions to spring
in the kingdom of God. Motive 4.


Which in his wisdom be not only permitted, but disposed and ordered to the
exercise, and more full trial of the faithful. To which purpose we are often
urged in the text to search the scriptures, try the spirits, prove all things:
but here is a shorter cut for a catholic. Only these two points. First in any
doubtful question undetermined, either let him suspend his judgment: or if he
lift to take a side, it is not dangerous, until the Church have defined: and
then secondly, after definitive sentence let him embrace it, as a matter of
faith without further examination. Me thinks this trial is too too easy,
that a catholic should put himself into such complete armor (as ye Apostle
bids) as to, have his loins Ephesians. 6. 15. 16. 17.
girt, with verity, his feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel, to
take unto him the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, to make such search
and examination for the truth of Ioh. 5. 39.
God: and when it comes to the point, so he keep himself within compass of
the visible Church (which is very spacious) he may safely fight, on which side
he list, without danger; and, when sentence is past, yield consent with
security. Which position (I must needs confess) has the advantage of man's
nature far above the other. For that which we desire and wish for we are
easily induced to believe: wherefore every man naturally affecting to enjoy
security, with all facility and ease that may be does willingly persuade
himself of this and the like plausible conceits, even by the sway of his own
inclination. Which thing makes it no whit less suspected of error, but rather
much more, because every natural motion and desire arising out of the inferior
part of the soul, must by the kingdom of Christ be either quite subdued and
rooted out, or at the least, so crossed and qualified, as it seldom remains
the same.

So then to draw this whole point to a more narrow issue, our demand is,
whether upon the promise of God made to his Church for her preservation in the
faith of Christ, there may not be built over much security? that is, as the
school has conceived of theological virtues, though on Gods part, respecting
his promise, there can be no excess of hope, or confidence, yet in regard of
the peruersenes of our nature (which may make the general promise of God less
effectual to us) there may grow presumption: because those promises be not
absolute, but conditional; so whether the promise of Gods assistance to his
Church be of the like nature, with some condition to be observed of the
Churches part; or whether it be altogether absolute, is one point in question.
That it is in part absolute, is a thing granted of all hands, to wit, that
neither the wickedness of man, nor the gates of hell shall ever so far
prevail against it, as quite to extinguish Mat. 16. 18.
it, but it shall continue a Church till the last dissolution. For else
wherefore should heaven and earth stand? to be a cage of unclean birds, or a
theater of iddle vanities? This cannot agree possibly with divine providence.
But for those promises which concern the better being of the Church, as the
enlarging of her dominions, the increase of the number of true and zealous
catholics, her more conspicuous and flourishing estate, her preservation from
the inundations of heresies, from the Apostasies of her members, and schisines
of the whole body, her deliverance from the mistes of errors, and finally her
sound and more sincere profession of the truth: concerning these promises of
assistance (I say) though God be faithful who has promised, yet the Church by
reason of her manifold sins may make them less effectual unto her. But
taking all these promises to be most absolute without condition, we may grow
presumptuous, promising to the Church overmuch security.

Such was the error of the Jews in the time of John Baptist, Mat. 3. 9.
who building upon the promise of God made to their forefathers, not regarding
any condition on their part to be performed, thought themselves secure, while
they could but say they had Abraham to their father, and show their lineall
descent out of his loins. But the answer does directly overthrow that
conceit. God is able of stones to raise up children Mat. 3.
unto Abraham, insinuating that which Saint Paul more fully does express
(Gala. 3. 7.) They which are of faith are the children of Abraham, though by
propagation no more proceeding out of his loins, then the very stones in the
street. Be it so, that the promise of the assistance and residence (...) Gods
spirit in the Church was made to Peter and his successors, as the promise of
Gods favor to Abraham and his seed. The seed of Abraham according to promise
we have found not to be those children which proceeded out of his loins by
natural descent, but such as resembled father Abraham in faith and godliness. I
demand then first (of any indifferent man) who be principally meant by Peter's
successors according to the promise? I mean that promise made unto Peter and
his followers to the end of the world. Whether those Bishops of Rome, who can
only say they have Peter for their predecessor, and show a lineall and local
descent from Peter in that Sea: or rather those of special note in the Church
of Christ (at Rome or elsewhere) who as well in ability to govern, as soundnes of
doctrine and sincerity of life, do resemble that blessed Apostle? Something to
enlighte^ my self by example: Saint Basil Bishop of Caesaerea, but never of
Rome, was notwithstanding by Saint Chrysostom iuuested with that glorious
title of Peter's successor, in his second book de sacerdotibus. I demand
whether such a father of the Church renowned for doctrine and 1. Septa Synod.
Constantinop. Act. 13.
life, though never seated at Rome, be not rather to be accounted the Apostle
his successor according to promise, then 2. Synod. Nicaena 2. Act. 7.
either Pope John infamous for life, or Pope Honorius the Monothelite, for that
heresy condemned by three general 3. Synod. 80. Constantinop. sub. Adrian. 2.
Act. 7.
councels? Secondly (to give you a little more ground) suppose the Bishops of
Rome be more privileged by their local succession, and have greater interest
in the promise made to Peter and his successors, then Doctors of other seas
(which I cannot yet find) but suppose it though, as the seed of Abraham even
according to the flesh, in that regard were nearer to the promise then
strangers, as the Apostle witnesses, For unto you the promise belongs: my
next demand is, whether that promise made to Peter, and in him to his
successors of Rome, be absolutely tied to them, or with some condition by them
to be performed? Of that old promise made to Abraham we find two conditions
required in his seed, one of faith set down by Saint Paul, Gal. 3. 7.
They which are of faith are the children of Abraham: and the other of works
mentioned by our Savior, If ye were Abraham's children, you would do the works
of Abraham. The breach John. 8. 39. Romans 11. 19.
of these conditions caused those natural branches the Jews to be cut off.
Whereupon the Apostle makes an admonition to the Church of the Romans and the
rest of the Gentiles, by their example, not to presume, since God spared not
the natural branches, least he spare not them, Noli altum sapere, sed time.
Which is not so to be conceived, as if there could be a general Apostasy of
the Catholic Church from faith: but so, as if amongst the Romans or other
Gentiles, the current of the visible Church and fountain of divine graces
might be dried up, and begin to spring afresh amongst the Jews, or other
nations. Then if this be possible, nay if it be (as the Apostle speaks) to be
feared of us: that the Romans or any of the Gentiles may fall from faith, and
be cut off from the promise, as your selves do sentence the Churches of the
East at this day to be fallen, then much more may there be a possibility of
error in your Church in some branch of faith. For such a fall cannot be in a
moment, but must needs presuppose some preparations going before.

So then to wind up this whole discourse, you taking the promise made in Peter
to the Sea of Rome absolutely, not respecting any condition at al, may
thereupon build overmuch security, and so consequently fancy to your selves a
confirmed estate of the Roman Church (like the state of Angels,) and imagine
therein a means of deciding controversies more certain and infallible, then
God in his divine wisdom thought meet for her state militant here upon earth.
Yet albeit we cannot hope for a means of unity in that degree of certainty,
which fancy may easily imagine, or man's nature desire: Notwithstanding there
be excellent means for the certain finding out of necessary truth, provided
by God in his Church: not one but many, and amongst many, no one so certain to
us, which man by his ignorance or wilfulnes may not pervert to his own
destruction. Wherefore though first and principally we appeal to scripture, as
to the certain rule and ground of all the rest: yet for the true sense and
interpretation of scripture, we confirm our selves by the consent of the
learned in the Church; by the analogy of faith, and common grounds of belief
delivered by the Church, and collected by the ancient fathers out of the most
plain and undoubted scriptures, by the general consent of antiquity, by
Pasil. ep. 52. ad Athanas. Nazian. 2. Epi. ad Procopium. Propter multitudine^
hereticis fauentium infaustum exitum habueru^t omnia consilia illis temporibus,
qualia fuerint Sel^usiense, Tirense, Ariminense, Mediolanense, Smyrnense, etc.
provincial and general counsels, which at this day we wish and heartily
pray, might be called without partiality; but our complaint is the same with
Saint Basil and Gregory Nazianzene in their time, that a general counsel
cannot be called with indifferency, in the throng of so many quarrels,
especially since the head of the strongest faction must needs be possessed with
a prejudice in his own cause. These means of finding and maintaining the
truth of God, though taken severally they may seem the weaker, yet all or most
of them joined together are sufficient to rest the consciences of true
Catholics. To the perfection where of we labor to attain, forgetting that
which is behind, and endeavoring to that which is before.

THE SEVENTH MOTIVE.
THe divine providence, which as a center indifferently extends it self to
the universality of things, has allowed every creature common strength to
preserve his being, such is in liuelesse bodies their place, or motion, or
qualities; in vegetable their instinct of distinguishing their proper aliment;
in beasts, the judgment of sense, and privilege of nature; and in man an
apprehension, censure, and project from the intelligence of sensible
occurrents, both in natural and civil bodies.

The same wisdom and bounty, which has been so enlarged to his servants,
cannot be straightned to his children: and therefore it is above all doubt,
that he has set some plain and certain direction in his Church, both of
discerning of heresies when they arise, and of avoiding the infection of them:
neither has the holy Ghost failed herein, for because all the dangers of the
Church were chiefly to come from heretics, he has drawn in the scripture,
as in a table, the picture of heretics, their apparel, fashion, speech, and
carriage whereby they might be noted upon the first appearance, But among all
other Items, none is oftener given for a mark to discern them, then their
difference of doctrine, from the former tradition and custom. There shall be
false teachers which shall bring in heresies. 2. Peter. 2. 1. If any man come
to you and bring not this doctrine John. 2. 10. And the contradiction of Corah.
1. Tim. 8. If any man teach other wise then that which you have heard from the
beginning. Let it abide in you, fight for the faith once delivered: keep the
traditions you are taught. And if any man would fashion in his wishes a plain
and sensible rule, whereby the thickest conceits, that are not able to go
between truth and error in the loosest controversies, might determine any
question; there cannot be a better fancied then this difference of teaching,
and innovation of doctrine, which he that understands not the sense may
perceive by the words, the soundes, and contradiction of former opinion, as men
that are skillful in musical proportions, and being acquainted through use of
song, can easily judge if any change be made therein. By this were all
heresies apprehended at the first, and also arraigned. So that Stephanus Bishop
of Rome overthrew the decree of the council of Carthage, for rebaptising,
wherein Saint Cyprian was president, with his own rule, Ecclesia Dei non habet
talem consuetudinem. So Luther and Zwinglius and the rest of that crewe, were
at the first appearing branded by this note for heretics.

ANSWER.
THis is the same fallacy with the former applied another way: for as in the
last motive, you have assured the Church of an infallible means to define all
truth: so in this you secure her members likewise of a power with facility to
discern heretics, by argument drawn from the general providence of God
extending it self to all creatures, but most of all to his children. In which
ground there is some truth, but entwined with some errors. For as in other
creatures the divine providence is very bountiful, for the preservation of
their several beings against injury and dangers: yet for all the power of
nature in senceles things, or the judgment of sense in the unreasonable, or the
benefit of reason in men, they be notwithstanding oftentimes subject as well to
the pray and violence, as to the craft and deceit of others: so is it in the
professors of christian faith: unto whom God has revealed a means to
preserve their spiritual being in this state militant, more certain, and far
more sufficient for them, then he has given to any other: yet not with such
ease and facility to be enjoyed, as in this motive you endeavor to persuade.
For albeit the Scripture has not been wanting in describing heretics so
plainly, as by way of prophecy could possibly be expressed: yet are they not
thereby presently known upon the first appearance, nor can the thickest
conceits so easily judge of them.

If you take your marks (as you say) from their apparel, Mat. 7. 15.
fashion, or outward carriage: then a sheeps skin drawn over a woolfe will
easily deceive you: their outward appearance will in every respect seem holy
and innocent as the sheep of Christ. Therefore is there need of a serpents
wisdom to discern them; and not that only, but also of diligence and
watchfulness to epsy them. For as they come in sheeps skins so come they
privily, as Saint Peter notes in 2. Pet. 2. 1.
the place by you first mentioned, There shall be false teachers who (privily)
shall bring in damnable heresies. Which word, though it carry the emphasis of
the sentence, yet is it by you wisely omitted: happily because you thought it a
note of an heretic, not so well beseeming Martin Luther, who came not so
privily I wis, but open enough, and in his own liknes, contrary to the common
fashion of heretics, who first put on a sheep skin, and then creep into the
flock, the easier to deceive. Wherefore when that prophecy is fufilled, which
you have so fitted unto these times, concerning the doctrine of many false
Christ's: where the body is thither will the Eagles resort, not owls, or
bussards, but such as have a quick eye of Mat. 24. 28.
faith to discern the Lord, and the swift wing of devotion to fly unto him.
Nay ye delusions of heresies shall the^ grow so strong, as nothing shall be able
to withstand them, but only the eternal election of God. For if it were
possible the very elect should be deceived. A small number (God knows) in
compare of that Verse. 24.
glorious multitude, you so boast of in your fifth motive: yet it seems these
few must stand, when many great troops are carried with the doctrine of false
Christ's. Ecce hic, and ecce illic. But these difficulties seem nothing unto
you, who can imagine a direction so plain against heretics, as the thickest
and most gross conceit may thereby with facility discern them. The most
notorious mark you have chosen, is their difference of doctrine from the
former tradition, and custom.

All ancient customs, and traditions received from our forefathers, being
venerable for age, have received such force from time, as they become
equivalent with laws, and bind posterities to yield perfect obedience. So
that every alteration, as of civil constitutions, so especially of religion, is
not only dangerous, but therein also prejudicial to it self, that it
gainsayeth antiquity. For of whatsoever it may be justly affirmed, Dictum fuit
antiquis, that is to stand inviolable against Mat. 5.
all innovation whatsoever: neither is it by any means to be ouerruled, but
only by a rule more ancient, Non fuit sic ab Mat. 19. 8.
initio. By which our Savior controuled the ancient traditions of the Jews:
examining them by the first institution of the law. For the first in every
kind is the rule and square of all the rest. Therefore every custom in the
Church of God is with all duty, and reverence to be embraced, except only in
case, where it does cross the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, whereupon
the Church it self is built. And therein, adificium coedat solo, so much only
do the places by you alleged infer, that we should not vary from the
doctrine of the Apostles, which we willingly subscribe unto.

But in these days I would not wish every thick conceit to put himself upon
the trial of former times for true antiquity, least he be deceived therein,
as Israel was by the Gibeonites with old rags and clouted shoes, Joshua. 9.
But Motive 14. Cap. 39. Dilatae and inueteratae haereses nequaquam hac via
aggrediedae sunt (...) quod pro^ temporum tractu longa (...) furandae veritatis
patuerit occasio.
the safest trial will be, Quid fuit ab initio? as we learn out of Vincentius
in his worthy work (as D. Bristow calls it) for put case (says he) that
heresy be once so rooted in the Church, that it begins to plead antiquity,
that it spread so far, and have got such strength as the favorers thereof have
power and opportunity to alter and corrupt the ancient writers: then is it
only safe to make trial by the written word. How justly these things have
been objected to the Church of Rome, I will not dispute: only let this
suffice, that an author so ancient, Sola scripturunt authoritate.
so renowned by your selves, does not only think it possible to befall in the
visible Church, but also has set down this advise against the same. I come to
the strength of this motive, which is the conclusion of this whole discourse.

MOTIVE.
Neither are they able to prove that either catholic or heretic did
challenge the Church of Rome for any of the controuerted questions, when first
they began to arise. For Arius, Actius, Vigilantius, Berengarius, and the rest
spoke against those points of doctrine, which we have proof by the adversaries
consent to have been practiced many ages before in the Church. But if they
cannot show neither in all, nor in one question between us, that the
repugnance and rejecting of it by any is ancient, as the allowance thereof, it
is manifest that the latter, not the former, were heretics which brought in
alteration.

ANSWER.
WE are able in some questions to satisfy your demand, and for the rest to
give sufficient reason, why it cannot be: which two points will easily and
fully dissolve the force of this objection. For matters in question, whereof
the Church of Rome is now challenged, be of two sorts. Some be like blemishes
in the face, so conspicuous, as they may easily be discerned at the first:
others fester more inwardly. To the former kind do belong especially those
points, which concern the government of the Church. Loath I am to enter
particulars in this general discourse, but only because you urge me to show
in any one question between us, that the repugnance and rejecting of it, is
ancient, as the allowance thereof. I nominate the title and right of universal
Bishop, with the privileges thereunto belonging: which, as they were claimed
by the Popes, so were they at the same times evermore disclaimed by others. For
the Primacie of honor and dignity, which at the first was generally given to
the Church of Rome, as well in regard of her large dominions, of the wisdom
and virtues of the commanders of that Sea: as also of the weakness and
leuitie of the Eastern Churches, together with other occurrents and
consequences of the Empire: This I say was by the more ambitious Popes and
their Parasites used for a styrrop to mount them higher, from a primacie to a
supremacy, from honor and dignity to a sovereign power and authority. Which
was no sooner upon occasion practiced by any, but presently was it checked and
controlled, not by particular men, but whole Synodes. Pope Julius presuming
upon this title did attempt to restore Athanasius, and Paulinus, upon their
appeal to Rome, who by the Bishopes of Asia and their Metropolitan had bin
deprived. Whereupon they of Alexandria assembled a synod at Antioch: dispatched
letters to the Pope both vehement and bitter: and therein declared it to be
most unequal for him to impose laws upon them for the depriving of any, since
they did not intermedle with his business, when he had expelled Nouatus out of
the Church of Rome. Thus much is fully expressed by Socrates in the 11. of his
eccle siasticall story. If you require instance of the Bishops of Afrike
likewise, witness Saint Syprian writing to Pope Cornelius, unto whom he
affirms their joint decree against Rome appealers to be both equal and right.
For (says he) since every pastor has a portion of the flock committed to
him, which he is to govern and rule as one that must give account thereof
unto the Lord: it behooves them under our custody to plead their cause at
home, where accusers and witnesses may be had, unless happily some few
desperate lewd fellows Nisi paeucis desperatis, and perditis minor videtur esse
authoritas Episcoporum in Africa, etc.
think the authority of the African Bishops to be less, by whom they are
judged. Thus did Cyprian write occasioned by one Faelicissimus, who, deprived
in Africa, ran to Rome. But this repugnance you cannot deny to be ancient. A
little after at the counsel of Sardice this question of jurisdiction grew so
hot twixt the fathers of the East and West Churches, that the Eastern Bishops,
before any thing determined, retired themselves home to their places, the
remnant of the Latin Church established a law concerning appeals to Rome,
thereby to extol the famous memory of the Apostle Peter. But at the very
next counsel all this was quite dashed again, at the counsel of Carthage
assembled of above 200 fathers amongst whom Saint Augustine was one; where it
was peremtorilie decreed, not in one or two, but four entire chapters: Cap.
28. 98. 116. 123.
that none should make any appeal beyond the Sea, in pain of excommunication.
Notwithstanding unto this counsel did the Pope send three Legates, with
straight command Faustinus. Philippus. Asellus.
to maintain his right, which he pretended to be grounded upon a decree of
the Nicen Counsel: that decree was proved forged: the Nicen Counsel sought
into: the ancient copies thereof sent for from Constantinople, Alexandria and
Rome: the next year conferred, examined, nothing found. Whereupon the Bishops
of that Counsel writ to the Pope, that in the Nicen Counsel nothing was
decreed tending that way, but rather the contrary, to wit, that he should
keep himself within his bounds, as other Metropolitans did: and therefore
advised him to content himself with his own charge. To this subscribed 230.
fathers. If you come to latter times, when his full and most complet supremacy
was defined at the Lateran Counsel, under Leo the tenth: presently upon it the
University of Paris appealed to another Counsel, and condemned that former.
So may ye find other Universities to have done in the like cause, as Louan,
Colen, Uienna, and the In fascicul. rerum expetend. and fugiend. Apeliat
universe. Parisiens. a Leone decimo ad futurum consilium.
rest. So in these and the like points concerning the external face of the
Church, more conspicuous, and consequently more subject to gain sayings, the
repugnance and rejecting of them might easily be shown to be ancient, as the
allowance of them is. But there be other questions concerning faith and
opinion, which be of a far different kind from the former. Much like unto
those tares in the parable, scattered by the enemy in the seed time of the
Church, the better to plead antiquite, yet are they not at the first espied
though, till they have sprung up, and laid claim to the ground, as well as the
most pure wheat. Whereof there be many causes concurring: one is because they
be little seeds at the first, and therefore less regarded of men, De minimis
non curat lex aut ratio. And not only from little evils, but even from
indifferent beginnings, as the devotions and natural affections of men, does
the enemy take occasion to bring in gross superstition. Whereof the wise man
gives instance in that great sin of idolatry among the heathen. For when a
father mourned grievously for his son that was taken away suddenly, he made
an image for him that was once dead, endeavoring after a sort to preserve him
alive in the eye and memory of man. Which affection in the father (had it
proceeded no further) Wisd. 14. 14.
were not greatly to be misliked: but after, he worshipped it as a God,
ordained ceremonies, and commanded his servants to sacrifice unto it. Thus
(says the text) by process of time this wicked custom prevailed, and was
kept as a law. Secondly, as the beginnings be small, and therefore less
conspicuous: so do they breed inwardly, and take deep root, first in the
minds of men, before they be published in the Church, as the seed is first
covered with earth before it spring up. To this purpose does our Savior
compare the false doctrine of the Pharisees unto leven, which a woman takes and
hides in a barrel of meal. So by this means, a little leven in time, will
sower the lump. Thirdly, as the beginnings of errors, so likewise their
growthes and proceedings are insensible, because they do not sprout up like
Jonas Gourd, in a moment, but like ordinary plants, by little and little: Non
crescere cernis frutices, sed crenisse: The same reason which is of the growth
of error, is likewise to be applied to the decay of pure religion: which being
not put down at once, but mouldering away in time, is not so easily perceived.
For had the Fig Tree which the Disciples saw suddenly withered, and
flourishing over night, dried up in longer space, it had not been so subject to
their observation. Besides these impediments, we must presume, that the enemy
being wise, will take all fit opportunity yt may be: then since all ages have
not been alike furnished with able and vigilant pastors, that also adds some
advantage to this purpose. For it is observed, that when men slept, the enemy
sowed tares, so the dark nights of ignorance and times of security, be
fittest to entertain heresies without resistance. But in other ages again,
when it pleased almighty God to raise most glorious lights in his Church, such
as were most of the ancient Fathers, they were presently set a work with some
graund heretic or other, which so possessed them, as they could not so well
intend those lesser enormities, which by that means gathered strength more and
more. For they were to gather all their forces, and encounter with such
heresies, as did aim at the soul of religion, and maine pillars of christian
faith: some taking away the divinity of Christ; some mangling his humanity;
some confounding his natures; some renting his person: thus the Dragon setting
upon the Lord of life, and ready to tear in pieces the very person of our
blessed Savior: it was then no time to stand brushing his garment: having such
huge beams to remove, it was unseasonable to pecke moates, though they also
hinder the eye sight, and become dangerous in time, to the very apple of Gods
eye, as the Church is called. So then, to conclude, as in diverse questions
controuersed, the repugnances may be showed to have been ancient: so there is
good reason you should pardon us for some others.

Thus have I briefly examined these few motives; not any ways extenuating
(so far as I can conceive) but rather urging them with the advantage: which
if I have in any reasonable sort satisfied, my next endeavor is humble prayer
to almighty God, so to move your heart, as this your resolution be no more
peremptory and strong, then the Motives whereupon it builds, are in reason,
able to enforce.

Amen.
FINIS.

