CERTAIN GODLY AND LEARned treatises

Written by that worthy Minister of Christ, M. DVDLEY FENNER; for the behoof
and edification of al those, that desire to grow and increase in true Godliness.

THE TITLES WHEREof, are set down in the Page following,

EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Waldegraue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1592.

Cum Priuilegio Regali.

THE CONTENTS OF this Book.
1 The Order of Household government, described out of the word of God. Fol. 1 2
An Interpretation upon the Lords prayer. Fol. 63 3 A brief Interpretatation
upon the Epistle to Philemon. Fol. 71 4 A short and plain Table, orderly
disposing the principles of Religion, out of the first Table of the Law. 81 5 A
Treatise of the whole doctrine of the Sacraments, plainly and fully set down,
and declared out of the word of God. Fol. 118 6 A short and profitable
Treatise; of Lawful and unlawful Recreations, and the right use, and abuse of
those that are lawful. Fol. 122
TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, noble, and potent Lord, JAMES, Lord LINDSAY of the
Byres: Grace and Peace in Christ Jesus.
IT were to be wished (Right Honorable) that as sin multiplieth it self,
so the knowledge and true fear of God, should every way be increased among
men. For, thereby it would come to pass, by the blessing of God, that fewer
should tread the path of destruction, than (alas) do now. And although it
lies not in man, to stop the course, and to damme up the streams of
iniquity (for this must be performed by the Lords own arm, or else all men's
endeavors are but vain) yet is it the part of all those that fear God, to do
what they may, for the effecting of this work. Wherein, albeit the attempts of
the men of God, have not always the effects which they desired, yet their
labors, both in preaching and writing, have not been destitute of their
fruit, in measure, greater or smaller, as the Lord thought it meet.

The Lord in this latter age, has raised up diverse, and excellent men for this
purpose, and he has greatly magnified his mercies toward us in this Island:
and us, in the enjoying of his goodness, if we can make a right use thereof. But
because we were not worthy of them, therefore he has many times, in the
midst of their years, yea, and some in the very spring and beginning of
their strength, to warn us, what he is likely to do with the the rest, if we
be not more thankful. Amongst the number of those, whom in the Lords great
mercies we inioyed, and lost for our unthankfulness, M. DVDLEY FENNER was
one, whom the Church of God in this age could have hardliest spared: he ended
his testimony in this life, being under thirty years of age: but yet of that
growth in the knowledge of God, that few (if ever any of his years) have
left behind them the like monuments of great knowledge and learning, in the
true and sound fear of God, as he has done. His works both in Latin and
English do bear witness hereof. And it is not meet that I should enter into
any farther commendations of him: although, both in regard of the outward
favor of God toward him, as being born an heir of great possessions, and
especially, in consideration of his spiritual understanding in the ways of
the Lord, his great learning, his conflicts with the adversaries of God, his
constancy, and patient suffering for the truth: there are many things that
make his name blessed among the Saints.

Some Treatises of his, being printed at sundry times, and now rare to be
gotten, I have gathered together, and presumed to dedicate unto your
Lordshippe: not doubting, but in regard, both of the Author, (who being a
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, I know you will esteem, though unknown
unto you) and especially, in respect of the notable handling of the truth,
which they contain, you will accept them, as being not unbeseeming your
Lordship, that they were published under your name. And if I should say, both in
regard of the work it self, and also the Author, that it were no small
honor unto a Christian Nobleman, that they come forth under his Patronage, I
think I should not speak amiss.

That one treatise of household government, does so commend the whole work unto
a Christian Master of a Family, as who so does well read and consider it,
must needs think, whatsoever has proceeded out of the same furnace, does
deserve to be highly accounted of. And happy were it for all families, that
they were governed according to the prescription, set down in this Treatise.
Your Lordship, I trust, will make that profit hereof, among the rest hereunto
adjoined: namely, that it will be a confirmation unto you, in that, wherein
your family is already reformed, and a direction for that perfecting of the
government thereof, wholly according unto the word. And to this purpose it is,
that I have dedicated this and the rest unto your Honor. Touching my self, I
will say no more, but as I desire to show my self profitable in my vocation,
unto the whole Church of God in general; so I would willingly gratify your
Honor in particular. And so accept this, as a testimony of my good will toward
your Lordship, whom I understand (and know in some measure) to bear no small
affection and good will unto the truth, and all those that profess the same.
Thus I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, that is able to
build you up further, and give you an inheritance among them which are
sanctified. Edinburgh the 24. of December. 1591.

Your H. to command in the Lord, R. W.

THE ORDER OF HOVSholde, methodicallie described out of the word of God, with
the contrary abuses found in the world.
THE order of an household called oeconomia, it is an order for the government
of an household according to the word of God. 1. Tim. 4. Which governs his
house well and excellently. Psalm. 10.1. I will walk in the perfect way, in the
vprightnes of my soul in the midst of mine house. Which declares, there is
a perfect way which comes from God only, as all perfection does; wherein is
required the vprightnes of ones soul, and whereof he sets down some part
afterward. Prou. 24, 3.4. By wisdom the house is built, and established by
understanding, and by knowledge, the rooms shall be filled with all precious and
pleasant substance.

Now the wisdom meant in this book is, that which is allowed of Gods word:
especially when he joined such blessing unto it.

The household order has 2. parts The first, of those which concern the
governors of the family. The second, of those which are governed in the same.


[1. Tim. 5.8. If one care not for his own, especially those of his house:]
which shows an especial rule of mutual duty between these two. Also the
wisdom of the holy Ghost, in setting down mutual duties unto them [Prou.
31. Ephe. 6. 2. Honor thy father and thy Mother, which is the first
commandment, with promise. 3 That it may be well with thee, and that thou
may live long on earth. 4. And ye Fathers, provoke not your children to
wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the lord. 5
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and humbling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ. 6 Not
with service to the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart. Colos. 4.20.21.22.23.24.]

Those which govern the family, are those superiors who have authority in
the same. Their general and common duty is, to order their house according
to the former rule. Yet one may (being urged by the great care of a
Magistracy, or for such like) have a steward, that is, one to govern his
household, according to the rules he prescribes. Contrary to this, is the
common and whole casting off of this care, unless in worldly matters. The
first part of this rule is prooved by these places. [I will have the younger
woman to marie, and govern their household. 1. Tim. 5. If one rule not his
household well, how shall he care for the Church, 1. Tim. 3.5. The example of
David, Psalm. 101.4.1. Salomons mother. Pro. 31.1.2.3. etc]

The second part of this rule, is prooved by the example of Abraham, who had
his elder servant in his house, who was over all that he had, and to whom he
committed the weighty duty of providing a wife for his son. [Genes. 24.2.
Then Abraham spoke unto the elder servaunt of his household, which was over all
that he had, saying: Put now thy hand under my thigh. 3 that I may bind thee
with an oath, by the Lord God of heaven, and God of the earth, that thou will
not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Cananits, amongst whom I
dwell. 4. But that thou will go unto my country, and unto my kindred, and
take a wife for my son Isaac.] So Joseph in Putiphars house.

This government must be performed with all comeliness fit for the
household, which is, that agreeable fitness or co^veniencie, which woorthily
becomes the diversity of persons in the family; as Superiors, inferiors,
equals: of sex, male, female: of age, childhood, youth, ripe age, old years:
of matters, as some concerning God, some man: of time, the day, the night. For
all these have not one and the same rule of decency: therefore the Apostle
says: [Which rules his house, which keeps his children in subjection, with
all comelines, 1. Tim. 3.4.] Now as there is comeliness peculiar to the
subjection of Children, so of servauntes: And as there is comeliness for
subjection, so for equality: and as for behauior of those of the house, so to
those not of the house, and so likewise in all other the former respects, as
shall appear by the shining light or eye of this general rule in every part of
household government.

Of the duties of ordering the household, by the chief of the same. There are
two sorts: The first, regards those in the household. The other, strangers or
guests, coming into the same.

[1. Tim. 5.10. If she have brought up her children well: If she have bin given
to hospitality. Job. 31.31. If the men of my tent have not said: O that some
would give us of this flesh, we are not satisfied, because the stranger did
not lodge abroad; I opened my doors to the waifairing man.] So he caused his
servants to give place to strangers, which shows this diversity of duties.

Now both of these are in regard of Christian holiness. The things of this life.


[Pro. 31.15. She opens her mouth in wisdom, and the doctrine of mercy is on
her tongue. And rising while it is yet night, she gives meat to her house, and
a task to her maids. And Exodus 18.5. And Iethro the father in law of Mosche,
coming with his children, and with his wife unto Mosche, into that desert
where he had placed his tents; to wit, to the mount of God. 6. He said unto
Mosche: I thy father in law Iethro, do come unto thee: also thy wife and her
two sons with her. 7 Then Mosche went forth to meet his father in law, and
bowing himself, he kissed him, and they asked one another of his welfare:
afterterward, they went into his Tent. 8 Where Mosche declaring unto his father
in law, whatsoever things the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and the Egyptians
for Israel: and all the troubles which had happened unto them in that way, from
whence the Lord had delivered them. 9 Iethro rejoiced for all those benefits
which the Lord had done unto Israel, because he had delivered them out of the
hands of the Egyptians. 10 And Iethro said: Blessed be the Lord God, which has
delivered you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hands of
Pharaoh: Which has delivered his people from under the hands of the
Egyptians. 11 Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods: for in
that thing wherein they were proud, he is above the^. 12 Therefore Iethro the
father in law of Mosche, took and offered sacrifices, and a burnt offering
unto God, and Aaron and all the Elders of Israel, came to eat meat with Iethro,
Mosche his father in law before God. 13 And it came to pass the next day,
Mosche sitting to judge the people, when as the people stood about Mosche from
the morning of that day unto the evening. 14 That the Father in law of Mosche
beheld all that he did unto the people, and said: What is this that thou do
unto this people? Why sit thou alone, and all the people stand before thee,
from the morning unto the evening? 15 Then Mosche said unto his father in law:
Because this people come unto me to ask counsel at God. 16 When there is any
business between the^, every one comes unto me, that I may judge between
both, and I make known the Statutes of God and his laws. 17 But Iethro his
father in law said: the thing is not good which thou do. 18 Thou will
altogether faint, both thou, and the people that is with thee, for this thing
is too heavy for thee, thou can not perform it alone.]

And this arises from a double respect: the commodity they receive, and the
duty they owe to the common state wherein they are: that as they have of their
children, servants, guests, not only bodily service and friendship, but that
which is of conscience, and comes from their faith and religion, and their
prayer, and the blessing in them, Math. 10.41. so they must give them this
double recompense.

Also to the common state, they are bound by covenant, not only as much as in
them lies, by their household government, to further the peace and tranquillity
of the common wealth, but also of religion and true holiness. 2. King. 11.17.
Contrary to this is, their best care, to be most exquisit in the latter, and
altogether negligent in the former, which is the chiefest: So that their
administration of household matters, is altogether civil, not religious.

For the family, the duty which regards them is, to keep them in
subjection, for the performance of al duties of holiness and religion, and for
the diligent performance of those woorks and labors, which are fit for every
one.

[1. Tim. 3.4. Which may govern well his house, which may keep his children
in subjection, with all honesty. 1. Tim. 3. If any be unblameable, the
husband of one wife, having faithful children, which are not slaundered of
riot, either stubborn. Psalm. 101.1. I will sing mercy and judgment unto thee
o Lord, will I sing. 2 I will mark (in an upright way) when thou shall come unto
me, I will co^tinuallie walk in the soundness of my mind, in the midst of
mine house. 3 I will not set before mine eyes a wicked thing: I have hated the
works of them that decline, it shall not cleave unto me. 4 A froward mind
shall depart from me: I will not acknowledge evil. 5 The tongue that privilie
hurts his neighbor I will cut out: him that is proud in his eyes, and
swelling in his mind, I shall not be able to suffer. 6 Mine eyes shall wait
upon the faithful of the land, that they may abide with me: He that walks in
the sound way, shall minister unto me. 8 The deceitful man shall not dwell
within mine house; he that tells lies, shall not be established before mine
eyes.]

Now for the performance of this general duty, two sorts are required: which
are, Such as where they most commonly go before them and direct them. Such as
they must perform unto them.


[Gen. 35.2. Wherefore Jacob gave commandment unto his family, and to all that
were with him: Put away the gods of the people, which are amongst you, and
cleanse your selves, changing your garments. 3 Afterward arising let us ascend
to Bethel, that there I may make an Altar to that strong God, which heard me in
the day of my distress, and was present with me in the way wherein I went. 4
Which when they had given unto Jacob all the gods of the strange people which
were in their hands, and the earings which were in their ears: Jacob hid them
under that Oak which is beside Shechem.

Where we see, that Jacob does both instruct them what to do, and in the
doing of these things directs them.

Such as wherein they must only go before them and direct them, are those
which only ought to be done jointlie of the whole family, and then the
superiors must be there, the chief directors of them: otherwise, when they
are absent, they must cause them to be done, as in prayer before and after
their labor, in thanksgiving, before and after meat. [Iam. 5.13. Is any
amongst you sick in mind? Let him pray. Is any man cheerful? Let him sing.
Psalm. 127. Unless the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that
build it: Unless the Lord keep the city, the keeper is diligent in vain. 2.
Let them be in vain unto you, which rise betimes, which sit down slowly,
which are fed with the meat of sorrows, so he gives sleep to his beloved.
Psalm. 55.18. In the evening and morning, and at noon days, will I meditate and
make a noise, until he has heard my voice. 1. Tim. 4.4 For whatsoever God
has created is good, neither is any thing to be refused, if it be taken with
thanksgiving. Luke. 22.17. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks,
he said, take this, and devide it amongst you. So Abraham's servaunt said, Genesis
24.12. O Lord God of my master Abraham, cause I beseech thee, that it com unto
me this day, and exercise this goodness toward my master Abraham. 48 And I
bowed down and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master
Abraham, because he had brought me by the right way, to take my masters
brothers daughter for his son.] And upon any great judgment on the family,
Church or common wealth, to direct them in fastings and prayers, with readings,
meditations, and use of the word, as may serve to give especial cause of
humbling, and especial cause fit of comfort for that work. [Hest. 4.16. Go
gather together all the Jews which are at Susan, and fast for me, and neither
eat nor drink those three days, night nor day: I likewise and my maids will
fast: so at length, I will go in to the King, which is not according to the
commandment: and when I shall perish, I will perish. Nehe. 1.4. And it came to
pass, when I heard these words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain
days, in which I fasted and prayed before the God of heaven. 5. And I said: I
beseech thee, o Lord God of heaven, most strong God, greatest, and chiefly to
be feared: Keeping covenant and mercy, to them that love him and keep his
co^mandeme^ts. 6. Let thine ear be atte^tiue, and thine eyes be open, to
harke^ to the prayer of thy servaunt, which I pray before thee at this time,
day and night, for the Israelites thy servants: and I confess the sins of the
Israelits, wherewith we have sinned against thee: I also, and the house of my
fathers, etc.] For as it is their duty, in their own private fast to do this
by themselves, so to direct others in the same, when they do it with them.
Contrary to this, is the unchristian profaneness in such cases: Also the
unchristian shamfastnes of some, and common negligence in others in these
duties.

Such as they must perform unto them, are duties of Instruction. Reforming.


[Pro. 13.24. He which keeps back his rod, hates his son, but he which
loves him, does give him instructions betimes. Pro. 15.32. He which
withdraws himself from instruction, dispiseth his soul: but he that
hearkeneth unto rebuke, possesses his soul.]

The duties of instruction are, that by a familiar and most plain manner of
teaching, they may grow in the knowledge of that truth which is according to
godliness. [Ge^. 18.19. When as I have known him, should I not reveal it for
this cause, that he may command his children and household after him, that they
may keep the way of the Lord, by exercising righteousness and judgment, and
that the Lord may perform unto Abraham, that which he has promised unto him.
Genes. 14.14. When Abraham had heard that his kinsman was taken, he armed his
men, instructed 318. and followed them unto Dan. Deuteronomy. 20.] They are for
Continual daily instruction. That which respects the public ministry.


Exodus 12.25.26. Let it be therefore, when ye shall come into the land which the
Lord shall give unto you, as he has said, and shall observe this worship. Let
it be (I say) when your children ask you: what signifies this worship unto
you? that ye say it is the Sacrifice, the passover of the Lord, who passing by
the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he slew the Egiptians, he
delivered our families. Exodus 13.14. And let it be when thy son shall ask
thee hereafter, saying, what means this? that thou say unto him, with a
strong hand has the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of
servaunts. For it came to pass when Pharao showed himself cruel in letting us
go, that the Lord slew every first borne of men, unto the first borne of
beasts. Therefore I kill unto the Lord, the males of all that open the womb:
but every first borne of my children I redeeme]

Duties for daily instruction, are Instruction out of the Scriptures.
Instruction drawn from Gods works


[Psalm. 87.1. Receive with your ears (my people) my doctrine, incline your
ear unto the words of my mouth. 2. I will open my mouth in a parable, I will
power forth hid things, which have been of old time. 3. which we have heard
and known, as our Elders have told unto us. 4. we will not hide it from their
children, the after generation. 5. being about to declare the praises of the
Lord, his might, and his wonders which he has done. For he has set a
testimony in Jacob, and put a law in Israel: which he commanded our Elders to
make known to their Children. 6. That the after generation, the sons which
should be borne, rising up, might declare it to their sons. 7. And they may
set their hope on God, nor might forget the works of the strong God: but
keep his commandments. 8. Nor that they be not as their elders, a stubborn
and rebellious generation: a generation which has not prepared their mind,
and whose spirit was not constant toward the strong God.

Instruction out of the scripture, is by the daily reading of the same with
them, both to make them acquainted with the course of them, so that they may
mark the same for their better profiting, by the allegations of the public
ministry, also to refer those things which are plain and easy, or which they
have learned from the public ministry, unto such plain instruction as they
instructed, may understand and know how to bring it in use. [2. Tim. 3.15. Thou
have known the Scriptures from a childe] which can not be spoken of a through
knowledge, no not such as belongs to the old men, who should be sound in
faith: much less such as belongs to a minister: but such as this, in being
made acquainted with it, and caused to mark as he was able, the course of it,
and to learn for use and practice, such as his parents were able to note unto
him, and he fit to receive by daily practice [Deu. 6.6. And let these words
which I command thee this day, be in thy heart. 7 And put them pearcinglie into
thy children, and speak of them, when thou sit in thine house, when thou
walk by any way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. 8 Also, bind
the^ for a sign upon thine hand, and let them be for frontlets between thine
eyes. 9 Briefly, write them on the posts of thine house, and on thy gates.]

Contrary to this is, first, that they are utterly negligent and ignorant how
they should do this: Then, that some presume above this rule, and go beyond
their calling: and especially that their household is not trained by this
means, nor made fit for the public ministry, and to amend their lives by
such Christian exercises.

Instruction drawn from Gods works is, by applying the works of God, past or
present, to move them the better to confidence, and trust in God, by works of
his mercy: to fear to offend God: by works of his justice, and so to sow the
very seed of true religion and good conscience in them. [Gen. 18.19. When as I
have known him, should I not reveal it? For this cause, that he may command
his children and household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, by
exercising justice and judgment, that the Lord may perform unto Abraham, that
which he has promised unto him.]

The duty which respects the public ministry, is

Double, First, concerning the obeying of it. The second concerning the use of
it


First concernig the obeying of it, they must (if it be possible) in their
place and calling, adjoyn them to a set ministry, if not, to bestow at least
the Sabbath days, yea, other also, in seeking to the ministers and prophets of
God, to hear the word of God. This is manifest, first: Because we must first
seek the kingdom of God; whereof this is a part, [Esa 32.1. Behold, a king
shall rule justly, and excellent ones shall govern according to the rule: the
eyes of them who see shall not wink, but the ears of them who hear, shall
hearken: the mind of the hasty shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of
the stutterer, shall readily speak shining things. When Saviors, to wit,
ministers of the doctrine of salvation, shall ascend in the mountain of the
Lord, to judge the mountain of Esau, the kingdom shall be to the Lord.
Hobad. 21. Diverse administrations, but one Lord. 1. Cor. 12. We are the
Ambassadors of Christ, to beseech you to be reconciled. 2. Cor. 5. Secondly, it
is the ordinary means to beget and nourish faith in us. How can they believe,
except they hear: how can they hear, without a Preacher: how can he preach
without he be sent? Romans 10. He has given Pastors and Doctors, for the
gathering together of the church the work of the ministry, and building them
up to a perfect age in Christ, that they be not as children wavering, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Ephe. 4. Attend to reading,
exhortation and doctrine; in these continue, in these things be, for in so
doing, thou shall save thy self and others. 1. Tim. 4.]

Secondly, because it is the greatest blessing to have it, and the greatest
plague to want it. Iere. 23. having threatened them that they feed not the
people, he says after, [I will gather the rest of my sheep out of all the
land whither I had driven them, and I will bring them back unto their
sheepcots, where they shall multiply and increase, and I will set over them
Pastors, which shall feed them: so that they shall fear no more nor shall be
wanting, says the Lord. Ier. 3. I will bring you to Sion, where I will give you
Pastors after my heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. God
will give you indeed the bread of affliction and water of oppression, but none
of my teachers shall, be shut up any more in a corner, but thy eyes shall see
thy teachers, and thy ears shall hear a voice behind us, saying, Here is the
way, walk in it. Esa. 30.20. A famine of bread, nor a thirste of water, but
hearing the word of the Lord, etc. Mat. 8. But when he saw the multitude, he
had compassion on them, because they were dispersed and scattered abroad as
sheep having no Shepherd; Then he said, Surely the harvest is great, but the
laborers few, etc.] Which shows how miserable they are which want this
benefit: It allows also this duty of seeking. 2. King. 4.22. And he said,
wherefore will thou go to him (meaning the Prophet) to day? It is neither new
Moon nor Sabbath day. Which shows, that in the scarcity of the preaching
ministry, they went on those days to the Prophets to hear the word of God.
The second duty is, to cause them to do that which is commanded them in the
third Commandment to that purpose. Which, although it be not proper to this
place yet for the simpler sort, it is thus set down. First, to prepare
themselves to the preaching of the word, by consideration of Gods ordinance
and promise, and their corruption: so that laying aside al superfluity of
evil, that they may with all meekness receive the word. Iam. 1.17. Luke 8.8.
Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever has, it shall be given unto
him, and who so has not, even that which he seems to have, shall be taken
from him: And for the Sacraments, to consider Gods institution, their
ministry, his mercy in Christ, their faith, their repentance and their
wants: and so seeking the assurance of grace, of reconciliation and comfort, to
com unto the table of the Lord. [1. Cor. 11.28. But let every one prove
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. Esa. 1.16.
Wash your selves, purify your selves, put away the wickedness of your
actions, and cease to do evil before mine eyes. Esa. 66.2. But upon him do
I look that is poor and contrite in spirit, and trembles at my words. Mat.
5.23. Therefore if thou have brought thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee. 24 Leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy ways: First, be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift.]

Secondly, in the works themselves, with reverence and understanding to hear
and receive the word, to be touched according to the matter, and with joy and
assurance of faith receive solace and increase of grace, by the right use of
the Sacraments; and after, to call to mind and try by the Scripture things
delivered, and so hold fast the good, and to apply the comfort of the
sacraments unto al temptations afterward. [Psal. 78.2. Hear my doctrine, O my
people, incline thine ear to the words of my mouth. Nehem. 8.10. After
Nehemiah (to wit, the Kings Ambassador) and Ezra the Priest and Scribe, and
the Levits teaching the people, said unto all the people. This is the day
sanctified unto the Lord your God: mourn not, neither weep: (for all the
people wept when they hard the words of the Law) 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Because our
Gospel abode with you, not in speech only, but also in power: both in the holy
Ghost, as also with much sure persuasion, as ye have known what manner of men
we have bin amongst you for your sakes. Math. 26. And when they had song a
Psalm, they went out into the mount Olivet. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Quench not the
Spirit: Set not light by preaching: Try al things: Hold fast that which is
good.]

For obedience of life, it behooveth them to teach them, call on them, and see
them do this which they learn, that the public ministry, and private use of
the word be not contemned, neglected, unprofitable unto them, and so God
provoked, not only against their family, but also the Church of which they
are. Contrary to this, is, that men both themselves and their families go to
the public ministry, as to a common matter, let it fall after to the ground,
without any looking into the certainty of doctrine, the power and practice of
it; and some with the ministry of the the word become worse, both they and
their housholdes, than those which never heard it. [Exod. 13.1. And declare
unto thy son in that day, saying: For this has the Lord done these things
unto me, when I went out of Egypt. 9 So shall it be unto thee for a sign upon
thine hand, and for a monument between thine eyes, that the doctrine of the
Lord may be in thy mouth: to wit, that the Lord with a strong hand brought thee
out of Egypt.] Which with the rest of the law shows, that at those times
this must be done, and that so thoroughly, that this work by this means, may
be a lively sign, and the doctrine be so understood, that it may more
fruitfullie and lively be communicated by conference one to another. Also
[Act. 10.24. And the other day after, they entered into Caesarea. And Cornelius
waited for them, having gathered together his kinsmen and special friends.
Nehem. 8.13. And all the people came to eat and drink, and to send portions,
and to make great joy, because they understood those words which they had made
known unto the^. 1. King. 13.31. And it came to pass, after they had buried
him; that he gave commandment unto his sons, saying; When I shall be dead,
bury me likewise in the sepulcher, in the which that man of God is buried:
place my bones besides his bones. 33. For surely the things which he has
foreshewed by the word of the Lord, against the altar which is at Bethel, and
against all the high places which are in the Cities of Schomron, shall come to
pass. Job. 1.5 After it came to pass, when they had finished the days of the
banquet, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rising early, he offered a
sacrifice according to the number of them al. For Job said, Peradventure my
sons have sinned, or cursed God in their heart. So Job did every of those
days.] Which shows, he called on them to do their duties, in sanctifying
them selves and their families, and preparing them according to the manner
prescribed.

The duties in reforming, are those duties whereby they must labor to reform
every thing amiss, which is espied, for Gods glory and their good, and least
it creep further. Contrary to this is, that many corruptions are not
accounted of, that they are winked at.

[Iob. 1.5 Psalm. 101.3.4.5. I will not set before mine eyes a wicked thing, I
hate the works of those that decline, it shall not cleave unto me. A froward
mind shall depart from me: I will not acknowledge evil. That tongue that
privilie hurts his neighbor, I will cut out: Him that is proud in look, and
swelling in mind I cannot suffer] The rule of this must be the meaning of the
the ten commandments, which because it is necessary for the simple, though
not so proper for this place, it is briefly set down. They shall suffer none
in their house vnrefourmed: which Phil. 1.9.10 Col. 1.10 11.
either in judgment is known to err from the truth of the word of God, or in
manners, from the practice of the same: But if any Command. 1. Ierem. 9.24.
delight in the ignorance of god, be careless to approve himself as one that
Deuteronomy. 6.4.5.12 13. Heb. 12.28. Gen- 17.1.
wholly depends on him, loves him, fears him, reverenceth him, laboreth to
approve al his ways before him: Command. 2. Deuteronomy. 12.31.32 Esa. 29 13.14 Math.
15. Col. 2 23. Psalm. ^19. Psalm. 26.8. Act. ^.42.
If any be given to idolatry, superstition, etc. and cares not in every part
of the worship of God, to follow his revealed will: or if in any the parts
commanded, he appear negligent and cold. John. 4.22. 2. King 18.4. Act 10.26.
Act. 14.13. Exodus 33.24. Roman. 1.23. Hos. 2.27. Esa. 30.22.
Or to put them to any other use than is commanded, or be given to images,
superstitious monuments, customs, occasions, or such like. If any dishonor the
name of God, either Command. 3. Math. 5.34. Iam. 5.12
in the vnreverent using, or abusing, or perverting, and not using with that
preparation before, feeling at the present time, and fruit after which is
prescribed, his titles, Act. 9.15^
Word, Genes. ^.2^* Mal. 1.11.12. [praep.] 2. Chron. 24.2. Eccles. 5.2. Genesis
24.5. Luke 8, 18. Eccl. 5.1* 1. Cor. 11.28. [Feeling] 2. Chron 24.22. Ier. 4.2.
1. These. 2.13 Neh. 8 10.
Sacraments, (...) [fruit] Hebr. 6.16. 1. These. 5 20. Act. 17.11. Psalm. ^1.9.
works, And if any Comm. 4
profane his Sabbath, by vain pastimes, going to plays, or Esa. 58.13. Amos
8.5.
give not him self to the exercises appointed on that day, out of the word:
Command. 5. Mark. 7.10 Romans 13.7 Romans 1.31.32. 1. Tim. 5.8.
If any neglect especial duties toward their equals, Leuit. 19.32 Job. 32.6.
Romans 12.6. 1. pet. 5, 2.
superior or inferior in years, gifts, authothority, as masters, parents,
ministers, servants, children or people. If any declare not a conscience to fly
Comm. 6 Math. 5.21 22. Levit. 19.17. Ex. 21.19.
evil, anger, malice, contention, quarelling, fighting, or any hurting of the
person of a man, either in soul or body: not being careful to succor the
same according to his calling: Comm. 7 Ephe. 5.3. Mat. 5.28. 1. pet. 4, Job
31.1.
If any be found* unchaste, in body, words, countenance or gesture: intemperate
in diet, in apparel dissolute, not caring to maintain the contrary holiness in
himself and others: Comm. 8 Exodus 26.14.15 1. These. 4.4
If any care not for the goods of another man, but by falsehood, flattery,
oppression, etc. diminish the same. Comm. 9. Ephe. 4.28. pro. 28.19.
If he be negligent in increasing of his own, by honest and lawful means: if he
mispend it at cards, dice, gaming, etc. Com. 10. psalm. 15.3. Tit. 3. 1. Cor.
13.4 pro 25.13.
If any care not to maintain the good name of others, but be give^ unto
unnecessary blasing of other men's infirmities, by lying, slandering,
backbiting, tanting, etc. Iam. 1.23 Gal. 5.24.
If any show himself careless to restrain the motions, and intiseme^ts unto
sin, and the lusts of the same: The^ they shall use the means following to
redress them.

The duties which are to be applied to this rule, are these: Those which they
must do by themselves. Those which they must procure to be done by others.


[Iam. 5.15. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him:] As
this must be done for him in sickness, so in health: and as in this, so in any
other of the like nature.

The duties they must do by themselves, must have two properties: They must
be done with wisdom, fit for those duties. Patiencie fit.


Wisdom is, that the causes may be thoroughly sifted, and soundly reproved out
of the word of God. According unto this wisdom also, until a fitter
occasion, this duty may be let pass, and with keeping the authority of
the chief of the family, be winked at for a time. [Eccles. 7.21. Apply not
thy mind to all the words that are spoken, seeing thou ought not to heir
thy servaunt cursing thee. 22. For also, many times thy mind is privy that
thou have cursed others. Prou. 20.21. He which brings up his servants
delicatlie, shall in the end be deprived of his Children.]

Patience fit for it is, with keeping the authority of the chief of the
family, to hear what can be alleged, and by equity also, to allow or
dissallowe the same. Contrary to which is, hastines without discretion, and
making the matter plain, that the conscience may be touched for the fault.
Also pride not to hear any excuse or defense delivered in duty, submission
and obedience of child or servaunt. Finally bitterness, which may provoke
wrath rather then cause amendment [Collos. 3.21. Fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath, least they be discouraged. Job. 31.13. If I contemned the
cause of my servant or mine handmaid when they pleaded with me. 14. For what
should I do, if the strong God should rise? or if he should visit, what
should I answer him? Nomb. 22.26 After the Angel of the Lord went forward,
and stood in a narrow place, where there was no place to decline, either to
the right hand or to the left. 27. And when the Ass seeing the Angel of the
Lord God, lay down under Baalam, Balaam being kindled with wrath, smote the
Ass with his staff. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the Ass, which
said unto Baalam: what have I done unto thee, that thou have smitten me now
three times? Baalam said unto the Ass, because thou have mocked me. I would
there were a sword in my hand, for even now would I kill thee. Ephe. 6. And
ye masters do the same things toward them, letting pass threatenings: knowing
also that your master is in heaven, neither that there is respect of persons
with him.]

And these are the properties of those duties. The diverse sorts are, Rebuke.
Correction.


[Prou. 22.15. The foolishnes which is bound unto the heart of a Child, the
rod of instruction will remove far from him. Prou. 23.13. Withdraw not
correction from thy son, when as thou shall strike him with the rod, he shall
not die thereof. 14. Strike him with the rod, and thou shall deliver his soul
from the grave. Prou. 20.30. Horscombes are for the evil man, blewnes, wounds,
and stripes, pearcing through the inner parts of the belly. Prou. 29.15. The
rod and rebuke gives wisdom, but the child let alone to himself, shameth his
mother.]

Rebuke is a sharp, admonition to take heed of the evil reproved aright, as
is gathered out of that before.

Correction is, when with a sharp rebuk of instruction, punishment is
inflicted or laid upon the offender, according to their discretion,
consideration being had of the fault, and all circumstances of the same. Yet if
this at any time, for some causes, be omitted, a greter is to be threatened and
performed, when they shall next deserve the same. [Prou. 19.19. Be thou great
in the fervencie of anger, in forgiving the fault, saying, that if thou shall
deliver him, thou will further punish him afterward.] Contrary to this, is
too much lenity, also immoderate correction. [Prou. 19. The rod and rebuke
gives wisdom, but a son permitted to himself, shamed his mother. Prou.
29.16. Chastise thy child, and he shall bring thee rest, he shall delight thy
soul. Prou. 29.19. A servaunt is not chastised with words, etc.]

That which they must procure to be done by other, is, that when the former
means will not serve, they do according to S. James his rule, send for the
elders of the Church, that they may by new admonitions, rebukes, and censures
of the Church, draw them to repentance: and if that serve not, to bring them to
the Magistrate, and so (those which they may) to discharge them from the
family, unless they amend: and those which they may not, to keep them in such
order, till God or the commonwealth cut them of. Iam. 5.15. And the prayer of
faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Mat. 18.16. But if he shall not hear
thee, take yet with thee, one or two, that of the mouth of two or three
witnesses, the whole matter may be confirmed. Deuteronomy. 21.18. If any man shall
have a stubburne and rebellious son, which hearkeneth not unto the voice of
his father, nor to the voice of his mother, although they have chastised him,
yet he hearkeneth not unto them. 19. At length his father and his mother taking
him, let them bring him to the Elders of their City, and to the gate of their
place: 20. And let them say unto the elders of their City: This our son is
stubburne and rebellious, he hearkeneth not unto our voice, he is a riotous
person, and a drunkard. 21. Then let all the Citizens overwhelme him with
stones, that he may die, and take away that evil out of the midst of thee,
that all the Israelites may hear and fear. Psalm. 101.7 He that works deceit,
shall not dwell within mine house: he that speaks lies shall not be
established before mine eyes.]

And hitherto of the first sort of duties concerning Christian holiness in the
family.

The other, concerning the things of this life, is, convenientlie to provide
the necessary things of this life, as that they have convenient clothing,
food, rest, and (if on certain causes need be) recreatio^ [1. Tim. 5.8. But if
any man provide not for his, and especially those of his house, he has denied
his faith, and is worse than an infidel. Pro. 31.21. She fears not for her
family because of the snow, for all her family is clothed with double
cloakes. Pro. 12.9. The just man regards the life of his beast, but the
co^passions of the wicked, are the compassions of the cruel.]

And then much more the master must care for the servantes, that they may have
even that refreshing and ease which is meet. And thus much for the general
duties, and of their special duties toward those which shall be continually, or
ordinarily under their government in the family.

Now follows the other, which is the entertainment of strangers: whose
property is, the love of entertaining of guestes. [1. Tim. 3.2. Therefore a
Bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, watching, sober,
modest, given to hospitality, etc. Heb. 13.2. Be not unmindful of
entertaining guestes: for hereby certain unawares have entertained Angels. 1.
Pet. Be harberous one toward another, without grudging.]

The first duty required of this work is, a liberal and cheerful ministering
of protection and al things which serve for the necessity and comfort of this
life, as is meet for the ability of them which receive, and the condition of
those who are received. [Gen. 18.2. For when lifting up his eyes he looked,
behold three men stood before him, whom whilst he saw, he runs to meet
them from the door of the Tent, and bowed himself to the earth. And he said:
My Lord: If now I have found favor in thine eyes, pass not I pray thee from
thy serva^t. 4 Let there now be taken a little water, and wash your feet, and
fit down under this tree. 5 In the mean time, I will take and bring a morsel
of bread, and refresh your heart, afterward ye shall go forward, seeing for
this cause you pass by your servant: which said: Do so as thou have spoken. 6
Therefore Abraham going hastily into the tent unto Sara, said: Make ready at
once three measures of corn: Take fine meal, knead it, and make cakes baked
under the ashes. 7 But Abraham running to the heard, took a sucking calfe,
tender and good, and gave it to a servant, which made have to prepare it. 8
Therefore taking butter and milk, and the calf which he had prepared, he set
them before them, who did eat, he standing by the^ under the same tree, Genesis
19.1. And those two Angels coming unto Sodom in the evening. Lot sat at the
gate of Sodom: whom when Lot saw, he rising went to meet them, and bowed
himself with his face to the ground. 2 And he said: Behold now my Lords, turn
I pray you into the house of your servant, and wash your feet, For protection
see a notable example of Lot. Genesis 19.2.3.4.5.6.7, 8. and Judge. 19.16.17 18.
after rising in the morning, ye shall go your way. Which said: Not so, we pray
thee, for we can lodge all night in the streets. 3 But when he was instant upon
them exceedingly, they turning unto him, entered into his house: which made
the^ a banquet and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. 1. Tim 5.10.
Being decked with a fit testimony in good woorks, if she have brought up her
children, if she have been harberous, if she have washed the Saints feet, if
she have succored the afflicted, if she have followed every good work
diligently.]

The other is, as occasion serves, mutuallie to edify one another, by calling
to mind Gods works, mutual instructions and exhortations: Also by bringing
them to the publik service of God, and causing them to keep with them the
Sabbath, as appears by the example above, Romans 1.10 Always in my prayers
beseeching, that (if by any means) at length a prosperous journey by the will of
God might be given me to come unto you. 11. For I long to see you, that I might
impart to you a spiritual gift, that you may be established.

Contrary to this, is nigardlines, such as was in Nabal, in receiving of
guests. Also suffering God to be dishonored, his word or Sabbath neglected, or
any such abuse to be co^mited by their guests, and not labor by good means to
amend them, or remove them from the family.

And hitherto of the chief of the family, and their duties, as are general to
all.

Now for the most part, the chief of the family are married folk, and so in
common, the governors of the house. They are called married folks, because of
the band of marriage. Marriage is that joining of one man and one woman together
by the covenant of God, that they may be one flesh until they end their life.
[Gen. 2.24. Therefore shall man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to
his wife, and they shall be one flesh. Levit. 18.18. Take not one woman unto
another to vex her, by uncovering the shame of her that is married upon this,
in her life. Pro. 2.17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets
the covenant of her God Malach. 2.14. But you say, Wherefore? Because the Lord
has witnessed between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou do
unfaithfully: yet she is thy companion and wife covenanted unto thee. 1. Cor.
7.30. The wife is bound by the law, as long as her husband lives, but if her
husband be dead, she is free to marie unto whom she will, only in the Lord.
Romans 7.1. Know ye not brethren (for I speak to them that know the law) that
the law does bear rule over a man as long as he lives? 2. For the woman
being subject unto the man being alive, is bound by the law: but if her husband
be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man. 3. Therefore whilst the man
lives, she shall be called an adultresse, if she become another man's but if her
husband be dead, she is free from the law, that she is not an adulteress,
though she become another man's.]

To be one flesh, by a part put for the whole, is that most near and holy
society with the power and use of the bodies one of another in purity, whereby
the man in an especial manner is become the head of the wife, and the wife
another help to the husband likewise. [Gen. 2.28. And the Lord said: It is not
good that the man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him. Pro. 2
17. Which forsakes the guide of her youh, and forgets the covenant of her
God. Math. 19.9. Therefore they are no more two, but one flesh: That therefore
which God has joined together, let no man separate. Ephesians. 5.21. Therefore
shall man leave father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they
which were two, shall become one flesh.] Therefore, in the whole government of
the family, The husband is the chief, or fore-governour. The wife is a
fellow helper.


To be a fore-governour is, in the whole administration of household government,
to be over all persons and matters in the house, and even the wife, 1. Tim.
3.5. For if any man knows not how to govern his own house, how shall he care
for the Church of God? And to look as the chief owner, to al revenews, and the
estate of the good things of this life; especially, to care for the keeping and
increasing of it. Diligently know the estate of thy heardes, etc. Prove. 27.23.

To be a fellow helper, is, to yield help to her husband, especially at home,
in all the matters of the family. [1. Tim. 5.14. I will therefore, that the
younger women marie, and bring forth children, and govern the house, and give
no occasion unto the adversary, to speak evil. Tit. 2.5. That they be
temperate, pure, tarying at home, good, subject to their husbands, least that
the word of God be blasphemed. Judge. 5.24. Blessed be Iahel the wife of Ghebar
the Kenite, before all women which abide in the tents. Pro. 31.5. Who shall
find a woman of strength, seeing her price far exceeds the Carbu^cles? 12.
She does him good, and not evil, all the days of her life. Genesis 18.6.
Therefore Abraham going hastily into the tent unto Sarah, said: Make ready at
once, three measures of corn, take fine meal, kneade it, and make cakes baked
under the ashes, etc.]

Contrary to which is, that we keep not authority and chiefdome in all
matters: that women vsurp any part of it: that they be given to gadding, and to
meddle with matters not fit for their labor and travel. 1. Tim. 5. They will go
from house, etc. Pro. 7.11. Her feet dwell not in the house. The duties of
married folk in the family, are of two sorts, First, mutual. Then toward
others.


Pro. 31.12.15. Who shall find a strong woman, when as her price exceeds the
Carbuncles? And rising whilst it is yet night, she gives food to her house,
and a task unto her maids.

Mutual duties, are those which are to be performed one to another of them.

They are Common to both. Proper to each.


[Exod. 21.10. If he shall take another unto himself, let him not diminish her
food, her clothing, and benevolence due unto her. Tit. 2.3. Likewise unto the
old women, that they wear such apparel as may become holiness, not slanderers,
not given to much wine, but teachers of honest things. 4. That they may make
the young women wise, that they may love their husbands and children. 5. That
they may be temperate and chaste, tarying at home, good, subject to their
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.]

Common to both, is that which both owe to each other, and it is dwelling
together Mutual good proceedinges from thence.

[1. Cor. 7.12. If any brother have an unbelieving wife, and she be content to
dwell with him, let him not forsake her. 13. And the wife which has an
unbelieving husband, which is content to dwell with her, let her not forsak him]

Dwelling together, is to be ordinarily in a dwelling place, for the better
perfourmance of each other mutual duties. [Math. 1.18. For his mother Marie
was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child
by the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 7.10. And to the married I command, not I, but the
Lord: Let not the wife seperat her self from her husband. But to the re^nant I
say, and not the Lord, if any brother have an unbelieving wife, and she be
content to dwell with him, let him not forsake her. 13. And the wife which has
an unbelieving husband, which is content to dwell with her, let her not forsake
him. 1. Pet. 3.7. Likewise let the men dwell together, as becomes them that
have knowledge, giving honor unto the woman's vessel, as to the weaker, that
when as ye be heirs jointlie, of the grace of life, your prayers be not
interrupted. Ruth. 4.11. Unto whom all the people that were in the gate, and the
Elders said, we are witnesses: the Lord make this woman which shall come into
thine house, like unto Rahel and Leah, which both, did build the house of
Israel, and get thou the riches of Ephrata, and let the name of Bethlehem be
renowned. 12. Let thine house be as the house of Peretz whom Thamar bare unto
Judah, of that seed which the lord shall give thee of this maid]

Yet the Scripture allows upon necessary occasion of warfar, service to the
common wealth, church, or necessary affairs of their own, sometimes a long
absence. [Deut. 20.7. What man soever has espoused a wife, and yet has not
married her, let him go and return to his house, that he die not in this
battle, and another man marie her. 8. And let the Governors proceed further to
speak unto the people: What man is he that is soft and fearful in heart, let
him depart and return to his house, that he make not the hearts of his
brethren to melte as does his heart. 9. Then when the Governors shall cease to
speak unto the people, they shall make princes of bands of war, in the heads
of the people. 2. Sam. 11.11. And Vriah said unto David: The Arc, and Israel,
and Judah abide in the tents, and Ioab my Lord, and the servantes of my Lord,
have their Tents in the plain field, and should I enter into mine house to eat
and drink, and lie with my wife? As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I
will not do this thing. Pro. 17.19. For mine husband is not at home, he is gone
a far jorney, at the appointed day he will return again.]

Contrary to this, is the ordinary abuse and negligence of this duty, which
brings manifold inconveniences.

The mutual good, proceeding from dwelling together, is that which consists
in a sweet communicating of the persons and goods, for the mutual necessity
and consolation one of another [1. Cor. 7.3. Let the husband give unto the wife
due benevole^ce, and likewise the wife unto the husband. 4. The wife has not
power over her own body, but the husband: and likewise the husband has not
power over his own body, but the wife. 5. Defraud not one another, unless it
be by consent for a time, that ye may apply your selves to fasting and prayer,
and come together again, least Satan te^pt you for your incontinencie. It is
not good for man to be alone. Genes. 2.]

Here also must be considered, the parts of this duty: first, due benevolence,
which is the honorable possession of their vessels in holiness one toward
another, for avoiding of sin, bringing forth a seed of God, and the honest and
proper delight, which ought to be between the man and the wife. [Hebr. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers,
and adulterers, God shall condemn. Mala. 2.14. And ye say, wherefore? Because
the Lord has witnessed between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom
thou do unfaithfully, whereas she is thy companion, and joined in covenant
unto thee. Esa. 62.7. As when a young man marieth a virgin, when thy children
do marie wives, as in the joy (I say) of the bridegroom with the bride, so
shall the Lord rejoice with thee. Genes. 26.8. And it came to pass, when they
had been there many days, that Abimileck, king of the Philistims, looked by
the window, and saw that, behold, Isaak played with Rebekka his wife, wherefore
calling Isaak, he said to him: Surely, behold she is thy wife. Pro. 5.18. Let
thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife of thy youth. 19. Let her
be as the loving Hind, and pleasant wild goat: let her breasts satisfy thee
at all times, and wander in her love continually. 20 And wherefore should
thou wander my son with a strange woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger?]

Contrary to this is, the abuse of their liberty between themselves,
communicating that which is proper to the husband, to other, in whoring,
dancing, uncomely familiarity with other.

The second is, their mutual help or labor one toward another, in word,
deed, and communicating of good things, for the mutual norishing one of
another. [Ephes. 5.29. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, as Christ also does the Church. Pro. 31.28. Her children do
rise, and call her blessed, her husband also does praise her, saying; Many
women have done stoutly, but thou exceedest them all.]

And these are the common duties of one toward another: the proper do follow:
They are duties one of them in several to another.

They are of the Husband to the wife. Wife to the husband.


[Ephes. 5.33. But also particularly, every one so love his wife as himself,
and let the wife fear her husband.] The proper duties of the husband are, A
proper care for his wife. The applying of the general duty of all men toward
their wives.


[1. Pet. 3.7. Likewise let men dwell together with them: giving honor unto the
woman's vessel, as unto the weaker, seeing that ye are heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.]

The proper care for the wife is, to cover her, that is, to provide all things
meet for a mate so nearly joined in full blessing to him, and thus according
to their condition, to give honor to her, as the fittest for him, in heaven
and in earth, with a patient covering or bearing of her infirmities. [1. Pet.
3.7. Exodus 21. If he shall take another unto him, let him not diminish her
food, her clothing and benevolence due unto her. Gene. 30.16. And unto Sarah
he said, Behold, I have given a thousand Cicles of silver unto thy brother:
behold, he is the covering of thine eyes amongst all that are with thee: Let it
be known amongst all, and be thou instructed. Ruth. 3.9. Unto whom he said:
who art thou? which said: I am Ruth thy handmaid: that thou may spread thy
wing over thine handmaid, because thou art the kinsman. Esa. 3 28. In that day
shall seven women take hold of one man, saying: We will eat our own meat,
and put on our own clothes: only that we may be called by thy name: Take
away our reproach.

The applying of the general duty of al men, in regard of care toward his
wife, is, when in a special manner, the image of Gods glory and wisdom, does
shine in the government of the husband toward his wife, and the glory which
God has in the same, shines in the honor and glory which the man in all
things takes from the wife. [1. Cor. 11.3. I will that you know, that Christ
is the head of every man, and the man the woman's head, and God is Christ's
head. 7. For the man ought not to cover his head, because he is the image and
glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man. 8. For the man is not of
the woman, but the woman of the man, etc.]

Contrary to this is, when men are indiscreet, childish, fond, lose their
authority, or keep it not, but also their hardness, bitterness, want of
wisdom in framing them to perfection in obedience.

The proper duties of the wife, are, Recompense of her husbands care The
applying of that general duty of al women in regard of men, in peculiar manner
to him which is called, to have him that covering of her eyes before al men.


The recompense of the husbands care is, by obeying him in all good things, and
by her advise, sweet counsel, labor and travel, to be a comfort and help unto
him. [Pro. 31.11. The soul of her husband does trust her, and the spoils do
not fail. 12. She does him good, and not evil all the days of her life. 13.
She seeks woolle or flax, and makes it for the pleasure of her husband. 14.
She is like to the merchants ships, she brings meat from far. 17. She
girdeth her loins with strength, and confirms her arms. She tasting her
merchandise to be good, her candle is not put out by night. She puts her
hands to the wharue, and her maids do hold the spindle.] The labor is double
Either in matters of this life: or Christian holiness.


Pro. 31.26. She opens her mouth wisely, and the doctrine of mercy sits
on her tongue. 28. She beholds the ways of her family, and eats not the
bread of slothfulnes.

The matters of this life are, her labor, In regard of her family. And her
own work.


For the family, she must ouersee all the ways of them, and both set them
work and task, and also give them their meat, and other necessaries in due
season. [Pro. 31.15. And rising whilst it is yet night, she gives food to her
house, and a task to her maids. 16. She considers a field, and takes it,
of the fruits of her hands she planteth a vineyard. 17. She girdeth her
loins with strength, and confirms her arms. 21. She is not afraid of her
household, because of the snow, for all her household is clothed with double
cloakes.]

Her own work is to labor diligently, early and late, in something of
profit for the family. Pro. 31.13.14.15.17.19.22.

Her labor for Christian holiness is, to see all duties accomplished at the
commandment of her husband; for which Christian watchfulnes, proper to a
mistress of the house, it requires even to be his eyes, foot and mouth, when
he is away: in espying, looking, admonishing, rebuking, and also giving alms
to the poor. [Pro. 31.20. She opens the palm of her hand unto the poor, and
she stretches out her hands unto the needy. 26. She opens her mouth
wisely, and the doctrine of mercy is set on her tongue.]

The second especial duty of the wife, so called by the sign of it, is to
be an image of the authority and wisdom of her husband, in her whole
administration, and so to be his glory and honor: and from a meek and quiet
spirit in all her behavior of words, deeds, apparel countenance, gesture, etc.
to signify plainly, she has a feeling of him in her heart, as of the image
of Gods majesty, glory, and perfection. Genesis 24.63. (For Isaac had gone forth
to pray in a certain field in the evening) and when he lifted up his eyes and
beheld, Behold, the Cammelles came. 64. Rebekka also lifting up her eyes, when
she saw Isaak, she descended from the Cammel. 65. For Rebekkah saying unto the
servant, who is that man which walks by the field to meet us? The servant
answered, It is my master. And she took a veil, and covered her self. Genesis
20.16. And unto Sarah he said: Behold, I have given a thousand Cicles of
silver unto thy brother: behold, he is unto thee a covering of the eyes anongst
all that are with thee. 1. Pet. 3.6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord,
whose daughters ye are made, as long as ye do well, eve^ when ye are not
terrified with any fear.]

Where Sarah speaking of her husband but in her heart: the Apostle says, she
did as of her Lord. Contrary to this is, the pride and untamed affection of
the wife, their uncomely gestures, their hot and chiding answers toward their
husbands, their unshamefast and vnequallike looks: finally, whatsoever is
contrary to the former rules.

And hitherto of the duties which are between themselves, now follow the
duties toward others. They are double, As they are parents. As they are
masters and maistresses.


Colos. 3.21. Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, least they be
discouraged. Col. 4.1. Ye masters, give right and equality unto your servants,
knowing that you have a master in heaven. Tit. 2.4.

The duty of parents must be performed moderately of the father, with great
gravitie and authority. [Gene. 22.7. And Isaak speaking unto Abraham his
father, said: My father: which said Behold, here I am my son. Then said
Isaak: Behold, here is fire and wood, but where is the small beast for the
sacrifice? Unto whom Abraham said: God shall provide for himself a small beast
for the sacrifice my son: when they went both together, Pro. 4.3. When I was a
son with my father, tender, and only beloved before my mother. 4. He teaching
me, said unto me: Let thy mind hold my words, keep my commandments and live.
5. Get wisdom, get understanding, forget not, neither decline from the word of
my mouth.] Of a mother, with that cheerful easines of a mother which keeps
her authority. [Pro. 31.1. The gathering together of the words of Lemuel the
king, wherewith his mother had instructed him. 2. What shall I say, my son?
What thing, o son of my womb? And what, o son of my desires? 3. Give not
thy strength unto women, and to those that work that kings may be abolished.

The duties are Common to both. Proper to each.


Common to both, from the first conception of children, to take care of them,
even to the end of their lives, as appears by the parts following.

The special parts of this duty are these.

Which respect Their tender age. Their youth.


[Gal. 4.1. This I say, the heir as long as he is a child, differs not from
a servant, though he be Lord of all. 2. But is under tutors and governors,
until the time appointed of his father.]

The duty in their tender age, is, according to their years and abiltie, to
nurse them up in discipline fit for children, and admonitions of the Lord.
[Ephe. 6.4. And you fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them
up in doctrines and admonitions of the Lord. Prove. 22.6. Instruct thy child
according to his capacity, yea when he shall be old, it shall not depart from
him.]

Discipline fit for children is, when by intisements, allurements, corrections,
etc. fit for the^, they are framed to good: The giving of the admonitions is,
by little and little, by often repetitions, in greatest plainness which may be,
to make them understand some chief grounds and seeds of religion, of good
manners, and behavior toward al, and so to begin some conscience in them.
[Esay. 28.10 When as there shall be added precept unto precept, precept unto
precept, line unto line, line unto line, here a little, there a little. 2. Timoth.
3.15. That thou have learned the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, which is in Christ Jesus. Heb. 5.12. For you,
which for a time ought to be better learned, have need to be taught again,
what are the principles of the word of God, and ye are become those, which had
need of milk, and not of strong meat. 13. For every one that uses milk, is
inexpert of the word of righteousness, for he is a babe. Pro. 20.11. Let a
child make himself known in his works, whether his work* be pure and right.]

Contrary to this is, to let them have their will from the beginning: to
discourage them by severitie: to let the common ignorance of the world be
rooted in them, and not in this care, to frame them to truth and goodness,
and to prepare them to be apt to receive profit from the public ministry.

Their duty toward them in their youth is, Either in the entrance of their
youth, Or in their ripe age.


Their duty in the entrance of their youth is, according to their gifts and
diversity of them, to prepare them unto some profitable calling in the Church,
by applying them unto it, beating into them the gifts and conscionable use of
the gifts which is required. [1. Chron. 28.9. Then also Solomon my son, know
the God of thy father, and worship him with an undefiled body, and with a
careful mind, because God does search all hearts, and does understand every
imagination of the thoughts: if thou shall seek him, he will be found of thee,
but if thou shall forsake him, he will forsake thee for ever. 10. Behold now,
seeing the Lord has chosen thee to build an house for a Sanctuary, be thou
strong and do it. 11. Then David gave to Solomon the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses thereof, and the treasure houses thereof, and of the parloure
thereof, and of the inner chambers thereof, and of the place of the
mercie-seat. Pro. 31.1. The gathering together of the words of Lemuell the
king, wherein his mother had instructed him. 2. What shall I say my son? What
thing O son of my womb? And what, O son of my desires? 3. Give not thy
strength unto women, and to those that work, that kings may be abolished.

Here the Church may not be deprived for honor, gain, or such fleshly
respects of meet Ministers.

In their ripe age, their duty is to give their children that which may help
them in this life, and also, if they have not the gift of continency, to
counsel them, to govern them unto a fit and religious wife, such as is fit for
the duties aforementioned.

[1. Cor. 12.14. For I seek not yours, but you; For children ought not to
gather treasures for their prarents, but the parents for the children. Genesis
24.2. Put thine hand under my thigh. 3. That I may bind thee with an oath by the
Lord God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou will not take a wife
unto my son, of the daughters of the Cananites, amongst whom I dwell. 3. But
that thou will go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my
son Izhak. Ruth. 3.1. Afterward Naomi her mother in law, said unto her.
Should I not seek rest unto thee, that it may be well with thee? So 1. Cor. 7.
etc.]

Contrary to this, is the neglect of their life to come, to make matches, only
for carnal respects, suffering them to live wantonlie and uncleanly, and not
seeking the remedy appointed,

The proper duties of both, is commonly toward them in their infancy. The
fathers duty is, with all convenient speed that may be, according to the
assembly of the congregation, to present the child for the first Sacrament,
and there to give a name in the mother tongue, which may have a godly
signification, fit for that work.

Contrary to this is, deferring of that work, for trifles or unmeet causes, a
giving of a name in another tongue, a profane name. [Gen. 25 25. And the
first came forth roughe, being all over, as an hairy gown, and they called
his name Esau. 26. Afterward, his brother came forth, whose hand held the
heel of Esau; therefore every one called his name Jacob. Luke. 1.59. And it
was so on the eight day, they came to circumcise the babe, and called him
Zacharias, after the name of his father. 62. Then they made signs to his
father, how he would have him called. 63. So he asked for writing tables, and
wrote, saying: His name is John: and they marveiled all. Genesis 4.25. And after
Adam knew his wife, which brought forth a son, and called his name Sheth: For
said she: God has laid up for me another seed for Abel, whom Kain slew.
Genesis 19.11. Furthermore, the Angel of the Lord said unto her: Behold, thou art
with child, and thou shall shortly bear a son, therefore call his name Ismael,
because the Lord considers thine affliction. 15. Therefore Hagar brought
forth unto Abraham a son, and Abraham called the name of the son which
Agar brought forth unto him, Ismael.]

So the Greeks in Greek, as Timothy, The fear of God, [Act. 16. Then came he
to Derbe, and to Listra, and behold, a certain Disciple was there, named
Timotheus, a woman's son which was a Iewesse, but his father was a Grecian.]

And the Latins in Latin, as Tertius, [Rom. 16.22. I Tertius which wrote out
this Epistle, salute you in the Lord.]

The proper duty of the mother is, to nourish it up, if she be able, with her
own milk, and to waine it, and perform all such motherly care and duty. [1.
Tim. 5.10. If she have nourished her children, if she have lodged strangers,
etc. Genesis 21.7. Furthermore, she said: Who would have said unto Abraham, Surely
Sarah shall give children suck: but I have borne a son in his old age. 8 And
the babe grew and was wayned, and Abraham made a great feast, what day Isaac
was wained. 1. Sam. 1.29. So the woman abode that she might nurse her son
until she had brought him up. Luc. 2.12. And this shall be a sign unto you:
you shall find the child swadled and laid in a cratch.]

Contrary to this is, the tenderness of many mothers, that bring on them the
threatening of the Prophet willingly, of barren breasts, which should go only
with a barren womb.

Hitherto of their duties, as they be parents.

Now follows their duties as they be masters and maistresses, where besides
these, common both to children and servants, this is proper in regard of
servants; that not only according to justice they pay them their due wages,
but also otherwise help them, comfort them, liberally reward them, as far as
christianity, liberality in equality shall bind them.

Contrary to this is, to retain their wages, to exact of them, to oppress
the^, or only reward them strictly, according to the exact deserving. Coloss.
4.1. Ye masters, do unto your servants that which is just and equal,
knowing that ye also have a master in heaven. And these are the duties which
they must perform in their life time. Al which must be shut up with setting
order for all things at their death, with especial exhortations and prayers for
religion, for vprightnes in their callings, for peace and order after them.
[Esai 38.1. In those days Hezechiah was sick unto death: Esaiah the son of
Amos the Prophet came, and said unto him: so says the Lord, Give precepts unto
thy family, for thou shall shortly die, and shall not live. 1. King. 2.1. And
when the days of David drew near, that he should die, he commanded
Schelomon his son, saying: 2. I shall shortly depart after the manner of all the
world: but be strong and be a man. 3. And keep the ordinances of the Lord thy
God, by walking in his ways, keeping his statutes, and commandments, and his
judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses: that
thou may prosper in whatsoever thou shall do, and whither soever thou shall
turn thy self. 4. That the Lord may perform the word which he promised
me, saying: If thy children shall keep my way, by walking before me in faith
from their whole heart, and their whole mind, saying; I say, there shall not be
cut off unto thee a man from the seat of Israel. 5. Moreover, thou know
what Ioab the son of Zerviah has done unto me, what he has done to the two
Captains of the host of Israel, Abner the son of Ner, and Hamasa the son
of Iether, whom he slew; appointing slaughter of war in peace, as he has
put the blood of slaughter of war on his girdle, which was about his loins,
and in his shoes which were upon his feet. 6. Wherefore, do according to thy
wisdom, neither suffer his white head to go down to the grave in peace. 7.
But exercise mercy, toward the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let
them be amongst those that eat meat at thy table, because likewise they came
unto me, when I fled from Absolon thy brother. 8. To be short, Schimmhi the
son of Gera be in thy remembrance, which cursed me, with a most bitter curse,
what day I went to Machananijm, who discending to meet me, to Jordan; I have
sworn unto him by the Lord, saying: I will not slay thee with the sword. 9. But
now discharge not him being guilty, seeing thou art a wise man, but know what
thou shall do unto him, that thou may bring down his white head unto the
grave with blood. 10. After David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the
city of David. Gene. 49.30. Then he commanded and charged them, saying; When I
shall be gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers, in the cave which is
in the field of Hephron the Hittite.]

Hitherto of the first part of householders, which concerns the government
of the same by the superiors in it.

Now follows the duty of the inferiors.

The inferiors, are those which are under the rest in the household, and are
called of Peter, those of the household, or household fellows. Their duties are
toward The household governors. Or others.


Tit. 1.6. If any be unreprovable, the husband of one wife having faithful
children, which are not slandered of riot, neither are disobedient. Toward the
household governors, to Be helpful to them in outward behavior. Be in
subjection and obedience.


Luke 2.51. Then he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
to them.

The first is, by outward behavior to acknowledge their authority, such as
shall be prescribed unto them, as of cap, leg, manner of speaking.

Contrary to this is, vnmanerlines, answering again, giving cutted answers,
etc. [1. Tim. 6.2. And they which have believing masters, let them nor despise
the^, because they are brethren, but rather do service, because they are
faithful and beloved, and partakers of the benefit. Tit. 2.9. Let servants be
subject to their masters in all things, not answering again. 10. Neither
pickers, but that they show all faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine
of God our Savior in all things. 1. Pet. 2.18. Servants be subject to your
masters with all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the
froward.]

The second duty of obedience is, in all commandments co^cernig the aforenamed
duties, of the superiors toward them, willingly to perform them, and to
submit themselves to rebukes, to admonitions, corrections, and such like with
meeknes. [Pro. 4.1. Hear o children the instruction of the father, and give
ear to learn understanding. 2. For I give unto you good discipline, forsake
not my doctrine. 20. My son, attend unto my words, and incline thine ear to my
speech. Nomb. 12.14. And the Lord spoke unto Moses: If her father had spit in
her face, should she not have been ashamed 7. days.]

The duty to be helpful, is, by their example and persuasions one to another,
and by revealing things, which by admonition will not be amended, to be helpful
to the Superiors in the former duties.

Contrary to this is, evil example, evil persuasions, hiding things which
ought to be revealed. [Gen. 37.2. Joseph being 17. year old, fed the flock
with his brethren (for he was a child) with the sons of Bilhah, and with the
sons of Zilpah, the wives of their father, and he brought unto his father
their evil report. Genesis 27.44. And when it had been told unto Ribkah all the
words of Hesau her eldest son, she sending, called Jacob her youngest son,
and said unto him, etc.]

The duties toward others, is, Amongst themselves. Toward other besides
themselves.


Amongst themselves, that with peace and quietness, they have their mutual
equality, bear one with another, and help one another as far as is lawful.
Contrary to which is, unquiet minds, pride, jarres, lifting up above others,
not keeping the place or difference made by the chief of the family.

Toward others is, that they so order themselves toward al, as they are
taught out of the commandments, and toward guests and strangers: rich and
poor, high and low, as they be taught out of the fifth commandment: And thus
of the common duties of all inferiors of the family, and this is prooved by the
commandments and sentences going before. [Geness. 45.24. And letting his
brethren go, he said unto the^: be not moved or stirred one against another
in the way.]

Inferiors in the family are, Children, Servantes.


Childrens duty is, from their beginning to their ending, to be subject,
obedient, and helpful to their parents. Contrary to this, is the rejecting of
these duties at some years. [Luke. 2.51. And he descended with them, and came
to Nazereth, and was subject to them. Ioh. 19.26. When Jesus therefore saw his
mother, and the Disciple standing whom he loved, he said unto his mother:
Woman, behold thy son. 1. King. 2.19. And when Bathshebah came unto the king,
that she might speak unto him for Adonijah, the King rose to meet her, and
bowed himself to her; sitting in his throne, he commanded a throne to be
placed for the mother of the king, which sat at his right hand. Genesis 47.29.
And when the days of Israel drew nigh, that he should die, he sent for his
son Joseph, and said unto him: If now I have found favor in thine eyes,
put, I pray thee, thine hand under my thigh, and exercise this kindness and
faith toward me: bury me not in Egypt; but when I shall rest with my fathers,
carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their sepulcher: Which said; I will do
according to thy word. Genesis 49.29. After he willed and commanded them, saying:
When I shall be gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers, in that cave
which is in the field of Hephron the Hittite. 30. In that cave which is in the
field of Macpela, which is on the other side of Mamre, in the land of Canaan,
which Abraham bought with the field of Hephron the Hittite, for a possession
to bury in.]

The proper or especial parts of this duty, is, in their proper Obedience.
Recompense which they must make.


The proper obedience, is that which springs from a cheerful, natural,
continual, and childlike love and reverence.

Contrary to this is, disobedience, unnatural behaviors or affections, etc.
[2. Tim. 3.2. For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters,
proud, evil speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, profane. Collos.
3.20. Children, harken unto your parents in all things, for this is acceptable
unto the Lord. Ephe. 6.1. Children, give ear unto your parents in the Lord,
for that is just.]

This obedience must show it self, especially in being governed by them in
the matter of calling, and marriage, according to the rules prescribed in the
word of God, and all such matters of weight and moment. Chiefly until by the
fathers authority and consent, more full power be geven to their children,
because of their years and discretion. [Nomb. 30.4. When a woman has vowed a
vow unto the Lord, or bound her self by a bond at her fathers house in her
youth, 5. If when her father hears her vow, or the bond wherewith she has
bound her self, and her father hold his peace concerning her, let it be
established. 6. But if her father shall make her to break it, in what day he
shall hear it, let none of her vows or bands wherewith she has bound her
self be established, and the Lord shall forgive her, because her father has
made that she should break it. 1. Cor. 7.36. But if any man think he have
committed some uncomely thing against his virgin, if she pass the flower of
her age, and that it ought to be done, let him do what he will, he sins not.
Let the^ be joined in marriage. 37. But he which abides firm in heart,
neither is driven by necessity, but has his own will in his power, and has
decreed this in his heart, that he may keep his virgin, he does well. 38.
Therefore he that gives her in marriage does well, but he that gives her not in
marriage, does better. Genesis 24.51. Behold, Ribkah is before thee, take her and
go thy way, that she may be a wife unto the son of thy Lord, as the Lord has
spoken.]

Laban the son, having the government of his father being old, was the chief
in this business. Genesis 24.55. And the brother of Ribkah, and her mother said,
let this maid tarry with us a few days, at the least ten, afterward go thy
ways. 57. Then they said, let us call the maid, and ask of her mouth.

Their especial recompense is, to relieve and maintain them, or any other,
which is knit unto them in any especial care and duty, as far as their
ability or duty toward the wife, and care of the family will suffer.

Contrary to this is, contempt of your parents, grieving of them, neglecting
to help and succor them, etc. [1. Tim. 5.4. But if any widow have children or
Nephews, let them learn, first to show godliness toward their own house, and
to recompense their own kindred, for that is an honest thing, and acceptable
before God. Mat. 15.4. For God has commanded saying: Honor thy father and thy
mother: and he that curses father or mother, let him die the death 5. But ye
say, whosoever shall say to father and mother, by the gift that is offered by
me, thou may have profit. 6. Though he honor not his father or his mother,
shall be free; thus have you made the commandment of God of none authority by
your traditions. Genesis 47.12. And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren,
and all the household of his father with meat, as putting it into the mouth of
the children.]

The especial duty of servantes is, to do all things which their master
shall, according to Gods will, give them in charge. [Col. 3.22. Servants, be
obedient to them that are your masters, according to the flesh, in all
things; not with eie-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart,
fearing God. Luke 17.7. Who is it also of you, that having a servant plowing,
or feeding cattle, would say unto him by and by, when he were come from field,
go and sit down at the table. 8. And would not rather say unto him, Dress
wherewith I may supp, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and
drunken, and after eat thou, and drink thou. 9. Does he thank that servant,
because he did that which was commanded him? I trow not.]

Contrary to which is, that some will do one thing only at this time, and
which pleases him.

The manner of doing this, has two parts, Diligence. Faithfulness.


Tit. 2.9. Let servants be subject to their masters, and please them in all
things, not answering again: neither pickers, but that they show all good
faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things.

Their diligence is in a single heart, as to the Lord, not only by labor and
travel, but prayer, religious care, and all good means to perform the things
laid on them.

Contrary to this is, eie-service. [Col. 3.22. Servants be obedient to the^
that are your maishers according to the flesh in all things, not with
eie-service, as men-pleasers, but with singlenes of heart, fearing God. 23. And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. Ephe. 6.5.
Servants, be obedient unto them which are your masters, according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ.
6. Not with service to the eye, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from the heart. 7. With good will, serving the Lord and not
men. Genesis 24.9. Therefore, the servant putting his hand under his thigh, swear
unto him concerning this matter. 10. Afterward, the servant took ten Camels,
of the Camels of his master, that he might go on his journey: (for he had all the goods of his master in his hand) And rising, he went unto Syria between
the rivers, unto the city of Nachor. 11. Where, causing the Camels to rest
without the city, beside a well of water, in the evening, at what time the
woman came forth to draw. 12. And he said: O Lord God of my master Abraham,
bring to pass I pray thee, that it may come to pass unto me this day, and
show this mercy unto my master Abraham. 26. And he inclined his face to the
ground, and bowed himself to the Lord, saying: Blessed be the Lord of my
master Abraham, which has not left his mercy and faithfulness toward my
master.]

His diligence also appeared greatly, when he said: I will not eat til I have
spoken my words, or matter, ver. 33. and in making speed he said: Stay me not,
seeing the Lord has prospered my way. Send me back that I may go unto my
Lord, etc.

Faithfulness in their labor and charges, to seek the uttermost they can, the
commodity and benefit of their masters. Contrary to which, is, picking,
turning another way, in banqueting, feasting, riot. etc.

This appears most lively in the description which Jacob does make of his
faithful service to Laban. This is the twentieth year since I have been with
you, thy sheep and thy goats have not left their young, and the rams of thy
flock have I not eaten. The torn I brought unto thee, but made it good my
self, at my hand thou did require it. Likewise, the stolen by day, and the
stolen by night. I was about my work when the heat consumed me by day, and
the frost by night, and sleep departed from mine eyes. Genesis 31.38.39.40.

And thus much for the order of household, which is prescribed by the word of
God.

THE RESOLVTION AND INTERpretation of the Lords prayer, out of Math. 6.9. and
Luke 11.2.
OUR Savior Christ, being both desired of his Disciples to be taught how to
pray, and having reprooved the abuse of unnecessary and vain repetitions of
one and the same thing: gives his disciples commandment to pray, as he taught
them in this prayer; Saying, Pray thus, and when you pray, say, Our Father,
etc. that is, let the things which you require, and give thanks for; the
difference which you make of the things and the affections wherewith you pray,
be no other than are contained here. This form, or pattern, or rule of prayer
has two parts. The first is, an entrance or preparation to the same. The
second is, the prayer it self.

The entrance does contain such a description of God, as is meet for us,
whenever we adresse our selves to prayer, to have feeling of in our hearts.
It is disposed in an Axiom or sentence copulative, or coupling. The first
reason is, from the adioint of relation, Our Father, which is adorned with that
manner of exclamatio^ which utters a familiar affection, as My father, my
son! Genesis 22.7. So that we must in the assured feeling of faith, according to
the Spirit of adoption and sanctification, cry unto God as our merciful
father, through Jesus Christ. Romans 8.13.14.15. Gal. 4.6. More ready than any
father, to grant that we ask according to his will, and therefore must be
waited on, in request and suit, til we obtain. Luke 11.5. to the 14. verse.
The second reasone is, from the Subject, Which art in heaven, that is, full of
all majesty and power, Heaven the throne, or seat, or place of Gods majesty
and power, where this is most clear and manifest. Psalm. 113.4.5. And 115.3.16.
Esai. 66 being put for the power and majesty it self, by a Metonomie, or
change of name, where the place or subject is put for the thing placed or
adjoint so that, our reverence must bring forth such cogitations, desires, and
words, in such manner as may become his majesty, because he is in heaven, and
we in earth. Eccle. 5.1. In the first, is shut out infidelity, doubting whether
we be hard, in patience, in waiting Gods leisure. In the second, rashness, or
multiplying words, thoughts, doubting of Gods power, wandering thoughts, and
all earthly imaginations. The prayer it self has two parts, The form of
request. The confirmation of it, containing a thanksgiving.


Because our requests must be made manifest with thanksgiving. Phil. 4.6. And
thansgiving for a benefit received, does greatly confirm our faith in
requests, as Jacobs example does show. Genesis 32.10.11. etc. The form of
requests, is set down in a copulative axiom, which numbreth up six several
petitions, where the bond or couple of the axiom is left out, as the manner
is, where one does earnestly, and because of the earnestness, speedily
require, or will a thing, as Genesis 18.6.7. Dan. 9.16. And this declares and
utters, the proper affection or fervency of petition, which is as beggars,
who feeling of our wants, by the work of the holy Ghost, to crave with
unspeakable sighs and gronings. Romans 8.26.27. Iam. 5.16. This shuts out
none, or very little feeling of our want, coldness, and dulnes in prayer it
self. The petitions are of 2. sorts; The first, which beggeth concerning God,
only in the first place, as the place and end of every request shows. The
second, which require concerning our selves.


This teaches, that first and chiefly, we must desire al things to Gods glory,
above our own salvation, and that the other must be asked to that end, as
depending on it, and no further, tha^ as it may serve to his glory, which is
undoubtedly true of our salvation, because of Gods decree. Ioh, 12.27.28. Mat
16.42. 2. These. 1.10. To. 9.1 The first sort also is double First, for the
right use of gods name. The second, for Christ's kingdom, and the fruit of it,
as the Apostle wills to pray, that the word have passage, and be glorified.
2. These. 3.1.


The first is set down in a simple axiom of the adjoint hallowed, and the
subject thy name, coupled by the form of praying or desiring, vttred by us in
the word be: where sanctified is a metaphore, or finenesse of speech, noting a
comparison from things dedicated to God, or the Temple, and signifies that
Gods name, (one kind being put for the whole by a Synechdoche, the titles,
which is, his name and memorial, whereby he is known for his works, word,
Sacraments, and mysteries, etc.) be put apart from all profane abuses, unto
the right use, prescribed in the third commandment: For all which, see the
quotations on that commandment. This is chiefly to be prayed, when we see
our selves or others given to any abuse of Gods name.

Thy kingdom come: The second sort has two petitions: the first is disposed
in a simple axiom of the subject and adjoint, that the kingdom of God, which
he excerciseth by his son, may daily com; that is, be set up in glory, fit
for it: this having two parts, his administration here, by all means of his
honor, and the last judgment; unto both these must be referred the heds of
our requests; as praying for that, which is commanded in the second Command.
So that whenever we want any office of Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacons, or
the right calling or execution of it, in exhortation, doctrine, watching,
Ecclesiastical censure, or the order of them, or the gifts fit for them, and
the power of them, we must beg them according to the first head. Mat. 6.33. 1.
Cor. 12.6. and 5.4. and 12.28. Romans 2.6. Ephe. 4.11. Tit. 1.2. 2. Cor. 10.5.6.
Mat. 9.36. etc. In the second head we ask, that all things being performed,
and all enemies overcome, Christ, the resurrection, and his judgment may come
quickly. Math. 24.32. and 25. 1. Cor. 15. Apo. 22.20. The next is also disposed
in an Axiom simple of the adjoint and subject, that the will; that is, the
revealed will of God in his word, may be fulfilled. Deuteronomy. 29. Which has a
declaration drawn from the comparison of the like: For as does not note
equally here, but likeness, notwithstanding it be here with great
imperfections, as 1. Pet. 1.16. 1. Ioh. 3.3. The propounding proposition is, as
Angels do in heaven, with peace, joy, willingly and readily: for by heaven is
meant the Angels in heaven, as by earth, the men in earth, the place being put
for those in it, by a change of the name of the subject for the adjoint. This
must be prayed, when we feel any repugnancy to Gods will, in the deed or
manner of doing. For here we request by one, all the fruits of the kingdom;
righteousness, joy, peace, etc. Romans 14.

The other sorts of request have this general, that we pray in common for the
whole Church, as members of one body, having one life and happiness in Christ.
Ephe. 4.2.3. etc. Therefore in every one we say, Give us, forgive us, lead us.
etc They are of two sorts, The first, concerning the things of this life, first
dispersed after the manner of the scripture; as the shortest; wherein as
children, we clime unto higher things. The other two, of things of the life to
come.


The first is disposed in an axiom simple of the subject, and the adjoint,
Gods giving, occupied in providing bread, saying thus: Give us that which is
not in our power, and whereof we are unworthy. Deuteronomy. 8.18. even bread, that is,
by a Synechdoche, all the commodities of this life, both for necessity and
Christian delight. Esa. 3. 1. Psalm. 104. Where the consequent is declared by
two arguments. First, the subject ours; that is, such as we in Christ be heirs
of, to use, being sanctified by word and prayer. 1. Timoth. 4. 1. Cor. 3.22.
The second by the adjoint, such as is both apt, and able by his blessing to
nourish us; seeing we may have money, and put it in a bottomless purse; and
eat, and not be satisfied, and drink, and yet not be refreshed. Hag. 2. For
the word signified bread to our substance, daily, such as may give daily
nourishment. The Antecedent is declared by the adjoint of the time, this day;
that is, one kind of time being put generally for that time wherein we are,
according to Gods promise to ask it, as Salomo^ says, The thing of the day in
the day: that is, every thing in his time, as S. Luke expounds, according to
the day, that is, as time requires. For in joy, the time requires one
blessing, in affliction another, that we might hang on God every moment. 1.
Tim. 6.6. etc. Mat. 6.31. etc. To the other two, this is general, that there is
a Synechdoche, where one kind is put for all of that sort, and the means of
them; as faith, and all other good graces, and the instruments begetting,
nourishing, relieving them, as preaching, exhortation, Sacraments, corrections,
etc. as they tend unto this.

The first of these, is disposed in an axiom simple of the subject and
adjoint, Father, remit us our debts. Where is an allegory of a Metaphor, the
similitude being borrowed of debtes, which is drawn from the obligation of
works, wherein we were bound to continue, to do all the law, unless we would be
accursed. Col. 2.14. Gal. 3.10. Now, by remission of sins is meant,
justification, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost deliverance from the
wrath to come, and all such of that kind. Romans 5. And this petition is, when
we are troubled, terrified in conscience, and through dulnes have not feeling
of these. This is confirmed by a reason drawn from comparison of the least,
and is concluded in a Syllogism connexiue or knitting, in the first kind, both
parts being contained in one, the assumption in the proposition. Seeing even
we forgive our debtors, which have not a drop of thy infinite mercy in us, Do
thou much more forgive us: For so S. Luke shows, it should be interpreted in
express words, and I see not why it should not so be translated, for the
Greek phrase does well bear it. So this is for our comfort, if we feel this
readiness in us, otherwise we can have no assurance. Luke 11.

The second is disposed in the like simple axiom, adorned with a Metaphor
taken from war, where men are led captive: Lead us not? that is, though we
daily deserve it, yet seeing we have begged the forgiveness of sins, give us
not so over unto the temptation of the Devil, the world, or our own
corruption, as that with the temptation thou give not an issue. 1. Cor. 10.13.
2. Cor. 12.7.8.9. This is declared by the contrary, but loose us: that is, by
a metaphor taken from the water pent up, set us free more and more from all
that whereunto concerning the flesh, we are captive. Romans 7.13.

The reason of the requests, is drawn from the efficient cause, which may
move God to yield to our petitions, because we give it wholly to him. The
reason may be concluded in a connexiue of the first kind. Seeing we give it
all unto thee, grant our request. But the first we do, Therefore, etc. The
proposition is wanting, the assumption is contained in an axiom copulative,
which numbreth up the parts; where again as above, the couple is left out, to
note our joifull and fervent feeling and melody of the heart, in heaping up
praise unto God. Ephe. 5.18.19. Col. 3.16. The parts are; first, that the
kingdom; that is, the ordering of all things in heaven and earth appertains
to him. Secondly, the whole power whereby they are done. Thirdly, the praise
and glory, as in the Chronicles, from whence our Savior Christ took it, 1.
Chron. 29.11. and in Judge. where it is so interpreted. Iud. 25. And thus much
for the parts, the property of the whole is noted out by Amen, which is the
force and certainty of our faith, in the whole work, as in a thing immovable.
2. Cor. 1.20.

THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.
THE entrance of this Epistle has two parts, The inscription, or title.
Prayers.
The inscriptio^ sets down The persons which do write. The persons to
whom it is written.


The first person which does write is Paul, the principal writer, who is
described by the adjoint captive: which adjoint is declared by the cause
Christ, that is, by a change of name, of the cause for the effect, Christ
leading him to prison by his spirit. And the second person which does write,
is also declared by his proper name, Timothy: and an adjoint of relation, a
brother, that is, by a metaphor, one of the same Christian religion. The
persons to whom he writes, are, first, The husband, The wife.


Second, The Minister, The Church.


The man is described by his proper name, Philemon: by his adjoint, beloved,
and by his effect, Worker together with us.

2. The woman is also described by her proper name, Apphia, and her adjoint,
beloved.

The minister is also described by his proper name, Archippus: and his adjoint,
a fellow souldior: that is, by a metaphor, a fellow minister.

The Church is declared by the subject, which is at thy house.

3. The prayers are, The salutation. Thanksgiving.


The salutation is set down, first, by the matter of it, which he wishes to
them. Whereof the parts are grace, that is, full favor of God: peace, that is,
by a Synechdoche of the special for the general, all prosperity both of
soul and body. Secondly, by the form, from God the Father, and from Christ.
All which is disposed in a coupled axiom.

4.5. The Tha^ksgiuing is described, 1. by the subject, my God: that is, whom
only I do serve, and hang upon. Secondly, by the adjoint, always making
mention of you in my prayers. Thirdly, by the efficient cause, hearing of your
love and faith. Both which, are declared by their proper subjects, which you
have toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and love toward all Saints: and all these
are disposed in a coupled axiom.

In the 6. verse, the adjoint of thanksgiving, his mention making of them in
his prayer, is set forth by the matter, which he seeks for in prayer, the
communication of faith: that is, which proceeds from faith, may be effectual,
which is declared by the cause, by the acknowledging of all good: which good is
set forth by the subject, which is in you, and by the cause, by Christ Jesus.

7.8.9.10.11. The principal matter of this Epistle, which is to entreat for
Onesimus, is set down in a simple axiom of the cause, and the effect in the 10.
verse. I Paul pray for thee Onesimus, where the antecedent Paul, is declared
by the adjoint, being such a one, which is declared by the special, even Paul
an old man, and increased by the greater, and made lightsome by the time, yea
now a bondsman of Christ. The first part of the consequent, pray thee, is
declared by a diverse reason, Although I have liberty to command thee, yet I
pray thee: Where the first diverse, liberty of commanding, is declared by the
adjoint great: by the form, in Christ, by the subject, that which is thy
duty. The second diverse, is declared by the moving cause, for loves sake:
and by a comparison of the greater, rather I pray thee. The last part of the
consequent, Onesimus is described: First, by the relation of the cause to the
effect, my son, that is, by a metaphor, one brought to the faith by my
ministry: which is declared by the formal cause whom I begot: that is, by a
Synechdoche of the part for the whole, and a metaphore, whom God by me did
effectually call, which is declared by the subject of the the place, in my
bonds: that is, by a Synechdoche of the special for the general, in prison.
Where, in the beginning of the 9. and 10. verses, there is a repetition of the
same found in the beginning, I pray thee, I pray thee. Secondly, Onesimus
is described by the adjoint, unprofitable to thee: which is made lightsome by
the time, once, and declared by the contrary, but profitable: which is
declared by the adjoint of time, now, and enlarged by a comparison of the
greater, to me also, and it is garnished by a redoubling of the same sound or
Anadiplosis, thee, me and thee: and by a little changing of the name called
Paranomasia, profitable, unprofitable. This axiom, I pray thee, being thus
worthylie declared, is declared in the 7. verse by the making cause, because I
have great joy and comfort in thy love, and is disposed in a connexiue
Syllogism of the first kind. If I have great joy and comfort in thy love:
then I may pray thee for Onesimus:
But I have great joy and comfort in thy love,
Therefore I may pray thee for Onesimus.
The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 7. verse, and it is
confirmed by the effect of that love, wherein it does rejoice, because the
bowels of the Saints have been refreshed by thee: And it is concluded in a
less plain Syllogism of the second kind, affirmative special.

That love that does refresh the bowels of the Saints, is to be rejoiced in:
But this love does refresh the bowels of the Saints,
Therefore this love is to be rejoiced in.
The bowels: that is, by an excessive metaphore, be inward affections of the
Saints: Here is set down the special of the former request, in a simple axiom
of the cause and the effect, receive thou him, where the last part of the
consequent him, is declared by the adjoint, my bowels: that is, by a metaphore,
my love: that is, by a change of name of the cause for the effect, my beloved.
This is confirmed by the cause which should move him, and it is concluded in a
connexiue Sillogisme of the first kind.

If I have sent him for that purpose, receive him.
But I have sent him for that purpose:
Therefore receive him.
This is a preventing of an objection: The objection is wanting, and may be
thus supplied: If he were so profitable, why did thou not keep him The
subjection or answer is from the diverse reason. Although I desired to keep
him, yet I would not do it without thy consent.

The first diverse is declared by the moving cause, [That in steed of thee, he
might minister unto me in the bands of the Gospel,] that is, by a
Synechdoche, In the afflictions which the Gospel has brought me.

The second diverse, is also declared by the moving cause, That thy benefit
should not be by necessity: where necessity is declared by the contrary, but
willingly or freely.

15.16. Here is another preventing of an objection; The objection is wanting,
and is thus to be supplied, He was a run-awaie: The answer is, by the adjoint
of the time, he went away but for a little time; which is increased by the
moving cause, But that thou should receive him for ever, which is enlarged
by a comparison of the less, not so much as a servant, but as more than a
servaunt: which is garnished by a redoubling or Anadiplosis.

The second part of the comparison, called reddition, is declared by the
special, a beloved brother, more than a servant, which is enlarged by the
greater, especially to me: which is amplified also by the greater, much more
to thee, which is declared by a distribution of the subject, wherein he was
more bound unto Philemon, then to Paul himself, both in the flesh, and in the
Lord: that is, things appertaining unto this life, to the Lord, by a change of
the name of the subject for the adjoint.

17. Here is a new reason to prove that he should receive him, drawn from
the working cause, in a connexiue Sillogisme.

If we have fellowship together in any common blessings, then receive him.

But we have fellowship together in common blessings:

Therefore receive him.

The proposition is in the 17. verse, the assumption is wanting: the conclusion
is made manifest by a comparison of the like, Receive him as me.

18.19. Here is a preve^ting of an objection, the objection is wanting, and is
thus to be supplied: He has hurt me or done somewhat to me: The answer is
from the diverse: If he owe thee any thing impute it to me: which is increased
by the greater I will pay it: which is confirmed by a testimony, I Paul have
written it with mine own hand.

The last part of the 19. verse, is a confimation of the second answer, from a
comparison of the more to the less, and is concluded in a connexiue Sillogisme
of the first kind.

If thou do owe me thy very self: then much more thou may forgive him
this debt for my sake:

But thou ovvest me thy very self:

Therefore thou may forgive him this debt for my sake.

The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the end of the 19. verse.

20. Here is another confirmation, drawn from the effects, and is concluded in
a connexiue Sillogisme of the first kind.

If by this I shall obtain fruit of thee in the Lord, and if thou do
refresh my bowels in the Lord, thou should receive him.

But I shall obtain fruit, etc.

Therefore thou should receive him*

The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 20. ver. and is garnished
with a crying out of a wishing, yea my brother, I would I might obtain!

Here is an answering of an objection, which might be made against the whole
Epistle. The objection is wanting, and may be thus supplied. Why write you so
earnestly? The answer is from the cause, The persuasion I had of thy readiness
to obey it, caused me: which is prooved by a comparison of the less to the
greater, in a connexiue Syllogism of the first kind.

If thou would do more then this: then thou would do this.

But thou would do more than this:

Therefore thou would do this.

The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 21. verse, and is
confirmed by a testimony of Paul his own knowledge, I know it.

22 Here is set down a commandment to prepare him hostage, whereunto is a
brief transition in this word, Also: It is confirmed by a reason drawn from
the working cause, in a connexiue Syllogism of the first kind.

If I hope to be given unto you by your prayers: the^ prepare hostage:

But I hope to be given you by your prayers:

Therefore prepare hostage.

The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 22. verse.

23. Certain salutations are set down in the 23.24. verse. in a gathering
axiom of the cause and the effect.

24. Epaphras, Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke salute thee: whereof the
first is set forth by the adjoint, My fellow prisoner: which is declared by the
cause, for Christ Jesus, the other by their adjoints, my helpers.

25. The salutation is set down in a simple axiom affirmative, of the subject
and adjoint grace be with your spirit, that is, by a Synechdoche, with you:
The antecedent grace, is declared by the efficient cause Christ: and it is
garnished with a crying out of wishing. Amen.

And this is the particular resolution of this Epistle. The general follows.
This Epistle has 2. parts, The entrance, The description in the 1.2. verses.
Prayers, 3.4.5.
The rest of the Epistle.
The rest of the Epistle. The chief matter, Concernig Onesimus from the 7. to
the 22. verse. His own hostage.22. ve.
The shutting up of it The salutation from others: 23.24. verse. From
himself.25. verse.



FINIS.
TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, thou have here a brief and plain exposition of the first Table
of the Law of God, made by Master DVDLEY FENNER, for the profit of his own
particular charge, and some other his friends. The which coming to my hands,
I thought good to make the profit thereof more general. And the rather, in
that it was the first fruits of his labors, being made by him, before the
twentieth year of his age. Whereby thou may see with what an excellent
spirit he was endued, even in his tender years. Accept it therefore as it is
meant thee: and if thou reap thereby any profit, give God the glory.

A SHORT AND PLAIN TABLE, orderly disposing the Principles of Religion, and
first, of the first Table of the Law, whereby we may examine our selves.
Romans 3. ver. 9. to the 20.
AL being lost in Adam, by Rom 5.14. Ephe. 2.3.
our nature corrupted, Romans 5.12.14. and 6.21.23.
and much more by the fruits thereof, they who shall be saved, must be
restored, by being 1. Ioh. 1.3.
one with Christ, and so with God.

To obtain Christ, two means are ordained.

The Law and Gospel
preached, 2. Cor. 3.5.6. By these two instruments, the holy Ghost works 2.
Cor. 3.6.7. Romans 8.15 8. etc.
two things necessary to be in us, for the obtaining of Christ.

By the first, Romans 7.5. to the 15. Mat. 5.6.
a true knowledge and feeling of sin, and the punishment due to the same,
Gal. 3.19. to the 25. Mat. 9.12.13.
which makes us seek Christ.

By the second, Ephesians. 3.8. to the end, and 4.11. to 17. Romans 10.14.15.16.
a true knowledge and feeling of grace, Gal, 3.26. to the end.
with power by faith to receive Christ

The Law is a doctrine Deuteronomy. 5.28.
given of God, Romans 10.5.
commanding soul and body, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.16. and 30.2.
to the whole man, Deu. 6.24.25. and 28.5.
perfect obedience, in doing those things Deuteronomy. 12.32. Number. 15.39. Eccle.
12.15. Deuteronomy. 12.28.
only, which in the Law are commanded, and flying those only, which there are
forbidden.

1 Geuen] And therefore every thing taught out of the Law, rightly interpreted,
is to be received, Romans 7.7.

2 Commanding to doe] One difference between the Law and the Gospel, which to
apprehend Christ, and so justification, etc. asks but belief. Romans 10.15.
Galat. 3.10.11.12.

3 Whole man] Therefore in the commandments not the body only, but the
judgment, will, and affections, in the soul, must be taught what to do, and
leave undone.

4 Perfect obedience] A second difference of the Law and Gospel is gathered:
for the Gospel asks but a true faith, not perfect. Mark. 9.24. 1. These.
3.10. Also by this, not only the thing, but the necessary means to the thing
is commanded and forbiden. Pro. 31.5. and 8.

5 Commanded, forbidden] So that every precept does not only command the good,
or forbid the evil, but both. Mat. 22.

That the first work may better be wrought, the Law has two properties. Deu.
28.3.15.

Curse or punishment, which is the first, which punishes the least offense
with the wrath of God, to be felt for ever in soul and body; called death.
Galat. 3.10. Romans 6.23. and 5.12.13. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gene. 2.17.

Blessing, or reward, which is the second, giving to the perfect obedience of
all, the favor of God to be felt with all blessing in soul and body for ever;
called life. Deuteronomy. 6.24.25. Levit. 18.5. Deuteronomy. 30.19.20.

Thus much of the Law, with the properties and use of it. Now follows the
interpretation of it: where is declared what is commanded and forbiden.

In the interpretation of the Law, must be seen what is commanded and
forbidden. Pro. 2.9. Generally, Jointly in the whole body of the law joined
together, and in the general division of the Law of God.
Specially, what is in every particular commandment.


In the whole body of the Law jointly considered, two things are commanded:
Knowledge and practice. Col. 1.10.

Concerning the first, is commanded the true knowledge of good and evil, which
is for the age of every man. Col. 1.9.10. Phil. 1.9. Heb. 5.14. Luke. 2.52. To
Pro. 2.3.4. and 4.10.
desire it, Pro. 2.10. Psa. 119.24.
delight in it, love it, Contrary, is forbidden general ignorance of good and
evil. Hos. 4.6. Ephe. 4.17. To love it, desire it, delight in it. Pro. 1.22.

Practice is the following or flying of the thing known to be commanded or
forbidden.

It has, Inward feeling. Phil. 1.9. and 2.13. Outward works. Ephe. 5.10.


By feeling of the heart, we choose, love, desire delight, are zealous in the
good thing it self, that it may be done; to refuse, hate, abhor, and are
zealous against the known evil. Amos. 5.14 Phil. 1, 9. 1 Thessalonians. 2.1. Amongst
these, zeal is an earnest affection of the mind, whereby we do follow the
good, or flee the evil, so much as we are vehemently grieved with that which
hinders it. 2. Cor. 7, 11. Mat. 3, 7. 1. King. 19, 10. Act. 18, 25. Number.
25.13. Here is forbidden the contrary, as no feeling. Ephe. 4, 17. Zeph. 1,
12. In zeal forbidden, want of true zeal. Apoc. 3 15. Zeal for evil. Mat.
10, 21. Zeal for good beyond knowledge. Luke. 9, 53.

In feeling, the affections must be so ordered, as that they may be equally
more slack or strong, as the good or evil shall be greater or lesser. The
order of the Law confirms this, when God is provided for first, then man:
first, particular bounds, then general. He that loves father and mother more
than me. Mat. 10 37. So we must desire more the presence of God in the life to
come, than his favor in this life. 1. Cor. 1, 7. And love, and reverence more
the teaching Elders, than governing only. 1. Tim. 5.17. etc. For the better
doing of this, is required Pefection, Sobriety.
Mat. 12, 37. and 27.5

Perfection is, when the afections in doing, are both strong ynogh, and also
sincere or upright. 1. Chro. 29, 9. Strength is, when according as the good or
evil is, there lacks no earnestness of affection. Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Mat. 22, 37.
Here is forbidden the least remission or weakness. Rev. 2, 4. Uprightness is,
when the affection loves, desires, etc. In a single heart, only because God
commands, and for that end, Which he commands generally to all things, the
settinge forth of his glory. 1. Cor. 10.32. and 6.20.
this is called simplicity, truth, a single heart, Deuteronomy. 18, 13 Ioh. 1, 17.
Ephe. 6.14. and 6, 6, 1. Chro. 29, 5. Forbidden hypocrisy, vain glory, etc.
Mat. 6, 5. 1. Cor. 13, 3. Phil. 1, 16, and 2, 3.

Sobriety in affection, is to hold them in, so that they pass not measure.
2. Tim. 1, 6. Tit. 1, 8 Thus much of feeling.

The second thing in practice, is the outward work, when from the inward
feeling, the members of the body execute. Romans 6, 12, 13. Romans 12, 1. The want
of this forbidden. Iam. 1 26. To all this is commanded, Perseverance and
watchfulness. Ephe. 6, 10.

Peseverance is, always to continue and go forward in doing good, and flying
evil. Ezech. 18, 25. Coloss. 1, 10. To this is contrary, a stay, or going
backward. Gal. 5.

Watchfulnes is a continual care with our selves, that we be readily prepared
as we ought, to practice good, and resist evil, which is set forth, Ephesians. 6, 10,
18. 1. Cor. 16, 13. 1. These. 5, 6. Mark. 13, 35 In this is forbidden no
continuance, no care, to little, too slack, etc. Genesis 3. Eve. David 2. Sam.
11.1.2.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.6.

The remedy of our sins in these, is Christ his death; with his knowledge.
Luke 2.52. With his feeling, Ioh. 4.34. With his zeal. Ioh. 2.17. His
continuance in obedience throughout his life. Ioh. 17.4. His watchfulnes. Mat.
4.4.10. 1. Cor. 5.21,
as well to take away the guiltines and punishment of the sin, and to impute
freely the obedience and blessing: Romans 6.2.3.4. etc.
as to give power to kill the sin, and to quicken us to obedience.

Thus much of that which is generally forbidden and commanded in the body of
the Law. Now follows what is generally, in the division general of the Law.

The whole Law is divided by the Lord himself into two Tables.

The first, does contain those duties which we owe directly in his service.
Deuteronomy. 4.13. and Exodus 34.1.2.

The second, which we owe unto our brethren. Mat. 22.36. Romans 13.8.9.

In this division we are charged two things: First, that to perfect obedience
of the Law, we should bring these two sorts of duties sound and whole, as those
which then only are pleasing unto God, when they are found together. Mich.
6.7.8. 1. Ioh. 5.2. and 4.20.21. Here then is forbidden, the severing of them,
as some will so delight in exercise of Religion, as they will neglect other
duties toward men, as Masters, Fathers, Magistrates, etc. And some seek so
to please these in several duties, as they neglect too much the other, as
reading of the law of God, hearing the word preached, and calling it to mind
being heard, etc. Both which are condemned as ungodly and unjust. Romans 24.26.
Tit. 1.4. The forgiveness of this sin is had in Christ, who was condemned as a
blasphemer: This righteousness is imputed to us from him. Ioh. 17.1, 34, 5, 6,
etc. Heb. 5, 7, 8. And with this grace, the other, to be godly and just, is
always given. Tit. 2, 13. and 12, 13. Hence we are taught that feeling some
readiness unto Godliness, we should turn our selves also to endeavor to work
justice: and contrary, the second thing commanded in this division, is, we
should prefer love, delight, etc. The duties we owe to God, before those we owe
to men. Mat. 22.36. 1. Sam, 13.11, 12. The remedy in Christ accused as a
blasphemer, yet sought the glory of his Father, not his. Ioh. 2, 17, 18. This
mercy makes us come to this duty. Acts. 4, 18, 19. Here we must often
mark, how by stealth we shall be drawn to the ouer-loving, over-fearing,
etc. of men, and in time resist it. Hitherto, what is commanded and forbidden
generally in the Law. Now follows the particulars in the first Table.

In the first Table, are commanded duties unto the Lord, either or Which we owe
every day. that are, To his person directly, commandment. 1. The parts. 2. c.
The true manner of using the^.3. com.
To his worship.
One in seven.


In the first commandment, Exo. 20, 2, 3. we must consider, first the reason,
then the precept. I am the Lord thy God. I take this to be a reason of the
next verse; for if it were a precept, it should redound, seeing the contrary
being forbidden in that which follows; this is comanded thereby also. 2. It
is not like the other 3. having reasons annexed, this the first and the
chiefest should want. 3. A general authorizing of the Law went before. We may
note the reasons are added, to show us our sin the better, when we shall see we
have broken not a bare precept, but a precept persuaded by such aunswerable
reasons. Also that when we rise by Christ, we might not only be taught what to
do, but be allured to it. Thy Lord. This word Jehovah, notes out his being
eternal, infinite, beginning and ending of all things. Exodus 3, 14. Revel. 1,
8.

By this it appears, this Law appertains to all, because he is the Lord
of all. Thy God: that is, one which does vouchsafe thee a particular favor,
when in thy creation he endued thee with corporal and spiritual benefits,
and does inriche thee unto eternal life. Psalm. 144, 15. Heb. 8, 10. Ezech.
36, 26, 32. Luke 37, 38. Heb. 11, 16. By this appears, that neither we nor
the Jews had promises of this life only: Lastly, that the true fountain of
subjection unto God, is this assurance, He is our God. Joshua. 24, 16. Romans 12,
1. 1. Pet. 2, 1 Which brought. By this we are taught the better to nourish the
former root of obedience, to call often to remembrance the particular benefits
of God. By this appears that the Law was given to the Jews, and us, not
only to bring us unto Christ, but also to allure and instruct us to obedience
when Christ is received. Thus much of the reason. Now follows the
commandment Thou shall have no strange, or other Gods before me. To have an
other God, is to set up another, whom we will acknowledge to be of power, of
goodness, justice, of some excellent nature, and therefore fear, love,
reverence, hang on him, in all estates. Deuteronomy. 26, 17 18. As they look for him
to be their God, as above, so that where this is wanting, either on the part of
God, or the people, they are called without God. Ephe. 2, 12. Not his people.
Ose, 1, 9. This the Lord forbids to be attributed unto any but his own
Majesty, because he only is the Lord our God, and by this forbidding
commands the contrary, that he only should be acknowledged God, he alone so
loved, feared, etc. In this commandment therefore, we are first commanded the
true knowledge of one true God, then the confidence, and love, and fear, etc.
which is to be given to his person. The true knowledge of the true God, Iere.
24.7. Ephe. 4.13.
is to know his Ioh. 4.24. Iam. 1.17.
nature spiritual, infinite, pure, constant, most simple, etc. Esai. 33, 13.
his properties of power, goodness, justice, etc. John. 1. chap. ver. 8.9.
the distinction of three persons in one Godhead; the actions, or works of
God, Dan. 4.21. Romans 11.36.
his constant decree from before all time of all things, his wise and perfect
execution of the same, in the creation and the governing of the world, In this
we should delight and grow as the chiefest knoweledge; Ier. 9.23.24. Here is
forbidden, first Atheism, to persuade our heart there is no such true God in
heaven, Psalm. 14.1. Exodus 5.2. Mockers of him and his works, 2. Pet. 3.4.5.
etc. 3. Those that oppone themselves to the true knowledge of God. Mat. 12.21.
Acts. 6. Not to acknoweledg the love, grace, power, etc. of God, Mal. 1.2.
psalm. 82.6. To deny his justice, Malac. 3.13. The forgiveness of this sin,
was bought by the slander of ignorance, and blasphemy laid on Christ, and the
anguish of his soul, which he felt for our errors laid on him; by which also
we die unto this sin, and raise this part of obedience, Ephe. 4.13. After
this true acknoweledging of the Lord out of his word, must proceed: first a
sure confidence in the Lord, with the fruits of the same, Psalm. 100.3. Then
the other affections of love, reverence, fear of the Lord: Also a sure
confidence in the Lord, is from the assurance of his favor, to be assured
from him only, for continual defense, deliverance and succor, in soul and
body, Psalm. 27.1 3. and 3.7.9. Prou. 14.26. From this confidence, springes
trust or hope, which is to wait and look for the help, which in confidence
we assure our selves of from the Lord, Psalm. 33.18.19 20.21. Yea, although
means be wanting, we give glory unto God, Romans 4.10. 2. Kings 6.16. From
hence comes it, that we fear not in greatest dangers, 2. Kin. 6, 16, Psa. 3,
7, and 27.3. That in the time of affliction, we are patient, Prou. 20.22, Heb.
10.33. Without all murmuring to hold our peace, Psalm. 39, 10. Receiving them
as from a father, Job. 1. ver. 21, Psalm. 89, 39, 49, Rejoicing in them
assuredly, Iam. 1, 2, Hence also in every condition of life, to glory and
rejoice vnspeakablie, Psalm. 13.6. and 16.7.8.9. Joel. 2.23. Zepha. 3.14. Here
is forbidden first, the want of these, and the contrary, as to waver or doubt,
Psalm. 13.1.3. and 88.15. To leave our hope, Heb. 10.39. To despair, Genesis 8.13.
Impatience. Ierem. 20.14.18. To have trust in ordinary means, and to make
flesh our arm, is forbidden, Iere. 17.5.6.7. etc. To glory in these, and be
proud of them, Deuteronomy. 8.17 2. Chron. 16.1. Ierem. 49.3.16. and 2.13. Eze.
28.2.3. Esai. 30.12. Diffidence in binding God to means. Genesis 16.2. Number. 14.3.
2. King. 7.2. Luke. 1. To fear for the signs of heaven, Iere. 10, 2. To
cleave too much to the holiness of places and persons distinct. Ierem. 7, 49.
1. Kin. 12, 18. To hope in Astronomers, Interpreters of dreams, Witches, etc.
Dan. 2, 2. In Southsaiers, etc. Leu. 19.6.7. Planet gasers. Deu. 18.11. To use
evil means to do good, 1. King. 12, 25, 26. To. 3, 4. Out of this confidence,
farther proceeds a continual carefulnes, that in all our ways, that is,
thoughts, words, and deeds, etc. we see his will, and approve it, and so for
that cause look for his blessing and direction, Pro. 3, 6, and 16, 3. Genesis 5,
22. and 17, 1, and 48, 15. Psalm. 146, 9. Numb. 15, 39. Here is forbidden to
walk according to our own judgment and wisdom. Numb. 15, 39. Genesis 11.4. Also
a distrustful care Mat. 6, 25. Luke. 12, 26. To this, last of all is adjoined
humility, when emptying our selves of all, we give God the whole glory of all
good things, which are in us. Genes. 18, 17. 1. Pet. 5, 5. Esai. 40, 3, 4.
Forbid love of our honor, Math. 18.3, 4. Vain glory. Phil. 2, 3. Boasting of
any thing in us, 1. Corinthians. 4, 7. Presumption, Zeph. 3, 11, 12. Hitherto of a
sure confidence commanded in the Law, with those things which spring from the
same, the affections commanded here, the use whereof is perpetual, are the
true love and reverence of God. The true love of God is, when with all our
soul, strength, etc. we cleave to the Lord above all, Math. 22, 26. Hence is
commanded to desire his presence more visible in heaven above all, and rejoice
in it above all, Psalm. 16, 10, 11, 12. 2. Cor. 5, 8. Here is forbidden the love
of men, wives, children, or any thing of this life, to desire it more than the
Lord and his presence. Phil. 4, 18. John. 12, 43. Reverence of God, is, when
being overwhelmed with the infinitenes and excellency of his being, wisdom,
strength, goodness, mercy, justice, purity etc. We are drawn to behave our
selves more shamefastly and uprightly, in his presence, then before the
greatest majesty in the world, Heb. 12, 28. By this is forbidden no reverence,
less reverence unto the Lord, than unto men, as before in love. The last is
the fear of God: The fear of God is, when our Phil. 2, 12. 1. Pet. 1 11, and
2, 17.
hearts are moved and troubled with this above all, least by offense we
should Hebr. 4, 1.
displease our gracious Father, and so purchase his wrath and punishment
proceeding from it, This fear differs from the fear of the wicked: First,
in that it proceeds from faith, has always comfort with it, and sure hope
in persuasion of the love of God, Act. 9, 31. which the wicked have not.
Secondly, this is chiefly, least by our infirmity, we should displease our
God, where the wicked only tremble, because of the punishment, 2. Cor. 7.1.
Here is forbidden hardness of heart, and no fear, to fear any thing, as the
loss of life, goods, friends, displeasure of men, etc. equally, or more
than the displeasure of the Lord. Mat. 10, 26, 28, 13. Phil. 1, 18. Act. 16, 9.
Apoc. 21, 8. And the use of this shall end, when all infirmity and weakness
shall be taken away. Apoc. 21, 4, 5, 6. Our remedy for this our sin, is in the
death and righteousness of Christ, who being condemned as proud, making himself
equal with God, as loving himself more than God, was found meek, humble,
faithful, and reverent toward his father at all times, 1. Pet. 2 22, 25, yet
so, as when we receive him thus our righteousness, we must receive him, our
sanctification, that in all these things we may be holy. 1. Cor. 1.30. 1. Pet.
1.13. to the end. Thus much of that commandment, which has prescribed
duties, directly teaching to the person of the Lord.

Now follows, that we owe him, but in the outward worshipp which he has
commanded. And first, of the parts of it in the second, then of the true use in
the third.

The second Commandment.
In the second commandment, we have first, to consider the precept, then the
reason: The precept has two parts, the first in the fourth verse. Exodus 20.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven thing, or Image, or likeness of
any thing in heaven above, etc. In which part, by an usual manner of the Law, a
part being put for the whole, as in the 6.7.9. commandments, and that one of
the fowlest, look to note the filthiness of the rest, we are forbidden
generally to acknowledge, love, delight in, desire, make or use, being made,
any invention of men, either to present God, or to declare how he is affected
toward us, or to do any manner of worship unto him by, and is called the
whoring after our own heart. Ier. 13.10. and 16.13. and 18.12. and 19.5. Col.
2.22 23. Esa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. Now by the contrary is commanded, to
acknowledge, love, desire, delight in, and outwardly practice all those parts
of his worship, which he in his word has commanded, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Ioh. 4.22.
2. King. 17.26. In the second in like manner, is forbidden by one sort, to
acknowledge, love, etc. any other use, of any ryte or outward means used in
the worship or service of God, then he has ordained. Ioh. 4.22. 2. King. 18.4.
By the contrary, commanded to acknowledge, love, etc. only the proper use of
every rite and outward means which the Lord has ordained: so to receive the
Sacrnments, as pledges of our conjunction with Christ, the remission of our
sins in him, etc. not to make them a sacrifice for the quick and the dead,
not to bow down and worship them: so to receive the Ministers as the
messengers of God, to reconcile us by the Gospel, to forgive us our sins by the
word, to command us our duty, etc. But yet as instruments. 2. Cor. 5.18.
Math. 18.18. And therefore may not worship them, sacrifice to them, etc. Act.
10.16. and 14 13. And this is the true sense of the commandment.

Now let us see what particulars are forbidden, and what commanded. First, we
see forbidden in the first part, the making of Images to liken God, or to
worship him, whether graven or painted, Romans 4, 12. Ezech. 8, 10. Ioh. 5 21. No
Image of God must be made, Exodus 33.24. Romans 1, 23
because he is a Spirit, nor of Christ, Ier. 10, 8. Abac. 2, 18, 19.
because pictures and images are teachers of lies, neither those, nor any other
such should be suffered in the Church or at home, Gal. 3, 4. 1. Cor. 4, 6 2.
Tim. 3, 17.
because we are instructed sufficiently in the Gospel. Forbidden in the 2.
part, to worship images, to set them up, to gilde them, or any manner of way to
serve the^. Mat. 4, 10. Apo. 19, 20. Also here is forbidden all additions of
Sacraments, as the Papists made matrimony, and so gave it a sign of the
wedding ring, al additions unto them. 1. Cor. 11, 13. All addition of
ministeries in the service of the Lord: as the Papists added Priests to
sacrifice, Exorcists to conjure, etc. Luke 20, 6. John. 3, 21, 22, 23. Also
men's traditions and ceremonies brought into the church, not being to edifying,
nor for comlines, nor for order, etc. 1. Cor. 14, 10. Math. 15 8. Secondly, in
this commandment other sorts of particulars are forbidden, as al means,
occasions, or appertenances of Idolatry, whereby some show, or remembrance or
reverence is kept. Psalm. 16.4. As all Marriages, conjunctions or near
familiarity with Idolaters. 2. Cor. 6. 14. Deuteronomy. 17, 3.4. 2. Chro. 19, 1, 2.
Genesis 24.3, and 28, 1, and 34, 14. Likewise all relics of Idolatry which we
must pollute and mar, not doing any service or honor, no not giving them any
estimation, 2. Cor. 6, 17. Esai. 30, 22. 2. Chron. 29.5, Hitherto of certain
particulars forbidden. Now follow some commanded, as the outward means, which
the Lord has commanded in his word: they are of two sorts, either, Such as
the Lord comma^deth us to give him for his honor. Or those which he gives us
to use in his service, Esai. 45, 23.


Of the first sort, are, Ordinary, which are several actions of our body,
Christianly, according to the custom of the Church, commanded in the word of
God, and orderly and reverently ordered in his service. Special, the fruit of
the lips, in Prayer, and Thanksgiving
Heb. 13.15. Dan. 6, 11. Psalm. 55, 18. Extraordinary fasting.


Of the actions of the body orderly and revere^tly used, are bowing of our
bodies, Esai. 45 23. Reverent attention declared sometimes by rising up. Genesis
49, 33. 1. Chro. 28, 2. Number. 23, 22. 2. King. 23, 2. 2. Chro. 34, 31. Neh. 8,
6. Also lifting up of the hands and eyes, etc. Psalm. 123, 1 and 141, 2. For
even as a Husband looks that he alone should not only have the heart, but
also the reverent and loving behavior of the body, 1. Pet. 3, 6. Genesis 26, 6.
So the Lord requires these, both as testimonies of our sincerity, as also
helps of our infirmity, when we may conveniently use them, and forbids to
do in like manner to any besides him. The great carelesnes and negligence in
these, and the fruit of the lips in prayer, and praise of the Lord, is
condemned by the example of Solomon, 1. Kin. 8, 22. Dan. 6, 11. And of Christ,
Mar. 7, 34. Mat. 26, 36. To these sometimes also to help when our prayers, and
confessions, and hearinges, etc. must be more earnest and lively: because our
great sins, necessities, etc. Then is fasting added, which 2. Sam. 12.16, 17.
Est. 10, 6. Levit. 23, 23. Judge. 20, 26.
is a profession of our repentance by abstinence, Levit. 23, 14, 27. Joel.
2.15. Luke. 5, 33. Acts. 13, 2 3.
instituted of the Lord, for Mat. 9, 15. Joel. 2, 12, 17. 1. Sam. 7.6.
better humbling of our selves in prayer, for some especial grace, as is set
forth in the book entitled, The Description of the exercise of fasting.

And thus much of those which the Lord in mercy and wisdom receives of us.

Now follows those means which he has given us, and they are attributed
unto the Lord himself directly, as his titles, to be used, either Simply.
Romans 9, 5. 1. Tim. 1, 17. In an oath. Deuteronomy. 6, 13. Ier. 12, 26. Esa. 18. Or his
works. Given of him by man his ministry His word, Sacraments, order of the
Church



His works are given, not to worship them, which is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4, 12. But
to see and behold, and praise in them his wisdom, goodness, power, etc. Psalm.
67, 13, and 104, 1, and 107, 42. Psalm. 64, 10, 11. His word he has give^, that
we should read and meditate in the same day and night, to confer of it with our
wives, children, servants, privately at home, Deuteronomy. 6, 7. Psalm. 1, 1, and 119,
55. The Sacraments also has he given, not to be neglected, as most excellent
pledges of his sure favor and mercy in Christ. Romans 4, 11, and 6, 3, 4, Ephesians.
5, 26. 1. Cor. 11, 23. The order of his Church set down in his word, Heb. 3, 2.
1. Chro 28.12, 19, and 2. Chro. 29, 25, and 1. Chro. 15, 13. 1. Corint. 9, 8.
For ruling of his Church, by his word: Rulers who have the care of souls
committed to them, Heb. 13, 17. James. 5, 14. Act. 14, 23. And some of them 1.
Tim, 5, 17. 1. Cor. 12, 28. Romans 12, 8.
to labor also in the word, Ephe. 4, 11.
one by teaching, another by exhorting, 1. These. 5, 12, 13, 14, Iam. 5.41.
some to attend unto manners, watching over the people, to admonish them, to
comfort the^, to pray with them when they be in distress, etc 1. Tim.
4.14.15.6, and 21, 18 Mat. 18, 17.
to join with the others in the rest of the governing of the Church. Also for
the better relieving of the poor, distributers of the Church relief. Act. 6
2, Romans 12.8. 1. Tim. 3.7, etc. Al which we must know, delight in, procure, and
every one according to his own calling set forward; as Psalm. 27 4, and 42,
23. 1. Chro. 13, 1, and 29, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. 2. Chron. 15, 3, 12, 13, and 29,
30. Hag. 1, 4. and 14. In all these things commanded and forbidden, we may
easily feel several sins and corruptions by due examination of our selves,
severally in every one: but Christ has by his death satisfied for our sins,
Romans 4, 25. and has bin Ioh. 2, 14, 15. Mark. 7, 34. Mat. 26, 38. and 27, 30.
zealous in the obedience of the parts of this law, that in him we may have
perfect obedience, 2. Cor. 6.14. to the 2. verse. of cap. 7.
yet so as by his death, we more and more die unto these sins, and by his
resurrection be made lively to serve the Lord sincerely according to his will.
Hitherto of the commandment it self.

Now follows the reason, which is drawn from a double property of the Lord:
his jelousie in wrath, and his mercy. For I the Lord thy God.i. even then
being joined unto thee by my merciful covenant, as a husband to his wife,
Chap. 19, 6. A strong God. The first title is added to note his great power, to
do what he will, so that being persuaded in the first property of his
readiness to punish, and in the second of his readiness to reward. And first, in
this of his power we need not to doubt at all, and such use we should make of
his titles. Psalm. 2, 12.115.3, 10. Jealous. This is a kind of speech taken from
married folks. Hos. 2, 2. Ezec. 16. who cannot abide their wives should give
either in affection or in gesture, countenance, or any manner of behavior to
others, that which appertains to the^ only: and by this we gather the
greatness of the sins, either of gross idolatry, or any countenance unto it.
This jealosie he sets further forth by the fruit, that the Lord punishes
severely this sin. Visiting iniquity.i. punishing this sin, or the
transgression of this Law, in dissoluing this holy band: for so the general
word iniquity, and evil is taken, sometimes for some special great sin, as
Deuteronomy. 17.2. psa. 78.39. And here it appears that it must be so taken, because
it is not a reason of the whole Law, but of this commandment only. This is
further declared by the persons, on whom it falls. The third and fourth
generation. Which is, both because by the fathers sin, disanulling the covenant
by idolatry, the child falls out of the same, and continuing in that fall,
is punished justly for his own sin, and his fathers both. Mat. 23.25. And
therefore that which is added, declares those which are punished. Those that
hate me. That is, those that securely commit spiritual whoredom against this
commandment; and so this is nothing contrary to that, Ezec. 18. Exercising
benignity. This is the second property, wherein the Lord declares his reward
toward the keepers of this Law; that is, free liberality or bounty (for so
the word singnifieth) in receiving them into a covenant of life and blessedness,
yea, and that eternal. Act. 2.37. Out of this we learn, that as a child to
his father, when we shall do all that is commanded, we are Luke 7.6.7.8.
but vnprofi^able servants, and have done but our duty: and as if our father
leave us no patrimony, are we less bound to do our duty? So if the Lord had
not bound himself by his covenant, which came from his free and undeserved
goodness, could we have claimed any thing by fulfilling, because we did but our
duty, for the mercy of creating us in great dignity, according to his own
likeness and righteousness. But now having so many times offended since the
knowledge of his grace, and lying in his wrath; both by natural corruption and
continual serving of sin from the same daily, now is it not mercy only,
without all deserving, when he gives us by Romans 6.15. to the 20. Tit. 2.12,
13.14.
imputation, the righteousness of his Son, and so eternal life; and then
transforming us unto his likeness again, when we are first set freely in
possession of eternal joy? This is enlarged by the persons to whom this is
granted. To thousand generations. Which shows, that the Lord in respect of
us, sets his mercy above his justice. But he sets them forth by their
fruits that be partakers of it. That love him, and keep his commandments. By
love, he notes, that this should be the fountain, from which, the outward
obedience of this commandment should spring; so that if we love not, delight
not, in the parts of his worship, because in truth we love him and his
glory. These things are abominable. Ioh. 14.23. His commandments. Here, as
iniquity, was put for the spiritual whordome against this commandment, so
commandments are put for the several parts of obedience in this precept, as
the circumstance of the place does show, by which we see all good intents are
shut out. As they have been severely punished of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 4.15. Esa.
30.21. 1. Chro. 15.13. and 2. Chron. 13.10.11.

Hitherto of that commandment which has prescribed us the several parts, or
outward means which we must love, desire, etc. in his worship, which we give
him.

3. Command.
In this commandment as before, we must consider, first the precept, then the
reason. The precept is, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain. Take, that is, make any use: for the word signifies to take up, or lift
up on our shoulders. The name of God is his memorial amongst men, which being
in his titles, most properly is given to them, whether drawn from his nature,
as Jehovah the Lord, or his properties, just, holy, merciful. etc. The God of
Abraham, Jacob, etc. Exodus 3.15. Hence, because the Lord in excellency is
remembered in his works, by likeness they are called his name. Psalm. 8.2. 2.
Chro. 6.32. Much more his Gospel. Act. 9.15. His Sacraments. Mat. 5.6. Also
true prayer is the honoring of his name, and evil the profaning of the same.
Genesis 4.26. Mal. 1.11.12. Therefore here he comprehends all these, and
forbids to use vainly; that is, vnrevere^tlie, rashly, falsely, or
hypocritically, lightly or unprofitably: all which are uttered by the Hebrew
word: so that by the contrary, here is commanded to know, allow, love, desire,
and practice the true use of Gods name, in all the outward means of his
worship, by being prepared reverently to take it up, by bringing the proper
affections in the use of it, and by shoting at that most profitable end, which
he has appointed for every one. All which we must consider in every of the^
severally, and first in those things, which having imprinted his name in
them, he has given us, and those which are directly attributed to him, his
titles, and works. His titles according to the double use of them, simply, or
in an oath, has double caution set down in the word. In the simple use, we
must be prepared either by premeditation, or else by some occasion going before,
which does stir up the several affections of the heart in the use of them.
Romans 9.5. 1. Tim. 4.17. 2. Chro. 24.22 Here is forbidden the usual taking up of
the titles of God, not having our affection prepared to the revere^t use of
the^: by any of these means the proper affection here, must be according to the
title and use of it, as in the example of Zach. 2. Chron. 24.22. Being led by
the occasion of their unjust and unmerciful dealing with him, had a full
persuasion, and feeling of the sight and justice of the Lord, and so made use
of that glorious title, the Lord to terrify the^, and bring them to
repentance. The use of his titles must be either to set forth directly the
honor of God: his nature, power, mercy, justice, etc. as Romans 9 5. Tit. 2.13.
Or to make profit unto men, either our Psalm. 3.4. and 20.8. and 118.12. 1.
Chron. 17.27. Act. 10.33.
selves, or 1. Chro. 29.20. Luke 1.28. Esa. 12.2.
others, to be more moved with the feeling, of the 1. Chro. 29.20. Luke 1.28.
Esa. 12.2.
mercy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
justice, Ge. 17.1.
power, Exodus 3.15.1. and 1.10.
authority of the Lord, in any weighty matter, to be stre^gthned amongst us.
Here is forbidden the use of the name of God, when we have no such end, as we
do commonly at every trif^le, if but unawares we let fall a thing, or when we
utter some troubled affection, as Genesis 15.5. Or a falsehood is confirmed. as
Genesis 27.22. 2 Samuel 16.8. Or in blasphemy. Levit. 14.11. When we use the name
of God in an oath; according to the excellency of this duty, we must be
dilige^tlie prepared by earnest and sufficient consideration of the person of
the Lord, to whose judgment we must commit our selves, of the cause, and
matter whereabout we swear, with all other circumstances appertaining thereto.
Eccle. 5.2. Genesis 24.5. Whereto appertained the ceremony of lifting up their
hands unto the Lord, which called them to mind with whom they had in this
cause to deal. Genesis 14.22. So sometimes they added, or put in stead of the
creatures of life, heaven, earth, afflictions, or sufferings, not to give the
honor of an oath unto them, which were abominable. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Esa. 18.18. 1.
King. 8.31. Heb. 16.17. But to affect their hearts the more, with reverence of
him, his glory, or power, or mercy, or justice, which were most sensible in
those things. 1. Sa^. 20.3. Mat. 5.34. 1. Cor. 15.31. To which, if the names of
Idols be added, as it takes away this use, so it is abominable. Hag. 8.14.
Zephan. 1.5. Here is forbidden all carelesnes rushing to oaths, without due
consideration, yea, though the causes be just. Eccle. 9.4. Ier. 4.2. The second
thing is, with all revere^t behavior in the action it self, to have a sincere
and upright heart, as well in the fear of God to hallow his name, as to help
the truth in necessity: which is called swearing in truth. Ier. 4.2. The end
is, to make known a very weighty truth, which cannot by any other means be so
conveniently known. And this is to swear for a just cause. Ierem. 4.2 Heb.
6.16. Here again is forbidden rash and common oaths, not taken up for such a
cause, Eccle. 9.4. Mat. 5.34. False oaths, perjurie. Lev. 19.12 Deu. 5.11. And
thus much of titles. Now follows of the works of God. For the works of God,
any special preparation, besides that which is not general, I have not found.
The affection, which is proper in the diligent consideration of them, is great
reverence and sweet feeling of the glory of God, which any manner of way is
found in them. Psalm. 64.9.10, and 104.34. We contrariewise, either wholly
neglect the^ as Esai. 6.12. or else in lightness, etc. in which sort we speak
sometime of women, sometime of holy matrimony, yea, sometime of the joys of
heaven, and pains of hell, making foolish and vain plays of these things.
The use or end of all the work of the Lord toward him, to preach and set forth
the power and glory of the eternal kingdom of God. Psalm. 145.11.12. To us,
that we and our posterity may better know, trust, love, and fear the Lord.
Psalm. 78.7. Deuteronomy. 4.9. But contrariwise, we never make any such use, but harden
our hearts against al his works, both of justice and mercy, thereby declaring
our palpable blindness in such light, Psalm. 111.2. and 92.6.7. and 10.5. And
thus much for the true sanctifying of the name of God, in those things which
are directly attributed unto him. Now follows the other, in the private
exercise of his word, in reading, conferring, etc. We must be prepared in our
hearts, by a great reverence of the most heavenly, most constant and
profitable wisdom of the Lord for us, contained therein, Psalm. 119.129. By a
sure hope to find understanding in the plain light of the Lord, Psa. 119.130.
Pro. 8.9. By an earnest prayer unto the Lord, for the true understanding,
feeling, and practice of the same, proceeding from an hungry soul after these
graces. Psalm. 119.131. etc. Here is condemned our great want in all these
things, which come commonly at all adventure, without any due consideration of
this most holy exercise, in the reading, conferring, etc. it self, we must
draw our whole soul to mark, weigh, and attend upon wholly, which is set
forth by lifting up our hands unto the Law, to meditate in it, by searching
and turning etc. Psalm. 119.48. Also a bowing down to look unto it. Iam. 1.25.
Psalm. 119.15. To incline our heart to understanding, to cry after wisdom, to
search for it as for hid treasure. Pro. 2.3. Here again our great coldness,
wavering minds, and multitude of other like infirmities, is condemned. The end
is, that we may apply all unto our selves, examine our hearts by it, and so in
calling on the Lord, wholly to endeavor our selves to put it in practice. Psalm.
19.26.27. and 59.60. Prove. 2.1. Here is condemned the profane abusing of the
same, in jestes, plays, etc. Pro. 13.14. In the order of the Church, as the
means are more glorious and excellent, so we must prepare our selves more
earnestly on every side. Eccle. 5.1. To the Lord, in the person of the
Minister, who^ we must receive as the Lord. Romans 10.15. 2. Cor. 5.19.20.
speaking his word truly, Deuteronomy. 18.18.19. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
Or admonishing, or Deuteronomy. 17.10.11.
interpreting, or Mat. 18.17.
censuring, In themselves, that they sift their hearts to receive with pure
affection, the true use of them severallie in the exercise it self, reverently
behaving our selves according to the nature of it, and in our hearts to feel
the power and force of them: afterward also, to use all this to the several
profit and end for which these are ordained, as we will show in some of the
principal particulars. In the exercise of the word preached, being the way to
open Luke 14.27.32.
truth to our judgment and understanding, to Romans 10.15. and 12.8. Act. 26.
plant it, and to root it in our hearts and affections. We are commanded to
put away all other things out of our mind, and all superfluity, or malice, or
filthiness whatsoever, and be ready and swift to hear, yea and to receive the
word of the Lord by his minister, his husbandman is ready to ingraft in our
souls. Iam. 1.18. Luke. 8.18. In the action it self, we must with all Psalm.
78 1.
attentiuenes so give our heart, as we must have a present 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
touch and feeling of those things which are delivered, that Nehe. 8.8.10. and
13. Act. 2.37.
The use afterward is, by repeating, examining by the scripture, and applying
to bring in promises we may rejoice, receive comfort and strength: in his
threatenings, we may thoroughly feel our own estate and misery, and so be
humbled for the same, to practice of life and conversation. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20
Acts. 17.11. Eccl. 5.1. Exo. 19.9.
In the preparation, is forbidden the great loosnes, and carelesnes of men,
once to think about what they are, 2. Cor. 10.5.
the irreverence and little regard of the mighty furniture of the Lord in his
servants, Act. 2.13. 1. Kin. 21.20.
yea and sometimes the captious, proud, stubborn, and malicious purpose in
hearing. In the action it self, we see by that is forbidden, our heads full of
other matters, running upon our profits, pleasures, etc. the great hypocrisy
of many, who taking some delight in the thing outwardlye, have no true feeling
wrought by it, when they hear, Ezec. 33 31.32. The brawnie and fat heart, which
being never a whit moved, never or to small purpose repeateth, examineth,
applies, or practices, Ezec. 33.31. Zeph. 2.1. 2. Sam, 12. Mark. 6.20. In the
Sacraments, the preparation is an examination of our faith in Christ, 1. Cor.
11.28. Job. 1.5. of repentance. Esa. 1.16. and 66.2. specially also in
reconciliation of our brother. Mat. 5.2. Here great ignorance, slothfulnes,
blockishnes, which without al awe and reverence, to presume to partake the same
to our great judgment. 1. Cor. 11.28. Genesis 4.5.7. In the action or work it
self, we must feel a most sweet and sure confirmation of our faith, of
receiving of Jesus Christ with his wisdom, righteousness, sanctificaton and
redemption; that by the lively feeling of this, we should be thoroughly
inflamed, to give praise and thanks unto the Lord, with the Church. Mat. 26 30.
The use is, after al temptations to receive comfort and relief by them, Psalm.
51.9. Of one correction, for the rest, as of excommunication: the preparation
is by the authority and majesty of Christ, the action a fearful sentence with
majesty, justly pronounced, the use for the sleying of the flesh, that the
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord. 1. Cor. 5.4. The reason
follows: For he will not hold him innocent, that takes his name in vain.
That is, he will condemn him, as S. James and S. Paul write, the one against
rash swearing, and the other of the abuse of the Sacraments interprets;
Above all things swear not my brethren, etc. least you fall into
condemnation. Iam. 5, 12. 1. Cor. 11.29.34.

4. Command.
Hitherto these precepts, which command duties in the worship of the Lord,
which we owe every day unto him.

Now follows that duty, which one day in seven must be given unto the Lord,
in the sanctification of his Saboth. Remember, So he seems to speak,
because, when as this commandment was before given, they had neglected the
same. The Saboth day to sanctify, that is, to separate it from a common use,
and dedicate it to a peculiar and holy use unto the Lord. So the gold, the
vessels, etc. were said to be holy, and dedicated for the holy use of the
temple, and might not be given or put to any other use: To sanctify a Saboth
therefore, is to call our selves, not from our own sinful ways, which we
must do eeverie day, but from our honest and lawful callings, that giving our
selves to godly and Christianlie exercises of our faith, we may be stre^gthened
in the ways of God, and so in thought, word and deed, consecrate a glorious
Saboth unto the Lord. Therefore it is called the Saboth of God. Exodus 20.10. and
Leuit. 23.3, He calls it an holy convocation; that is, dedicated to holy
meetings. So Esai 58.13. Hereby is confuted their opinion, that take it a
Saboth kept, if they rest from their labors, so in the mean time they labor
in plays, dansings, vain songs, and enterludes, etc. as though the Lord had
called us from our profitable labor commanded, to displease him in these
vanities. Again, others also, who if they be better than the former, abstaining
from those things, have notwithstanding their heads, hearts, and mouths, so
full of worldly things, as they do not indeed perform the truth of the Saboth,
when as it should be kept as the rest of the Law, not only in action, but also
in the thoughts of the heart, and words of the mouth. Esa. 58. Amos 8.5. But
before we come to the proper and peculiar exercises, we will set down reasons,
that prove it perpetual for the Church in this world, to have one such day in
seve^ to be dedicated unto the Lord, that so we may have the use of it in our
conscience, and of the ceremony ceased I will speak in the end. First,
because of the covenant of the Law, which bids us do, and so live thereby,
driving us unto Christ, Romans 10.5. There are ten parts, called ten words or
sentences, of which, if we take away this, there will be but nine, Exodus 34.18.
Secondly, if Adam being in his soundnes, because his mind not being infinite,
could not do his Gen 2, 3.15.
work, Gen 2, 3.15.
and praise God, pray to him, meditate in his creatures, of his wisdom, mercy,
etc. had need for that purpose, wholly to give himself over more fully, the^
he did by times in other days once in seven days; how much more, having in us
so much ignorance, hardness of heart, etc. that we might help our weakness, and
grow forward? Thirdly, when this was a piece of the image of God in him, that
he did not only those daily duties, after mentioned together, with tilling
and keeping the garden. Genesis 2.15. every day, but was further able, one whole
day, in soul and body to give over himself to the former Saboth, exercise of
praying, praising, etc. Either we must not know, and not be borne again to
this piece of excellency, or else we must have this peculiar commandment to
humble us, and in this point to drive us unto Christ, afterward also, be a rule
and square unto us of the same. Fourthlie, the Apostles in taking this day, and
giving it the name of the Lords day. Apoc. 1.10. as before that was called the
Lords Saboth and ordaining public exercises, Act. 10.7. and private, 1. Cor.
4.2. As they did show, that in the particular seventh day, it was ceremonial:
so in the common necessity it was perpetual, according to the foresaid equity.
Last of all, as Calvin says unto the Papists, of the second commandment, who
also said, that was ceremonial and abolished. As long as we feel the grosnes
of our nature to invent false worship, framing Images of God, so long that must
remain to humble us: even so, as long as we do feel our corruption, in
accounting the Saboth impossible, and so omitting and profaning it, so long we
will hold it to be perpetual. Now, the lord to help our infirmities, has give^
us variety of profitable exercises to be occupied in, and to recreat us as it
were in another, being weary of one. They are either Public, Private.
Nehem. 8.5.13.

Public, is to join with the Church from the beginning to the ending, in the
hearing of the word preached, in praying, and administering of the Sacraments.
Eze. 46.1.2.3.10. Nehe. 9. Esd. 3, Act. 15.20.21. and 17.2. and 18.4. Luke 4.2,
2. King. 4.23. Private exercises are for our selves to increase godliness, or
others their comfort. Nehem. 8.13.

Of the first sort are, rejoicing in the word received, and profiting by that.
Also meditations, conference, etc. on the works of God, that so we might not
only by doctrine, but by experience be taught, and so be brought to greater
feeling, as is commanded, Deu. 5.20. For others, we are commanded duties of
love, in relieving, and co^forting the nedy, as well bodily by our help, as
spiritually by comfort and conference out of the word, edifying one another in
our most holy faith. 1. Cor. 14.2. Mat. 12. In these things our co^te^pt and
neglect, both of the mercy of the Lord, who has ordained so many good means to
increase our knowledge, our feeling in the faith and good works: his wisdom,
who having regard to our weakness, has give^ us such great variety, that
always being weary of the one, we may breath our selves in the other. In this
as in the rest, and the commandment going before, we must have the sins
forgiven in the son of God his obedience; here, Luke 13.10. to the 18. verse,
Luke 13.4.5. In him also, we must receive power with this former grace, to die
unto this sin, and rise unto this part of obedience.

Now follows the reason, whereby he does both make plain the obedience, and
allure us unto it. He allureth, because he gives this equity perpetual, that
seeing in six days, we may do all our work, which is necessary for the
maintenance of this life, and provision of our families, which is declared by
these oppositions in the 9. and 10. verses. Six days thou shall work, but
the seventh day is the rest, or Saboth of the Lord thy God. In six days do
all thy work, in the seventh do no work, but of the Saboth. Math. 12.5. The
Saboth unto the Lord, Here, as in that before, are the Papists confuted, who
ordained Saboths to Saints and Angels, a worship due to the Lord only, who
also took away this liberty of six days wholly, and too often. No manner of
work, except for frugall necessity, of putting on of apparel, of meat,
drink, etc. which must be as means to help and succor the weakness of
tender and old age, the strength of strong men in this exercise; who if they
should ordinarily abstain on that day from these things, it would make them
much unable to accomplish that work of the Lord, and so it is expounded,
Luke. 13.15. Wherefore that of Exodus 35.3. was a rudiment ceremonial, whereby
they were instructed to the reverence of the same, when as otherwise they might
do great things. This is further declared by a distribution of the efficient
causes. Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Servant. By which we
see, we do not rightly observe the Saboth, except all within our gates, that
is, our authority, (so called, because they bound the proper place of every
man, where he exercises any authority) do likewise sanctify the same. The
second reason, is drawn from the example of the Lord himself, the more to
allure us and move us, who contend to come near the excellent: So Christ
gave an example for us to follow. For the Lord made heaven and earth in six
days, but the seventh he rested. By that seventh day, he points out the
Jews Saboth, the seventh from the creation, to the which day they were never
preciselie tied, because being the seventh, it carried a note of perfection, and
so did shadow out the excellency of our rest under Christ, Heb. 4.20. And
therefore, because that was ceremonial, that proper day was pointed out to Adam.
Gen 2. Whereas if this had not been ceremonial, he had not needed, because the
moral equity of one in seven, was written in his heart, as above has bin
noted. And thus, as it was a figure of our sanctification and adoption, it was
not a piece of the first Table, but rather general to the whole Law, and
therefore in that respect is abolished. Col. 2.16.

The end of the first Table.
All Glory to the Lord.
THE WHOLE DOCTRINE OF THE Sacraments, plainly and fully set down, and
declared out of the word of God.
The place out of which we will draw the general doctrine of both the
Sacraments, is, 1. Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit we have been al baptized
into one body, whether Jews, Greeks, or servants or free, and al have bin made
to drink into one spirit.

The general declaration of a Sacrament drawn hence.
A Sacrament of the eternal covenant, is a public and faithful work of the
whole Church, wherein by the Ministers putting apart by the word and prayer, to
an holy use, a visible sign, ordained of God in the order prescribed, by his
delivery, and their receiving of the same; the holy Ghost does offer and
represent lively unto all; but more surely apply to the due receiver thereof,
the offering and giving of God in three persons, and the Churches receiving of
Christ crucified, and the covenant concerning justification, and sanctification
unto eternal life, fully ratified and confirmed in him.

Notes which show how every part, is gathered out of this place, with more
full confirmation by conference of the Scripture, which declares the true use
of every point.

[ A Sacrament of the eternal covenant] so called, to put a difference between
other signs, as the Rainbow, laying on of hands in ordination, and other such
signs, so called of old, Genesis 17.10. and does seal up the same, Romans 4.11. 1.
Cor. 11.

[ Is a publike] that is, to show the nature and true reverence of those works,
because these are not at any time for one, by one, or concerning the dignity of
one, as appears by this that is said here, All have been baptized into one
body, all made to drink into one cup. Which shows, that it is a work of a
public nature, of public fruit and privileges to all, of public profession
of the same, and therefore in regard of the dignity and reverence of it, to be
publicly ministered with the prayers of all, and for the profit of all: so for
this end Circumcision was ministered publicly, and they came together to it.
Luke 1.59. and in the Supper they continued together, Act. 2.42. It should be
in the Church, not at home in the house, 1. Cor. 11. Therefore, there were
convocations in the Passover, Exodus 12.6.47 Act. 2.42.20. Chap.

[ And faithfull] This is gathered, because it is said, by one spirit we are
baptized into one body, and made to drink into one spiritual drink, all
which is done by faith, by which he does dwell in our hearts, Ephe. 3.17.
John. 6.36. So in Baptism. Gal. 3. As many as are baptized, have put on
Christ: by faith we are the sons of God. This is plain in those who receive,
being of discretion, that make profession of their faith, Act. 8.36.37. and
Mark. 16.16 Now in the baptism of infants, the Ministers ought to have faith
in this work, the parents who offer the children, in regard of the covenant
of God made to them and their seed, Genesis 17 7. Act. 20.29. the Church even with
their prayers to God, and witnessing, do work with faith: and last of all, the
child, when he comes to discretion, shall have comfort by it: only, if he
die, the spirit of God does work the effectual knitting of him to the body of
Christ, by a secret working, as it pleases him, in steed of that faith which
comes by hearing. Therefore he says, that by one spirit all the members of
the Church are baptized into one body, etc. which is so general as it
co^prehe^deth infants, who have not faith. Of the Supper of the Lord there is
no doubt. This does teach us, first, that faith is not secure, but careful to
nourish and uphold it self by these means, when infidelity neglects it.
Act. 8.36. Romans 4.11. Esa. 7.13.14. Secondly, that it is not the outward work
that will help, unless faith and the holy Ghost work inwardly, not the washing
away of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request
unto God, through the resurrection of Christ. 1. Pet. 3. and so the Papists
are confuted, that say, that the work wrought outwardly in it self, does give
grace: for as the word profits nothing, unless it be mixed with faith. Hebr.
4.2. so it is with the visible word, which speaks to all the senses, as it
were.

[ worke] So it is called, because it is not only a sign, as a Rainbow, but a
work, wherein the Minister has his part, in declaring or preaching, praying,
etc. and the people theirs, in joining with him: not water only, but washing:
not bread only, but giving, taking, eating, etc. Which is, because the Lord
would have the inward man more effectually moved, when not only the ear, but
the eyes, hand, feeling, and such like instruments of the outward man, are
effectual instruments of the holy Ghost to work withal.

[ The whole Church] This is added, to show that this appertains not to all,
but to the Church only, none to be baptized, but those that are holy, 1.
Cor. 7.14. and which are in the covenant: none meet for the Supper, but which
know and believe according to Christian doctrine, 1. Cor. 5.11. and to such
belongs that saying only, Which are Citizens, and not strangers from God.
Ephesians. 4.11.12. and therefore, these holy things must not be given to Papists,
profane and wicked persons. 2. Chro. 35.6. Act. 8 36. Not to dogs, Mat. 7.6.
Secondly, it is added to show, that not the Ministers alone must work here, but
the Church with him, in winessing his work, in approouing the same by one
spirit of grace; by consenting in prayer and tha^ksgiuing, for which they are
said to do the works of the Sacraments, Luke. 1.59. 1. Cor. 11.5. In Baptism,
they receive not only comfort by remembering of the same work in themselves, but
also as no member is cut off by excommunication, but in the presence of all,
with prayers and consent of Christ's spirit in all. 1. Cor. 5.4.5. so it
behooves, that by the proper consent of the spirit of God in all, the party to
be baptized, be solemnly received, and the wholl Church to be assured by that
work, that he is a fellow heir, to be partaker with them in the communion of
Saints, and to whom they ought to render the same; so that this is also one
good and sure ground for which they ought to be present. In the Supper
likewise, when God calls al to a banquet why should any be absent which have
faith and repentance, Act. 2.38? Why should they not show that they are one
body, because they eat all of one bread? 1. Cor. 10.17. Wherefore the general
body of the Congregation, if they may, or as many as may, ought to be
present, and in the Lords supper to be pertakers.

[ Wherein by] In the whole Sacrament there are two parts: the one the outward
work, set out by it self, the other the inward and spiritual work set out by
it self: and both these, as they answer one to another, so are they set down
in this place; in both there is the person authorized, to put apart to that
use, to offer, to give and to receive. In both, there is the thing rightly put
apart, offered, given, received, and applied to his proper use. The persons
without, is first, God his minister, authorized from him by his Church; his
works are to put apart, consecrate, or dedicate to that holy use, by opening
the covenant of God, by praying for his blessing promised to these creatures,
by giving thanks for the blessed work of that action. Also to offer and deliver
aright the creatures, the water to wash with it, the bread to be eaten, the
wine to be drunk. Secondly, the persons without, are the whole Church, joining
with the Minister in prayer, in quickening their faith by the covenant of God,
beholding the former works of the Minister, and ratifying the^ in their hearts:
And last of all, by receiving and applying, or having applied aright the
visible signs. The persons which are inward, is the giver, one God in three
persons; who by this visible word in the Sacrament do offer, give and apply
the inward matter set forth: And also the said Church, being inwardly
strong by knowledge, faith and repentance, do with joy receive that which is
offered unto the^, applying it unto that fruit for which it was given. The
outward matters are the creatures ordained of God, sanctified by the especial
word and prayer, and so ordered in outward manner, as water to wash, bread to be
broken, wine to be drunken, as is prescribed: their fruit is to represent to
the eye, ear, feeling, etc. Secondly, to seal up and be an instrument, more
certainly to apply, for although it does apply no more than the word preached
does, neither by other inward gifts tha^ the working of the holy Ghost by
faith, yet because the instruments are more, and in the work God has
sanctified more instruments in his creatures to our seeing, feeling, receiving,
etc. they do more provoke faith kindle faith, strengthen faith, to the
receiving of Christ. The inward matter is Jesus Christ crucified, who was
sealed up and consecrated by the father himself, and the holy Ghost: yea, by
his own prayer to the work of our mediation, neither is he here barely offered,
but offered, give^, and received, as the ratifier of the whole covenant of God
by his death; especially to justification, and so full redemption for ever: He
must therefore be so seen here, so received here by faith: being received, so
applied, as we may feel these fruits conveyed to us from him, and this is the
whole substantial order of Sacraments, set forth at large, and now follows
to be prooved and applied to use.

First therefore, that there are these two principal and substantial things in
the whole nature of the Sacraments, it is most plain, when he says, Ye have
been baptized into one body, you have been made to drink unto one spiritual
drink: Lo then, not water, but washing: you have bin washed, and then, so as
ye came to be one body in Christ, to communicate in all his benefits, and so
you have been made to drink outwardly, but therewithal and thereby, as by an
instrument, the spiritual drink is delivered out of Christ. Now to come to
the particulars, that the Ministers of God must be the first outward person,
here it is plain: for when the very nature of washing or giving drink, does
require a person to wash, and to give drink: a holy washing does require a
holy person, to put a difference between this washing and all other washings,
and giving drink. By holy, we mean that which is in a peculiar manner,
authorized and blessed from God, (though the Minister peradventure be of an
evil life.) Mat. 23.25. Secondly, when as the being of this work depends
upon the deliverie of the word from God, having his authority, which is
solemn, as Paul says, Ephe. 5.6. by the washing of water through the word,
the Minister being only called of God, to be his Ambassador, to be in steed
of Christ, to beseech us to be reconciled unto God. 2. Cor. 5.20. It remains
that he of necessity be required. Thirdly, seeing they only are the
disposers of God his mysteries, they only can preach and minister the
Sacraments. Fourthly, as the firmnes of the seal stands not only in the
print or form it makes, but especially, that it be set on, by one that has
authority thereunto: It is therefore much more in this case. Lastly, as there is
inwardly considered, not only the thing given and received, Christ, but also
faith, that eats it given, and does receive from him (unto whom this honor
properly belongs,) even one God in three persons, especially, in Jesus
Christ God and man, and to take this as offered from another, is to deny God:
so in the outward work, which must fully answer to this, is required, he who
bears Gods person in this work, and therefore can only consecrate, offer, and
deliver with authority, the outward thing which answers to the inward
matter: So that to receive it from another, is to deny Gods ministry, and to
give the glory of it there, where he has not given it, and to deprive our
selves of this comfort, that our heart may say, Gods solemn voice speaks,
his solemn hand offers and gives, which is here the lively stay of our
faith. And this is that that S. John Baptist urges, Mat. 3.11. I (Gods
minister) baptize you with water, but he that comes after me, shall baptize
you with the holy Ghost. Where we see, he plainly lays together, and
compares sacramentally himself as Gods Minister, representing Christ with the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who do inwardly wash and baptize: and
his outward washing with Christ's inward washing.

Now, that his works are to put apart or sanctify, by declaring Gods
ordinance, by praying for his blessing, and by giving thanks, is plain, not
only because that is required of every one who gives ordinary food to his,
but especially, because these creatures, having no natural properties given
of God in them, to work such an heavenly work of representing and offering
unto all truly, and applying unto the faithful Jesus Christ: it must needs
have this property from the word of God, it must be received by prayer,
acknowledged with tha^ksgiuing: otherwise, how should it come, if the word
gave it not? and how given by the word, if by him not asked and conveyed? and
how can the assurance of this be witnessed to the glory of God, but with
thanksgiving? and who is here the common mouth of God and the Church, but the
Minister? Therefore he says, the washing of the water by the word, Ephesians. 5.6.
Therefore the bread of blessing which we break, and the cup of tha^ksgiving,
which is it thus blessed, is the communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1.
Cor. 10. and not he that eats that bread, but he that eats this bread:
that is, thus blessed and made holy, etc. eats and drinks his own
damnation. And here we must learn against the Papists, that it is no magical
witchcraft, which by the virtue of one word murmured in an unknown tongue,
clean abolisheth the natural substance of things, but it is the plain and
fruitful declaration of the promise of God, and his institution, which (with
their prayers) does give these creatures another property tha^ they had
although they keep their former properties and substance still, even that they
might be such instruments as have been spoken of before: So we do not (as they
belie us) put no difference between these creatures, thus dedicate to Gods
service, and others: We do not deny a change, only, we allow that change
which is according to Gods word, and has fruit and commodity with it, that
is, that it does not only now nourish or wash the body, but is an effectual
instrument of farther and more excellent things unto the soul. Here also we
must further note, that although this dedicating of the creatures to their use,
only be required of the minister, as that being of such necessity, as if it
be omitted, it destroieth the Sacrament, yet the Lord requires a further
thing of him in regard of the greater glory, beauty, power, etc. of this
whole work, which is the lively preaching of his word. For when the right
order of the Lord has been kept, the Church has not bin wont to shut up her
solemn prayers, without this work: So that Solomon says of his time, When
thou go into the Temple, look unto both thy feet, and be more ready to
hear, than to offer the Sacrifice of fools. Pro. 15. We see it has bin a
custom from old generations, that every Sabbath when they prayed, and Moses was
read, there should be preaching in their Sinagogues: and the Apostles have
observed this. Act. 2.42.46. We must not mervaile then, if in this solemn work,
when the outward things are more effectual, by the understanding of the word,
this be required very straightly. As I said before, it has been the continual
order of Gods Church: therefore in the Passover, the first day, and seventh
day, were days of holy convocation or assemblies, wherein we have showed this
work was observed, and may further appear by Nehem. 8.14.15.16. Therefore,
when the Apostles celebrated Baptism, Act. 8.12.38. and Act. 9.17. and
10.16.15.32 And when they celebrated the Supper instituted by Christ. Act. 20.
this order was observed. And S. Paul expreslie notes it in John Baptist, that
he first preached, that they should believe in Jesus Christ that was to come,
and they hearing it, were baptized, etc. Act. 19.4. Where we may note also the
duty of the Church, which ought to give especial good ear and heed, to hunger
and thirst for it, and to be quickened by it. And this plainly meets with a
common error, that many desire often to come to the Lords Table, but care
little for the preaching of the word of God; which is as great madness, as if
one should look much upon the sealer of certain writings, but never care to
know the conveigha^ces of estate, the covena^ts and several bonds, contained
in the^, the way how to come to the possession, ratified and sealed up by those
seals.

The Ministers other works are, that he must offer, deliver, and apply,
according as is prescribed, the outward creatures; so that the water he must
apply to washing, the bread he must deliver to be eaten, not to be worshipped,
kneeled unto, etc. So that herein they must keep the order which they have
received from the Apostles, as they received it from Christ: Therefore we see
the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. shuts out all abuses in the Church of the Corinthes,
with this reason, that which I received, I delivered: and that which is
grounded on our Savior his commandment, Do this, teach them to observe
whatsoever I have commanded, Mat. 28. in the end. And therefore, here al
additions of new signs, especially of crossing, spitle, milk, salt, oil, of
new actions as lifting up, adoring, sacrificing, etc. do al abominably
pollute these holy sacraments of God, whose whole honor is, that they remain
unto the Church of God, in that simplicity he left them. And when no action
here is worth any thing, but by reason of Gods word, which is sanctified to a
profitable use, and made an instrument of the working of the holy Ghost: it
follows, that to bring in such additio^s of orders with their significations
and uses of the outward parts of the Sacraments, is to command the holy Ghost
to be at our beck, to bless our instruments, etc. which is to make our selves,
at the least equal to him in wisdom, clean contrary to that in Nomb. 9. We
should not follow our own ways and eyes, after which we go a whoring.

The other outward persons are, the Ministers and the whole Church, who must
join in prayer, quicken their faith by consideration of the covenant of God.
For God has not prescribed the former works of the Minister, that the Church
in them should be idle: which we may understand even by this, that the
Scripture gives the work of prayer, prophesying, sacrifising, and so now of
administering of the Sacraments unto the Church, because in the prayer their
hearts join, in the opening of the ordinance and covenant they are taught,
and in remembrance they are confirmed, their hearts allow the work. In the
action about the creatures, they make their use: in the putting apart the
water, they behold the blood of Christ crucified, yea himself, and al his
deserving put apart, as for a fellow member, so for themselves and their
baptism received long ago, now comes fresh, and quickneth a fresh; for as
the scripture teaches us, the fruit of that work is not to be for a time,
but daily, Romans 6.1.2.3. So no doubt, when our hearts join in this work, one
for another, it shall be the^ very fruitful unto our selves. In the parents this
is yet more, who receive after a sort the covenant of God, specially concerning
one part, ratified in the flesh of their children. In the supper all this is
more lively to all, they ought to have their faith stirred up, provoked,
confirmed, etc. by the putting apart of the creatures, by the breaking, noting
out the bruising (as Esai says) of christ for our sins. The use of the
delivering, receiving, etc. has already bin spoken of, and shall be further
hereafter.

Here therefore, especially we must take heed, that we account not our selves
free, to lean our minds to other matters than are done of the Church, till it
come to us. And thus we have seen the outward persons, with the inward
answering to them, as has been touched in the particulars: God to his
minister, and the inward matter to the outward in the Church: their works also
have bin considered in part. Now the matter follows, which are the creatures
of God, put apart for that work which he has ordained: as water put apart to
wash, bread and wine put apart to nourish, refresh, and make glad the heart of
man. These having fitnes in them to that work, can even provoke us to the right
use of them, as in the Euneuch, to desire to be baptized as soon as he came
to the water: in those to whom Solomon speaks, Pro. 7. who ought to be
provoked, when wisdom has made ready her wine, and furnished her table. Now
these instruments are outward signs, being so set apart by the Minister, as is
before declared, and being prepared, offered, delivered, and received, do lively
represent and offer to al, and seal up the true believer by faith; God
offering and giving, and the Church receiving of Christ crucified, and the
covenant of God, and all the promises of the same ratified in him unto eternal
life. Here first we must consider, the proportion and relation of the outward
matter, and the application of the same. The signs or outward things have
relation unto Christ crucified, and the covenant of God ratified in him: so the
water, which is a matter apt to wash us, does hold proportion with Christ, who
is apt to wash and cleanse us, 1. Cor. 6.11. So the bread and wine being matter
fit to nourish us, have respect to the flesh and blood of Christ crucified,
spiritually and fully to nourish us, as the words of the institution declare:
This is my body, this is my blood, and the bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? We are made to be baptized into one body,
and made to drink into one spiritual drink. Then the offering and delivering of
these signs, has respect to the offering and delivering of the things
signified and noted before, by one God in three persons. For as we are in
baptism baptized unto the name o the Father, Son, and holy ghost, so to be
(as shall appear) in and by Christ the spouse, children, and household
servantes of God: so this one God in three persons, must offer and give Jesus
Christ, God and man unto us, which is set forth by the Minister, who bears
their authority, and does perform this outward work, which has relation to
the inward. So the Son is said. Math. 3. to baptize with the holy Ghost, when
he by the holy Ghost, does apply himself as he is God and man crucified, to
wash, etc. Neither can the Father possibly be shut out, who by the Son
through the holy Ghost works, as they are one, and as his work is especially
noted, Col. 2. and al three jointly. Tit. 3. are comprehended for that work in
baptism: the like is to be said of the Supper of the Lord: for the Father has
sealed up the Son, the true bread from heaven, and does teach us, draw us,
and give us it, and power to receive it, both in the word and Sacraments. And
the Son also gives his flesh to be meat in deed, and his blood to be drink in
deed, both in the word alone, and also in the Sacraments, Ioh. 6.27.32.37.40.45
46.57. Which place is not proper to that given of Christ in the word alone, or
in the Sacraments also, but common and general to both. Now as the outward
offering and giving, has relation to his inward, so also the outward receiving
or having applied, has relation unto the inward. So in being baptized, we are
said to put on Christ, to be washed with him, Gal. 3.27 So in taking and eating
the bread, we are to receive and turn to spiritual nourishment Jesus Christ,
and therefore it is here said, that we are all made to drink into one Spirit,
that is, into spiritual nourishment out of Christ. And this is the true
relation between the inward and outward matter, with the applying of the same.

Now we must consider the effects or working of the holy Ghost, by outward
signs, in regard of the inward matter, to which they have relation. Where
first it is to be noted, we speak of the holy Ghost, to declare that God
has not given the effects and workings following, to these instruments, as
faculties or properties, which are naturally in them, as that water should
as well by force inherent in it, wash our consciences from dead works to serve
the living God, as it has virtue to wash our bodily filth away, and to cleanse
us; but only that God has chosen them as his instruments to work by, not by
any property in them, but by virtue which the holy Ghost does work by them, so
that as Paul says of the ministry of man generally, Paul is nothing in
planting, nor Apollo in watering, but God which gives the increase The same
must likewise be understood, especially of the Sacraments. And therefore it is
said, We are baptized into one body by one Spirit: So that indeed the whole
cause, that in Baptism we are set in the body of Christ, is from the holy
Ghost. Therefore it is said, John does baptize as the Minister with water, but
Christ as the Lord with the holy Ghost. Mat. 3. Therefore, all this working of
the inward graces, is given to the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 6. Tit. 5.5.6. And so
Paul shows, he was exhorted to wash away his sins in Baptism, with calling
on the name of God, who only should work that work. This being learned against
the Papists, we may know that the work of the Sacraments, comes not from the
very work wrought, but from Gods Spirit working in and by the same, and that
working, is by the work of faith in Gods children.

Now the effects of working, as they are seals: both which are distinctly noted
of the Apostle as signs. Romans 4.12. in that by their relation with the
spiritual matter, they do lively set forth to the understanding by many
senses, as feeling, seeing, etc. the inward spiritual matter, to which they
have relation, the doctrine of the word of God being annexed: So the Passover
was a sign upon their hands, a frontlet between their eyes, that the doctrine
of God might be in their mouth. Exodus 13.9. Whereby we see it is become a
Schoolmaister by the word, more excellent than the word alone, that even the
doctrine of God may be more lively spoken of. Now, it is not a sign only, to
set forth and lively represent unto us these things by outward means, but
also to offer from God in truth, all those benefits in Christ which are
represented: for God does not dally, but does truly offer in his Sacraments,
to all that are admitted unto them, all that which is there signified. And
therefore it is said of S. Paul, That al did eat of that spiritual meat, and
all did drink of that spiritual Rock, which was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.23. etc.
Because al did eat that spiritual meat, which did offer unto them the
spiritual Manna: al did drink of that Rock which did follow them, and was in
show and representation, a true and very offering indeed of Christ. But some of
them receiving only the outward signs, did neglect or refuse the spiritual
grace so lively represented, and truly offered them.

The second effect and working, which is only in the children of God, and those
which are of discretion, by faith alone, does seal up, that is, more surely,
firmly, certainly, and comfortablie apply Christ unto us, and al his gifts
necessary for us, according to the covenant and promise of God in him. So that
this use of the Sacraments is plain, that although Christ be bodily absent,
yet he is truly and indeed by faith present, with all his benefits truly
received, and so his communion and fellowship applied unto the true receivers.
Only this is the difference, that in the word and by the word alone, our faith
is wrought, we truly receive Christ by faith; but in these Sacraments our
faith is quickened, confirmed, and increased, and so does more fully, lively,
and comfortablie apply Christ and his benefits. Both these are very manifest
in the Scripture. The first, that indeed Christ with his benefits, is in and by
these signs, as by instruments received. For we are said to be baptized here
into one body, that is, by baptism to be ingrafted into one body: and have
bin made to drink into one Spirit: that is, one spiritual drink of the blood
of Christ: so truly, and indeed Christ is put on, we are truly planted into
him, his death, resurrection, etc. Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3. We are washed, we are
saved, not by the outward work done, as the Papists imagine, not by putting away
of the filthiness of the flesh, but by the answer of a good conscience, through
the resurrection of Christ. 1. Pet. 3.21. So in the Supper it is most apparent,
the bread which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ, so that
we which receive, communicate Christ in and by these signs, as the whole order
and institution shall make this more manifest afterward.

Now the other points, that these are seals, not first to give, but more
firmlie, surely, and co^fortablie, to give and to apply, is plain, because in
those of discretion, in baptism faith to apprehend Christ and all his
benefits, is first required, as appears by the Eunuche: only in children
remains some show of doubt, but seeing the Apostle says, they are holy; that
is, within the covenant of God, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed. Christ
and his benefits in this covenant of grace does belong unto them, that living,
by faith it may be applied, or dying, the Spirit of the grace of God may work
in them, as he knows how, and has not revealed.

And this they have before Baptism, even being alive, but not by any virtue of
birth, which brings death, and that only in respect of original corruption:
but by the grace of Gods covenant, that if the tree be holy, so should the
branches also. So then this is the proper work of the Sacraments, more surely,
and strongly, and comfortablie to apply, and seal up Christ crucified, and
the covenant of God ratified in him to salvation. And thus much generally of a
Sacrament: now follows that which is gathered out of this general, which
every one must do concerning the Sacraments.

First, before this work is required, examination, after the feeling of sin,
Act. 8.37. Act. 19.4. 1. Cor. 11. Then our acceptable knowledge of God in three
persons, as of Christ his person, perfect God, and perfect man; his office to
save his people, to be their Priest by his sacrifice, perfectly to reconcile
and justify, to make also continual intercession, that our obedience, prayers,
etc. may be accepted: to be their King by the government of his Church, to kill
sin in the^, to sanctify them, and to apply the whole matter of salvation,
wrought in his Priesthood.

After, of a true faith and repentance, that being in one body with him, he
come aright to the Sacraments, and the imperfections, weaknesses, etc. may be
supplied. In the work it self, by a right knowledge of the doctrine of the
Sacraments, faith must work in every point, as has been declared above.

The use and end must finally be applied, that all the doctrine of Gods good
will, here in Christ sealed up, may be in our hearts, and so in our mouths,
to confirm and strengthen our selves and others, in all temptatations, both
against justification and sanctification. Exodus 13. Psalm. 50.7

OF THE DIVISION OF SACRAments of the covenant, gathered out of this place.
The Sacraments are two Baptism. The Lords Supper.


THat these two only are the Sacraments of the covenant of God, appears by
the declaration of a Sacrament, gathered out of this place, with which, none of
the other five imagined of the Papists, can stand: for they cannot show us,
that Matrimony is an instrument, whereby God does apply Christ and his
benefits, and this is not a common instrument of the common salvation, and
benefits which al have in Christ. Orders only are proper to Ministers, and is
not an instrument to apply any common grace of the Church, but to signify that
which is proper to the Minister. And Penance has not any visible sign
ordained of God, but is only one fruit and benefit of Christ, which is sealed
up in both these Sacraments, as shall more fully appear afterward.
Confirmation is an invention of their own brain, taken from an apish imitation
of the laying on of hands in the Apostles time, or those who received the
gift of miracles, and therefore was proper to the^. For Philip the Evangelist
was above all Bishops, and yet could not administer it, But the Apostles, S.
Peter and John, Act. 8. and this wholly to derogat from Baptism, as shall
appear after. Neither does there any Oyling agree to this definition, which was
not a public work, but a private: which was not for ever, but for a time
whilst the gift of healing lasted in the Church, which was not of the covenant
of God to salvation, but a temporal blessing, or at the farthest, if the
party had committed any special sin, which was the cause of that correction,
by being restored to health, he should receive assurance of the forgiveness of
that sin: all which last of al, does not apply to the worthy receiver, the
benefit of health there promised, no not with them: and therefore by the
former declaration, can be no Sacrament.

Secondly, we gather this division out of this place, because the Apostle
plainly makes it: for being about to show, how that many are in one body of
Christ, he proves it by a full division of those pledges, both our being set
into the body of Christ, and our nourishing in the same.

Now, if there had been any other pledges, he would never have omitted them.

Last of al, the effect or use of both these Sacraments here does prove it;
for when as we can have no more inward grace applied unto us than Christ, and
that is first to be born in him, and to have all privileges of eternal life,
and then after to be nourished in the same continually in him: both these
being fully represented and sealed up unto us in these two, it follows that
Christ (who would have the fewest, but the best Sacraments that might be under
the Gospel) would, nor did ordeine no more. 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3. Exodus 12.48.

OF BAPTISM.
The place of Scripture. Mat. 28.19. Go therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. This
place is taken to draw out of it the especial doctrine and declaration of the
Sacrament of Baptism.

Baptism is the first Sacrament of the covenant, wherein by the Ministers once
washing, or baptizing in water, into the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, there is represented, offered, and truly applied to the right
receiver, his once settling into Christ for ever, to have fellowship with one
God in three persons, for his glory, and with his Church; for pertaking the
washing of our new birth, and the benefits of Christ by the merits of his
death; to hide, cover, and clean take away the guiltiness of our sin, and
the merit of our righteousness and resurrection, to make us unblameable before
his judgment seat, for justification unto eternal life; and by the power of
the said death, to the killing and buriing of sin in us, unto righteousness
for sanctification acceptable to God through Christ. THE first Sacrament] this
appearth plainly, both out of the division going before, and also now by the
doctrine of Christ, willing his Apostles to teach al nations: when they
believe, he will have them straight way baptized, so we see the practice of the
Church touching the same thing. Act. 2.38. Act. 10* in the end. The history
of the Eunuch, etc. And it is plain by the effect or virtue of it.

[ By the Ministers once washing] That it should be the Ministers work, is
proved generally in the Sacraments, and is plain here by the words of our
Savior, who speaks to his Apostles, and gives them the charge of this work,
as dependent or hanging upon their preaching. This word once is added, as that
which is gathered out of the institution of Christ, who wills them to
minister to every believer, baptism, not baptismes: who says not of this as
of the Supper, as often as you do this. Also according to the plain example of
the Apostles, who would not have the members of the Church baptized the second
time, as appears by this, that those who believed, continued in the doctrine
of the Apostles, in communication, breaking of bread, and prayer, but not in
being baptized. Act. 2. And also, that Paul finding those that were baptized
of John, and had not received the gifts of the holy Ghost does instruct them of
the doctrine of Christ, and the baptism answering the same, and does not
baptize them again, but laying on hands on them, they received visible gifts
of the holy Ghost, Act. 19.4.5. And the reason of this is, because it seals
up our washing in Christ, our once being borne again, our once settling into
the body of Christ, our once spiritual marriage with him, as shall after more
plainly appear.

[ Washing or baptizing] Both are added, because washing is necessary to the
Sacrament, and yet there may be washing without baptizing, as it does signify
in his narrow and straight signification, that is, a washing with a whole
plu^ging of them in water. So then we must know, that washing is of
necessity, because so S. Paul declares the nature of Baptism, Ephesians. 5.26.
The washing of water through the word: and that is applied in the word Baptize,
used of our Savior, which does signify a plunging, to make clean and wash
away the filth, and therefore, this is necessary, because of the proportion
and relation it must have, with our spiritual washing of our new birth: Tit.
3.5. For the purpose of Christ is to set down before our eyes lively, in this
outward bare applying of water, the applying of Christ unto us in our new
birth: that as we know in washing, there is a being under the water, a soking
up of the filth, and leaving it behind: so this might be lively set forth in
three things answering the same, in our justification and sanctification, as
shall after appear: which was also most lively noted in that plunging before.
Now in that it is added with water, that must needs be understood in the
words of our Savior Christ, as appears by the Apostle, The washing of water,
etc. and in the words of John Baptist, I baptize you with water. And in Act.
10. in the end. He called for water, and commanded them to be baptized: and by
the story of the Euneuch.

And indeed, because nothing is apt to set forth the blood of Christ and his
merits, which is apt to cleanse and wash us, but water which leaves no filth:
herein therefore we learn plainly, that Christ would lively teach us, and
make us see and feel in his outward work, that same which is inward. That
which is further adjoined [ Into the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost] is that which pertains to the form of this Sacrament, that so
we should be washed, that thereby it might be noted, we are segregated from
the world, to have fellowship with one God in three persons, as a wife with an
husband, which is noted by this, [ into the name] that is, to bear the name,
in being one with these three persons by faith, and by hanging on them for all
government, blessing, etc. Whereof it comes, that as the wife is called by
the name of the husband, and to bear the man's name, or to have his name called
on a woman, is to be a wife, Esai. 4.1. so to be into the name of God, to bear
his name, is to be separated and dedicated to him as his spouse, to obey him
and receive protection and nourishment from him alone in Christ, as Dan. 9.18.
And Paul also says, Into whose name were ye baptized? into the name of Paul?
Was Paul crucified for you? and I baptized none into mine own name. 1. Cor. 1
For none was by baptism washed to bear Paul's name, to come as a wife in the
Church to him, to have spiritual fellowship, nourishment, and government from
him. And so this interpretation stands the word (for it is the word unto, as
1. Cor. 10.) with the circumstance and conference of Scriptures; as also the
Fathers their interpretation, to prove the Trinity of persons in one God,
because every one is God, because we bear his name, look for our salvation,
life, government, etc. as a wife from an husband. From these three persons,
which are one God, and so we learn in this former manner of baptism, we are
called from the fellowship of the world, of Satan, sin, etc. to have
fellowship with God. Thus we see the outward part of this Sacrament plainly
prooved out of this place: Now it follows that we come to the second, or
inward part; that which is represented and offered to all, and applied to the
true believer and receiver by the the outward work, as an instrument, as has
bin declared before. The inward matter is, first, our once setting into the
body of Christ for ever: then the end and fruit of the same, applied in this
Sacrament. Concerning the first, although it be not here expressed, yet it is
to be gathered hence, by the diligent consideration of the last words, and
conference of Scripture: For when this word does clearly say, We are joined
with one God in three persons, to have all necessary benefits from him. And
further, that we cannot know God, or come to him but by Jesus Christ, Ioh.
17.2. That we cannot be his sons, but by him, Romans 8.9.17. Gal. 3.26. That we
cannot bear any fruit, except we be in him, who is the Vine, as John says,
chap. 15. That we cannot be justified and sanctified but in the name of Jesus
Christ and the Spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6.13. that the washing of our new
birth cannot be shed on us abundantly, but through Jesus Christ our
Savior: therefore this is to be joined (once to God for ever) which must needs
be, to be for ever once set into Christ: and seeing the other in baptism
must needs be by the effectual applying of his benefits to us, we must needs
be first in him, and therefore Saint Paul says, Christ gave himself for his
Church, that he might purge it, cleanse it, and might present it holy, perfect,
without blame, spot, or wrinckle, by the washing of water through the word.
Ephe. 5. Therefore we are said in Baptism to be engrafted into Jesus Christ,
Roman. 6.3. To be ingrafted with him into the similitude of his death and
resurrection. Romans 6.5.6. Col. 2.11.12. We are said in Baptism to put on
Christ. Gal. 3.27.

Now it is said further, that we are set in him once for ever, because he that
comes to Christ once, he casts him not away, John. 6.37. he shall never
hunger. 35. he shall not be lost, 39. he shall live for ever, 50. And John says
of those that came outwardly to Christ, and the fellowship of his Church: If
they had been of us, they had not gone from us. And this, as it is true of our
setting into Christ, that it is but once in Christ for ever, by the immortal
seed of God that dies not, 1. Pet. 2. and by the eternal working of the
Spirit of God, which nothing can break: for what shall separate us from Christ,
when we are by his working adjoined unto him? Romans 8. in the end: As this is
true, and does rightly answer to the sign, so is it in all the other respects
of Christ's application unto us in this Sacrament. This outward washing being
but once, does seal up our once joining to God in spiritual marriage, that
God finding us dead in our own blood, has made an eternal covenant with us,
that he will never turn from us, to do us good, but we shall be his people, and
he will be our God: he will give us one heart and one way that we may fear him
for ever; that it may be well with us and our children: and he will so put his
fear in our heart, Eze. 16.8 Ier. 32. Hos, 2.
that we shall not depart from him: we have therefore the sum of Marriage once
for ever, never to depart: so likewise, it is the seal of our new birth, by
the spirit and water; that is, the holy Ghost; which as water cleanses us
and begets us again. Now we being born of God cannot sin; that is, be
given over unto sin again. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, because
the seed of God is in him, he cannot sin, 1. Ioh. 3. So Baptism, does
seal up therein our once bearing again in Christ by his H. Spirit, which shall
remain for ever. And if we could clean fall from the grace of God again, we
should have another bearing again* and another seal on the same: but because we
are but once borne, and after nourished still: therefore we are once baptized,
and daily receive the Lords supper. And this plainly by David, Psalm, 51. who in
his fall, thought much grace was hidden from him, so that he desired his heart
might be created clean within him: yet he prayed God not to take his holy
Spirit from him. Therefore by declaring plainly, that it was within him, eve^
in his feling.

So we see in the incestuous person, excommunicated, and delivered to Satan,
the end was, that the flesh might be destroyed, and the spirit might be safe in
the day of the Lord. 1. Cor. 6. So that, as every one who is of the Church, is
thought to be regenerate, so even in his excommunication, he is thought to have
the spirit and flesh within him, though the flesh seem to have gotten the
upper hand. Wherefore, this is a full comfort, which is sealed up unto
Christians in the Sacrament, which makes them take comfort in all temptations,
and to assure them against the terrors and fear of conscience, to keep and
strengthen them, that they have received the spirit to bear immortality: so
that Gods glory shall not die, but they have his power and his grace ready to
defend them. And this confuteth the Papists their fantasy in their imagined
Sacrament of Penance: who imagined a clean falling from grace, so that we have
no comfort by baptism, seek a restoring in Penance: whereas (although every
Christian risen from his fall, repents unfeignedly, and shows forth the
fruits) he did never fall from grace, neither needs an outward seal, that
he pertayneth to Gods favor and love, and his merciful Covenant, because that
has bin sealed up so in baptism, that it cannot depart, and the fruit and
comfort of it does remain after: for the Lord Christ Jesus, does extend it
as well to the time to come, as also the time past: he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Mark. 16. And Peter says, The baptism which now
saves us: speaking of those who were baptized. And Paul, 1. Cor. 6.2.3.4. does
plainly extend the fruit continually, to continue al dying to sin, and
rising to righteousness. Their devise therefore is wicked, destroys the true
use and nature of baptism: it makes one to judge the grace of God and his
favor is clean gone, and that a new birth (as it were) must be had, which
discomforteth a man: whereas, if after a great sin, he see the filthiness and
weakness of the flesh, with the horror of the same: he knowing that the grace of
God is in him, will comfort him, strengthen him in repentance, hatred of sin,
bringing forth the contrary fruits, etc. Neither this assurance, the root
of all courage in temptations and will, to fight manfully against sin, does
pull away from us care to please God, and bring us to security, but does
strengthen us, and will make us nourish good works, as the fruits whereby we
feel and are assured that Gods seed is in us. Neither can any have a feeling of
Gods grace, when he shall be by this means encouraged unto evil.

Thus we see the first point of being set into Christ: Now the fruits follow.
First, that to the glory of one God in three persons, we seek to have
fellowship with one God in three persons: and that is the point which is given
us to understand plainly in these words: We are baptized into the name of the
Father, etc. For (as we have expounded before) this does teach us, that we are
consecrated, dedicated, and joined to God, that we may carry his name, as his
wife, that we may have fellowship, as S. John says, with the Father and the
Son. 1. John. 1.2.3. That this one God in three persons may hold as his own,
to be glorified in us for ever: which offreth such strong consolation, such
great excellency to a Christian man, as cannot be expressed: hereby our
profession is sanctified to God, that it may be acceptable. The next end is,
that we may from this fellowship with God, have fellowship with the Church, in
the benefits that God does bestow upon the Son, and are sealed up in
baptism. First therefore, let us behold this fellowship, and then the
benefits.

This fellowship is fitly expressed of the Apostle, when he says: We are
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the
corner stone, in whom all the building is coupled together, and grows to an
holy temple in the Lord, in whom also we are built together, to be the
habitation of God by the Spirit: So that as we come by Christ unto God, so to
his Church, that we may have fellowship with it, and in it, in which alone all
we have salvation, for none is saved out of the Church, but in Sion the city
of the living God we are partakers of all blessedness. Therefore this is a
pledge of our being one body, though many members, 1. Cor. 12.13. and this is
the sign that we are begotten of one God and Father, have one clothing by
faith, of Christ his righteousness: one life, eve^ his life, in us al. Ephesians.
4.1.2.3.4.5.6. And therefore this is a first entering into public society, and
as it were, our solemn invecting into the Church and house of God. The benefits
and privileges that are here, is the washing of our new birth, (which is so
called of the Apostle in that place of Titus) which does spread it self into
two especial branches, justification, and sanctification, according to that
saying* But you are washed, you are sanctified in the name of Jesus Christ, and
the spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6. Which washing in general, has the lively
proportion with the outward work, but in special, we must see these benefits
and their special proportion, which is to be seen in this, that as in washing,
the water does cover the filth, does soke it up, and leave all clean, pure,
and unspotted: so the merit of the death of christ who satisfied the wrath of
God for our sins, by giving himself a sacrifice for sin, does not only cover
(as the Prophet says) our sins, and hide them from God, but so drink up
the guiltines of the same, that God imputes no sin, according to the saying of
the Psalm. Blessed is the man, whose wickedness is forgiven, and to who^ God
imputes no sin. Neither only is he made sin for us; that is, by imputation of
sin to him, but also an offering on the cross for sin, and this is, that we
might have the righteousness of God in him. That when as no flesh can be
justified in the sight of God, we might obtain the righteousness of faith,
which is free without al respect of works, even the righteousness of God, which
he does give us, inherent not in us, but in Christ, that in him we may be holy
and without blame: here therefore, by faith comes justification, from whence
peace of conscience, standing in the grace of God, deliverance from the wrath
to come, and full certainty of eternal life proceeds. And this (as it carries
full proportion with the washing and order of it, so it is said to seal up the
full remission of our sins. Be baptized (says Peter) into the name of Jesus
Christ* for the remission of sins. Act. 38. Act. 10.43.48. So says Ananias: Be
baptized and wash away thy sins, in calling on the name of the Lord Jesus.
Act. 22.16. Which also is contained under the other point; seeing the
forgiveness of sins was to justification, for it seals unto us the forgiveness
of all trespasses, original and other, and has put away the hand writing
against us. The other also concerning sanctification, is urged in many places
of Paul, but prosecuted especially in Romans 6.2. where we are said to be
baptized to the similitude of Christ's death, being drowned, as it were, under
the water, our sin being made clean by Christ's death. And we are baptized to
the similitude of his burial, as lying rotting in the water, in the tarying of
the water, till it does soke up the filth and carry it with it. So that we
have not only the power of Christ his death to kill sin, but to bury it,
and more and more to rot it: and not only that, but as he died for our sin,
and rose for our justification, declared by this, that all sin was answered
for us, seeing he rose again: so likewise we do by his resurrection rise to
righteousness and holiness of life, which is also signified by the washing, which
does leave us clean and white. And although it be true indeed, that this
holiness can never be perfect, and in that full measure it ought to be, in this
life, according to the Law, and that it be as the Prophet says, as a filthy
cloth, and the flesh rebel against the spirit, and that in nothing we can
do the good we would: so that if God enter into judgment with this holiness of
ours, we can never stand before him: yet this worthiness wanting in it self,
is accepted of God through Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5. so that being washed in
his blood, we be Kings and Priests unto God, and our works are acceptable: and
this is also sealed up in this Sacrament, as is plain, Romans 6.5.7.8. And so we
see that in this Sacrament we are set into the body of Christ, into the
fellowship of God and his Church, and in all the privileges of the same, and
that here is strong comfort against all temptations, our sins be forgiven for
ever, Gods wrath appeased, and we absolved before Gods judgment seat: that we
have here grace to forsake our sin, to die unto sin, and to bury it
continually: which benefits when they are sealed up here to be with us
forever, how wicked is that distinction of the Papists, that baptism is for
remission of sins, life, and sanctification: but confirmation, for
corroboration and strength to fight against spiritual enemies: as though there
were any sanctification without strength to fight against spiritual enemies,
and as though when we have hence comfort against terrors and temptations, 1.
Pet. 4. we are not strengthened against them: when Paul shows, that by the
power of Christ sealed up in baptism, we are made able to kill sin, to bury
sin, yea in righteousness to cleave unto God: Is it not most intolerable
boldness, to say, We have strength in sanctification to fight against sin, we
kill it, yea bury it: yea rise up to all newness of life? Does not Saint
Peter make it a piece of sanctification, when he says, Sanctify the Lord
God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1. Pet. 3.15. And if this be a
piece of sanctification, how can they separate this from spiritual
corroboration and strengthening? and can they deny this to be sealed up in
baptism, where we are consecrated to confess one God in three persons, the
religion and service of the same God, and to have fellowshippe for ever with
him? Let us cast away therefore these fantasies, and let us know, that we are
by faith in Christ, for ever put into possession of all his merits and
benefits, which is sealed up in baptism, and also we shall ever hereafter be
nourished and kept by the same faith, and that which is sealed up in the next
Sacrament.

Thus much of Baptism: Now of the right use of the same, according as it is
proper to it: in which, as there is diversity in those who must use it, so
there is diversity of rules prescribed unto them, in the word of God. The
persons therefore are of 2. sorts, the baptized Infantes Men of discretion
others The Parents of the Infants. The whole body of the Congregation.



Of infantes in their infancy, nothing is required, but that they be borne
under the covenant of God, as has bin showed before: after, when they come to
discretion, they are to make that especial use which others do. For those of
discretion it is prescrcibed, that they besides their preparation in general,
ought to have this especially, that they feel Christ to be there for ever, and
in him to be begotten to an everlasting fellowship with God and his Church, and
a communion of all benefits with them: and this preparation S. Peter being
asked, teaches, Act. 2.38.39.40. and so the nature of this Sacrament
requires. In the work it self, they are by faith lively to behold, and apply
in the outward and inward relation of washing, Christ given to wash them in
their new birth for ever, unto justification and sanctification, as is
commanded to Paul, Act. 22.16. In the use they are always afterward to be
stre^gthened, that they are one with God for ever, that in their temptations
they shall not fall away: that they shall stand, that their service to God is
acceptable, etc. and this Paul urges to the baptized, Romans 6.2.3. etc. and
2.2.11.12.13.14. This therefore must always be before us to comfort us.

The Parents of the infants before they bring their children to be baptized,
must call to mind the merciful covenant of God toward them and their seed,
and by their experience they must assure themselves of their child: and they
must also remember the ordinance of God, who (they having brought their
children in his covenant and holy seed by grace) will have it also sealed up in
their flesh: for which cause they must earnestly desire it, and with all speed
that may stand with order and public assembly of the Church to hasten it,
Genesis 17.10.11.12. And the wrath of God against Moses for deferring it, does
show this duty. Exodus 4.24.25.26. In the work it self, they are reverentlie
to offer it to God his Church and by his Minister, with the public prayers of
Gods church receive that seal in the flesh of their child, as is prescribed,
and in the mother tongue give such a name as may stand with the reverent work
of baptism, and the solemn inuecting of the child into the fellowship of the
Church. Luke 1.59.60.61. etc. After, they are to apply this work unto
themselves, to make them diligent in catechizing and nourishing up their
children in discipline fit for children, and admonition of the Lord, because
they have once received that seal, which does seal up that God will
circumcise the hearts of their children as well as theirs, Genesis 17.13. Deuteronomy.
30. The whole body of the Church ought with knowledge of Gods covenant, and
joy of a member to be added to the Church, address themselves to this work,
Luke. 1.59 In the work it self, they must with attention to the work,
joining also earnestly in prayer, receive assurance of a fellow member, so
receiving him with one consent and heart, in which respect they were said to
circumcise, and may be now to baptize. Luke. 1.59. Afterward, it must stir
them up to all love unity fellowship, and communicating of gifts and
privileges with the party received. Ephe. 4.1.2.3. etc.

OF THE SACRAMENT OF the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11.23. etc. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said:
Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you: This do you in
remembrance of me: after the same manner he took the cup, when he had thanked,
saying: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: this do as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me, etc.


In this text concerning the Sacrament, we must consider how Paul here
sets down two things.

Frst, he sets down generally what he delivered, which is declared by
relation of Christ.

Then the particular, that he received: is repeated, where the Sacrament is set
forth by the circumstance of time, in the night: by the parts of it in Christ's
work, the bread: 24. the cup. 25.

[ That which I receiued] out of this is gathered, that nothing in the matter
and form of administration and order of the Sacraments should be altered,
nothing added, nothing taken away, but all done as Christ has prescribed, as
has been declared further before.

The circumstance of the time, was in the night he was betrayed, and this was
upon especial cause, because the Supper of the Lord was to be administered
after the Passover, in steed whereof it came, that being abolished, and then
ceasing at the death of Christ: now this being done upon a particular
occasion, the time is not to be held but upon the like particular occasion: and
we may find the time changed by the Apostles, Act. 2.42. and 20.11. So that
this is for edification, that we may be fittest to that work, and for
comelines in the time of peace, to do things which are solemn and public in
comely time, which is the day, and for good order: because in the day order may
be best kept, and therefore is fitly changed of the Church into the day.

THE DECLARATION OF THIS SACRAment, gathered of the parts of the Supper, as it
is described by Paul.
The Supper of the Lord is a Sacrament of the covenant of God, wherein by the
Ministers blessing, breaking, and delivering of bread, with saying, this is
the body of Christ, etc. by his blessing and delivering a cup of wine, saying:
This is the new Testament in Christ's blood, unto the members of the Church,
which are able to examine themselves, by their receiving, eating and drinking
of the same: is lively represented and offered to all, but truly applied to
the receiver with faith, the giving and receiving by faith the very body and
blood of Christ crucified, and so who! Christ, with unfeigned thanksgiving to
God, for the lively showing forth and representing the death of Christ,
spiriual applying of the same by faith, to the mutual and continual full
nourishment together, in and by all the merits of Christ and the promises of God
in him, unto eternal life.

THE FVRTHER CONFIRMATION AND opening of this Declaration.
HEre we see, first the outward work is to be considered, then the inward. The
outward work in his parts, first of the bread, then of the cup. Yet this is
general to both, that they are blessed; that is, expounding the institution of
God, and the use of the same: by prayer and thanksgiving are put apart from
their common uses, to that which is holy by Gods ordinance, receive a property
they had not before, to nourish our souls, as is at large declared above. Now
that this is set down in the first place, it is the order that Christ has
observed, and we are to follow, and that which is fit for the works
following. For when as the breaking, pouring forth, giving, etc. of the bread
and wine are Sacrame^tal works, that is, such parts of this work as have
relation with the inward, do offer, represent, and seal up, it may not be
that these or any of them should be first done, and then this working of
blessing come after, because they have their form and force to be sacramental
works from hence. In the first part, the breaking of the bread comes to be
considered, which is so plainly set forth as a work, and has relation to the
torments of Christ on the cross for us: for, in that bread is broken, that it
may be eaten, it does lively set before us, that Christ was tormented for us
and for our nourishment, and as the Apostle says from Christ, my body, which
was broken for you; although it be true, that not a bone of Christ was broken:
and so breaking is not here taken properly, but by a similitude, for weeping,
tormenting, etc. as he was pierced, crucified, and on the cross made a curse
for us, and as the Prophet says, He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was broken for our infirmities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed. Esaias. 57.5. So then this is to be done
plainly in the sight of all, and all ought to give diligent heed and weighty
consideration of these things with us.

[ Giving of bread] This is gathered, because he says, take, eat, etc. And
it is plainly expressed of 3. Evangelists, as that which may not be omitted,
because being the Ministers work to us, it does represent the person of God in
3. persons, giving christ his body and blood to norish us. For they are the
dispe^sers of Gods mysteries, to dispe^ce unto us the spiritual nourishment in
these things [ Saying] This is added also plainly, according to the
commandment of Christ, who willed the^ to do this, the Ministers that which
Christ did, the people that which the Disciples did: and S. Paul shows that
which Christ did, is to be done of the church in this heave^ly ba^quet, the
ministers doing that which appertains to the^ and the people that which
belongs to them, and this is necessary; for it is not meet for the Minister
in delivering to be dumb, but he shows us our duty; and he shows what is
offered and give^ by the outward signs, and what we are to receive by faith, as
well as bodily. Now although the words here in Paul and some other Eva^gelists
do differ, yet this sense comes to one, and the holy Ghost does give us
liberty to take which we will for edification, and to show that the force lies
not in the words, but in the matter signified by them: and yet therewithal,
to give us a certain rule which we might follow. Only this is to noted in
all that, which our Savior Christ Jesus prescribes, that the words be spoken
generally to all, and not specially to one: both because that is the fittest
to note out the fellowship and communion of the Church in this work, the person
of Christ by the Minister, bidding all his guests with one love, as from him to
be merry, and eat with faith one spiritual meat together, which also does
plainly confute the Papists private communions of the Priest and his boy: which
as it has bin confuted generally, so here it shows that they go directly
contrary to Christ's institution, and the Apostles practice, who would have it a
banquet for all that were fit to receive. Neither is there profit in this
order of Christ in this respect alone: but herein our faith is further
succored, when we may together, and with one heart apply our selves to the
meditation and fruit of this speech of Christ by the Minister, which in the
particular speaking does both lose that our working together, and makes the
minds of Christians hang the longer in the waiting for this sentence, and the
comfort of it, and their minds are offered unto greater occasion of slips and
withdrawings by humain infirmity, when these things are prolonged, which may
more effectually be done together and speedily: wherefore this also is to be
kept, and we to use it for our comfort, for although this be not that, which
if it be done otherwise than it ought, does take away the virtue of the
Sacrament, neither is any to abstain from it, because it is a blemish, not a
plain deforming and destroying of the work, yet it is to be kept from the
former occasion. The meaning of the other words, This is my body, shall upon
more fit occasions be farther opened afterward. In the Cup the same order is
to be observed, and that proportion of the outward work in giving, etc. as in
the bread, according as S. Paul does express he did likewise in the cup: only
here is to be considered, that same analogy which the work has in both these
parts, that bread is given apart, and the wine apart: which, as it does show a
full nourishment, a feast which is neither meat alone, nor drink alone, so has
it an excellent analogy with Christ crucified, whom we receive as one that
has been slain for us, whose flesh we have for meat indeed, and his blood for
drink indeed, that we might have full and pefect nourishment in him, as our
Savior Christ expresses. John. 6.54.55. etc. which both are lively
representation and sealing up, not of Christ alone, but Christ crucified and
given up to be a full and perfect nourishment, even meat and drink unto us.
This the Papists destroy and clean take away from the people, to maintain
their transubstantiation, and they teach, that the bread being turned into the
body, has blood in it, and as well might they make another reason to give the
cup alone, wherein also is the body: for in Christ, the one is no more the
blood with the body, than the body with the blood. They alleadg indeed, that
it is said, Act. 2 and they continued in breaking of bread. and Act. 20. They
came together to break bread: Whereby they gather, it was ministered under one
kind. But this is gross blindness of theirs, that they cannot see, that as in
the Hebrew phrase, to eat bread by a part for the whole, is to receive whole
norishment: so in this manner of speech is noted the whole Sacrament, as on the
other side, in the former place of the Corinths, that to be made to drink into
one spiritual drink, does note out the whole Supper: and none ever imagined
yet, that the cup might be administered alone: And why may they not imagine as
well, that they blessed not the bread as the cup. 1. Cor. 10 26. because Paul
says, The bread which we break and names not blessing? This is therefore but a
wicked shift, to displace the plain ordinance of Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me. verse. 25. They do contrary to the custom of the Church
when as they received from the Apostles, that Christ did so, so they practiced
it, as is plain by this chapt. 25.26. And again, they destroy the doctrine of
S. Paul concerning the one principal use of the Sacrament, which is, to show
forth the death of Christ, which is lively done, when both are delivered, the
one for flesh, the other for blood, but not otherwise: and therefore he says,
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, you show forth the Lords
death till he come. Also they do thereby destroy the properties of all
nourishment, mentioned before. Let us therefore hold fast and rejoice in the
perfect and most full ordinance of Christ, and let us not forgo the comfort we
have in this point. There follows, that this must be delivered, and this is
spoken to those which are able to examine themselves, which thing is proper and
peculiar to this Sacrament: and that which Paul urges after in this place,
approves the same: A man must examine himself, and so come to this table, etc.
And in the Passover their children were not admitted, but such as could
inquire and be instructed of their fathers, that the same might be a frontlet
before their eyes, and a sign upon their hands, that the doctrine of God
might be in their mouths. Exodus 13.8.9.10. and 12.26 27. Indeed if we mark
and way the matter well, the difference of the outward work here, from that in
baptism, does by proportion require this: For although those that are of
discretion and are to be baptized, must make profession of their faith and
repentance, because otherwise we cannot know they are within the covenant of
God, and it is meet that they having discretion to use the seal of God aright,
should show they are so prepared to do it, yet for all that we see, the very
washing of water does not require discretion in him who is to be washed,
because we can wash and cleanse well those things, which have not only no
understanding, but not any sense. But where there is required a reverent
giving, hearing of that which is spoken, and understanding, a reverent
receiving and eating, that we so cannot be in the outward work, even with one
discretion, to consider of whom to take, to understand what is said, and what
to be done, which discretion, if God will have in the outward work, what does
he thereby but plainly declare, that there is required understanding of what
Gods spirit does speak, who gives the true body of Christ what we shall
receive by faith, what it is to eat it spirituallie, and be nourished by it.

Let us therefore hold also this fast: and therefore let none presume to come
hither, but seriously examining himself. Let not the Pastors presume to
profane the holy things of God, by admitting any, they havuing not prepared
and tried. Zopho. 3.4. 2. Chron. 35.6. The outward work of the Minister we
have seen: there follows the outward works of the Church, which are besides
the hearing and beholding of the former, as has been noted: the especial
receiving, eating, and drinking, and these are commanded of Christ, have been
always performed of the Church, that Christians might be partakers of the
Table of the Lord. 1. Cor. 9. and all might eat as the Israelites did, one
spiritual meat and drink in this Sacrament: wherein is confuted the madness
of the Papists, who do shut out many of the people from this work, and
therefore destroy the Sacrament, which without this is no Sacrament, do take
away the form of it, and use for comfort, which is that they might eat,
drink, receive, etc. according as they are consecrated, broken, and delivered
to this end, as we have seen before. They, I say, wickedly take away this,
bid them fall down, worship it, acknowledge it the very sacrificing of the
body and blood of Christ: non of al which, they have received of Christ, and
therefore should not deliver it in his name, but the clean contrary, for to
eat, and worship with not teaching are contrary, and to offer to another as a
sacrifice, which must be given to us to eat: for when they imagine to offer,
they do clean contrary. Thus the spirit of Babel has confuted all, and
turned light into darkness. But let us remember these actions are of the
substance of the Sacrament, commanded of Christ preciselie, and for the which
all the other actions are, as appears plainly by the institution of Christ,
and therefore may not be omitted, unless we will lose the whole comfort of the
same. The work of receiving, has his proportion with the true receiving of
Christ's body and blood crucified, which is done by faith: for as he dwells
in us only, and is united to us only by faith, Ephe. 4.37. Galat. 3.25. so
the receiving which is inward, and has proportion with the outward, must be by
these means alone. And so is the eating and drinking, nothing but that work of
faith, whereby Christ is so applied, as we feel our selves to draw one
spiritual nourishment by faith from him, as shall be after declared. So then
we do see, how excellent this outward work is, if we consider aright the
parts of the same, and the proportion they have with this inward, whereunto
now let us come, and briefly touch the same.

The work which is here represented and offered to all, and sealed up to the
faithful, is, God giving in Christ, and our receiving of the body and blood of
Christ crucified, and so of himself. When we say, that Christ his body and
blood is not only offered and given, but of the faithful receivers thereof is
sealed up, thereby we said, that we acknowledged and held Christ to be present
in deed, even as in baptism; and therefore his body and blood, because it is
received and is our meat indeed, as we shall see afterward But we do not hold
that he is bodily present in and with the bread, or that the bread is turned
into his body: for as we have ground of the former, because Paul says, The
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The cup
that we bless, is it not the cummunion of the blood of Christ? That is, an
instrument whereby truly is communicated, by the working of the holy Ghost to
our faith, the very body and blood of Christ: so the words, This is my body,
that is, an instrument which offers and represents to all, one body, and
seals up the true receiving of his very body and blood, as shall be prooved
by and by in the confuting of the adversaries the Papists, which hold, that
the bread is turned into the body of Christ, because (this is my body) must be
properly taken. The Lutherians say also, that the body is bodily and locallie
with, or in, or under the bread, because this word ( is) must be taken
properly. Now their reason why it must be taken properly, is, because in the
Sacraments the speech must be proper and fit: which is a falls and vain
opinion. For what spech is more fit and effectual, where the bodily things are
instruments of spiritual and heavenly things (signs are to deliver more
effectual things signified) then these figuratiues, which have more grace and
effectualnes in them. And when one receives liberty and season of land, or
an house, or a city by a sign, who does not know this speech is more
effectual, I give this my land, this key of my house, then if he had said, this
is a sign or token of my land, and my house delivered. And they are confuted by
the Scriptures, which does especially in Sacraments, chose to use this speech,
My covenant shall be in your flesh, speaking of Circumcision, which yet is but
a sign, or Sacrament of his covenant, as he interprets there. Genesis
13.11.13. When they are said to kill the Passover, that is, the Lamb, which
was a sign, seal, and remembrance of the Passover. Exodus 13.21.11.13. etc.
So the Arc is often called the Lord: So the Altar of Moses, Exodus 17.15. So
the son of Iaakob Bethel, Genesis 28.22. And to go no further, this place of
the Apostle, when he says, This is the new Testament in my blood, will they
have it here proper, and not as we interpret it? Will the Papist say, Wine is
transubstantiated into the covenant of God? which is not a substance, but a
truth of promise only? And shall we have two transubstantiations, one into
blood, another into the covenant? The Lutherians likewise, will they have the
covenant to be there bodily remaining, as remaining locallie, which cannot be
in a place? so then, here the foundation is clean overthrown. And yet they
stand not to their rule: for let them tell us, is this a proper speech, this
bread is my body, that is, has with it, or under it, or in it, or in it my
body? Do they not find us out a strange and new signification of this word;
That it has in it, with it, or under it, which was never heard of before? And
as for the Papists, we say also, how can they say, this is a proper speech,
bread is my body, that is, bread is transubstantiated into my body? that the
proper signification of it is, that is, transubstantiated? If they say, the
bread is not understood in this word this, but the body, the^ they make Christ
to say, This body is my body, which besides the unfitness, it has with the
Sacrament, what shall become of the express text for transubstantiation, for
here is no word where it is expreslie said, The bread is transubstantiated
into my body: so that they must be driven to their wooden collections, from
express and proper words, which they cleave so much to.

But because this point is a ground for many arguments, let us make the truth
of this apparent: First, we see the plain following of the text in speech and
reason, does plainly show, that this word this, is referred to the bread, for
when he says, He took bread, he brake it, and gave it to them, we ask,
whether he gave not bread, and that it be here to be understood? If not, he
gave not that he brake, and he brake in vain.

Again, when there is a plain word bread going before, which is necessarily
to be referred to break and give out, how can they refer this, to that went
not before, and leave out that which did?

2. This word eating, which notes the work of the mouth, in grinding and
preparing to digestion, how can it be referred, except they change the proper
signification to another then bread?

3 When as in the second part, this is not referred to blood, but to the Cup
which he took and blessed, plain by S. Luke and Paul. Let the^ show how it can
be otherwise in the bread? If they say, the Cup is put for that in it, which is
blood; that is to beg the question: and when as the adjoints of color, taste,
strength is there, as in a Subject, will they say, that also is turned into the
blood of Christ?

4 When Paul calls it bread, after it is received, saying: He that eats
this bread; and drinks this cup: Is it not here plain, that this is referred
to bread? I know their slip, that he called it bread by a figurative speech,
for spiritual nourishment, as in John 6. Christ says, I am the bread which
came down from heaven, etc. To this I answer They are blind if they can make
no diversity betwixt that speech which is in John, where the circumstance is of
Christ, when he says, I am the bread of life, and then that he says not
simply bread, but bread of life, the bread which came down from heaven, etc.
and between this of S. Paul, who having made mention of bread, blessed, and
consecrated, says, He that eats this bread, simply, that is, this bread so
blessed, broken, etc. Secondly we say, when he says, He that eats, seeing
he joyneth the proper subjecte bread, to eating, the proper work of it, and
the body of Christ cannot be properly eaten, as is showed before. It
remains that we must call it properly bread, and so chap. 10. when he says,
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
Where note, that bread before consecration, cannot be the communion of the body
of Christ by your own judgment. Secondly, that metaphorical bread cannot be
broken, Christ's body cannot be broken: therefore very bread must here be
understood. Wherefore we conclude, that bread remains, and this word, this,
must be referred to the bread and therefore they cannot stand to proper
significations of words, they (I say) who urge it so much. Now we will come to
the reasons which prove, that these words ( this is my body) must be
figuratively taken, and so consequently in that interpretation and figure,
which we have showed to be proper: neither yet will we (for shortness sake)
bring all the reasons that might be brought, but these which are plainly
gathered out of the text

First, Christ is said to give that which he says was his body: now if this is
my body, be properly understood, Christ had one body which gave, and another
which was given. But that is absurd therefore it must not properly be understood.

2 If the speech be proper, they are not diverse things, as bread may be said
properly of an oother as of a body: but that cannot be, Ergo.

3 If that be properly understood, then Christ may be said to be bread, as well
as bread christ, but that is false, Ergo etc.

4 If that be proper, then that which is true of bread, that it is of wheat, is
true of Christ: and that which is true of christ, must also be true of the
bread; the^ also the bread shall be united personally unto Christ as his body,
which is false and wicked, therefore it must not be so understood.

5 If bread be the body, then there are meant two substances; one for a sign,
the other for the spiritual matter, and the accidents, as color, taste, etc.
must signify and seal into the body of Christ, which is false.

6 If bread indeed be turned into the body, and wine into the blood; the^ they
be separated truly, or else the bread is blood, and the wine is his body, which
is false: if they be separated truly, then it was not separated truly in his
death upon the cross, which is false: if Sacramentallie, then it is his body
and blood only sacrame^tally, that which does aptly seal up the body and
blood of Christ, which is that we hold.

7 If the bread be his body in deed, and the wine his blood in deed, then
Christ every time the supper is administered, being alive in heaven truly, is
dead in earth truly and bodily indeed, which is blasphemous: therefore it must
not be understood properly.

8 If bread be turned into his body indeed, or his body indeed be locally with
it, the^ christ his body, which alwais has his parts, is visible, etc. has a
hand, a foot, etc. differing from it self, it shall the same time be invisible,
yea no hand, differing from foot, etc. and there shall be a co^tradictio^, his
bodies visible, and his bodies not visible and so the truth shall ly; al which
is abominable.

9 It is said, the bread broken, is his body broken, and the pouring out of his
blood, which is a sign, seal, etc. of it, so must the bread and wine be his
body and his blood, as it represents, etc.

10 If the wine be his blood indeed, then blood is still poured out, which is
false.

11 As the wine or cup, is the new Testament, in his blood, so the bread is his
body, and the wine is blood, but that is a Sacrament, which represents and
seals the new Testament in his blood: Ergo, it is not proper.

12 Here is a plain difference betwixt that in the cup, which is said to be the
new Testament, and between that wherein the Testament is, that is, his blood:
for these are distinguished, therefore it is not properly said his blood.

13 He says, Do this in remembrance of me, therefore he is not here eaten.

14 We are said to show forth his death til he come, therefore bodily he is not
come, nor is not there, nor cannot be properly said, to be so only, by these
manifest and plain reasons out of the text, agreeing with the proportion of
faith we have prooved our judgment.

Now then having showed how Jesus Christ his flesh and blood is here indeed,
not bodily, how it is received in deed, not bodily but spiritually by flesh: we
must consider of that we say, that we receive his flesh and blood; yea, and so
whole Christ, which is indeed true, and must necessarily be understood as a
ground and foundation of our whole comfort here, and indeed it cannot be
otherwise; for if we receive him flesh and blood, we must thereby needs
receive him God and man, which is not separated from him, and whole Christ does
dwell in us, Ep. 3. neither ca^ the flesh of it self justify, fructify,
quicken, etc. For these things being more excellent than the first creation,
are proper to the Godhed. So the^ Christ does only quicke^ us by his flesh and
blood, as by a mean or matter, whereby he does convey the virtue and power of
his Godhead, in his sacrifice and sufferings, whereby he overcame death and all
principalities and powers, in his resurrection, by which he rose again: so
that we must become one with Christ, and he must be in us, and we in him, and
he dwell in us: and we in him, which is by the virtue and power of his divine
working, and the natural uniting of his natural humanity to us, to who^ we be
knit. Therefore in John 7. he says, That not only his flesh, but he was the
bread of life. ver. 35. We must come to him, believe in him, that we may
never hunger nor thirst, and 46.47.48. etc. Then this foundation of strong
comfort and consolation being laid, let us consider the ends and fruits of the
receiving of Christ. First, to Gods glory, then our good.

For Gods glory, that this heavenly and excellent work of the possession of
Christ, decreed and brought to pass by one God in 3. persons, might be
remembered, according as it is said, Do this in remembrance of me. And again,
You shall show forth the Lords death til he come, and that to the glory of Gods
wisdom, power, mercy, etc which in the same may always be remembered, praised
glorified, etc. Which is with unfeigned thanksgiving and praying to God, as we
have seen the Evangelistes mention of our Savior Christ, and when God does
liberally preserve and defend us, etc. How can we be unthankful, even at this
present for his merits? The other end is, that we apply him to spiritual,
mutual, and continual nourishment, and growing in grace with the whole Church.
For this is indeed that same which gives a most lively difference between
baptism and the Lords Supper. For in baptism we are set into the body of
christ, and are washed with the washing of our new birth in him, and have an
assurance of al privileges, are set into the right title of possession of the^
with the rest of the Church. But here Christ is so applied and his benefits, as
we do grow, increase, and wax strong, more and more in the forgiveness of al
our sins, as assured more and more, we feel the righteousness of Christ ours,
our consciences more and more appeased; our peace greater, also our killing and
burying of sin, our quickening and refreshing in obedience greater, and that
not only in our selves, but in communion and fellowship with the whole Church.
Therefore Paul says, As in Baptism we have bin set into one body, so we have
bin made to drink into one spirit; that is, spiritual norishme^t. So he says,
We have together, communion of the body of Christ, and of his blood; we are at
his table, and are fed together: we come one body together, so many as ar
partakers of one bread. 1. Cor. 10.4.17. We come together in unity of faith,
joy, of obedience, as the household servants of one master, and Citizens of one
God and Lord. So we daily increase and grow against al our temptations and
daily wants. Where we see again the wickedness of the Papists, who as before, by
their confirmation they derogated from Baptism, so hence more from the Lords
supper; seeing as strength is there given, so here maintained, nourished, and
increased, as spiritually we grow fat and in good liking. Therefore Paul
teaches, that this makes us cast away al show of Idolatry, overcome all
temptations, serve God sou^dly, 1. Cor. 10.13. etc. And this is that which
answers to the eating of the bread and drinking of the wine, which is more
the^ receiving; for it is not only to take it into one, but being received, so
to apply it, as it be digested and turned into good norishme^t for the body. So
I do not here only receive Christ by faith, but so apply him and his merits
received by my faith, as I feel my self to grow with the Church in all the
former benefits unto the assurance of immortality and eternal life. And
hitherto of the Sacrament it self: now followth the use. First, all the whole
congregation, eue^ as many as are able to come and examine themselves, ought
aforeha^d, not only to examine generally, as has bin taught generally in the
Sacrament, but here they must see and feel their faith, not only to receive
christ; but to apply him for increase of strength and growing in repentance.
Likewise, what be the several wants, weaknesses of faith, terrors of
conscience, weakness to resist sin, and follow obedience: and so here to seek
increase of strength and comfort; for this is the examination urged of the
Apostle as answerable to the nature of this Sacrament. 1. Co. 11.26.27.


In the work it self, men's hearts must be occupied in the whole variety of the
works mentioned and opened above, and so must feel strength and comfort to be
ministered, to stir us up with the whole Church, in the fellowship of this
banquet, sweetly to offer praise to God, in Psalms and spiritual songs. The
continual profit after, is always hence to have increased strength and
spiritual might; ^. Cor. 10.13
and here in all fruits to have refreshing, that eue^ as Elias well refreshed,
went in the strength of that nourishment a long time: So here we being
refreshed, must walk forward in spiritual comfort by the strength thereof;
which we have received, 1. Cor. 10.3.4, 5-etc,
sealed up by this seal already; and further, because we are so inco^passed
about, this profit must make us come often to this banquet, to seal up our
nourishment in Christ daily

FINIS.
To the Christian Reader
FOR recreation no better mean can be kept, then that which is just and even
with the wise man's measure: who said, Be not too just, neither make thy self
too wise: for why should thou make thy self desolate: Be not too wicked or
a fool: for why should thou dye before thy time, Eccle. 7 18.19. For as
they are too just and too wise; which beyond the rule of God his word, abridge
the lawful liberty of honest exercise: so they are too wicked, which either
make no choice, or keep no measure in their recreations. Which thing is
manifest by this, that the first sort, do either by immoderate austeritie,
be^numbe their gifts, or by a superstitious conceit, make a show of godliness,
where the power of it is wanting: The second, do either by excess make
themselves drunken, even to the death, [yea sometimes of their bodies,] or else
by a sweet and fleshely delight do cast themselves into such a sleep, as does
partly spoil their gifts, partly make them slothful and idle to all good
works. For avoiding of both these extremities. I do always with Solomon,
exhort al men to lay good hold upon the latter counsel, least in pastime, they
become wretchles and profane: also not to put back their hand from the
former, least by contempt of an outward blessing, they decay in ane inward
grace. Because [I knowe] that will prove true which Solomon says. He that
fears God, will escape out of all these pitfals.

For the better information of some to whom I am more especially bound* I had
writtin this short remembrance following, minding by private cemmunicating of
the same with them further to provoke their willing minds to make straight
steps unto their feet: least that which is halting, be turned out of the way,
when it ought rather to be healed. Heb. 12.13.

But the persuasions of some who desired to have it common, and the commodity
of more easy communicating of it, this way, has moved me to make it thus
common. The general matter [^ hope] none will mislike. In the particular point
of lot^es, if my reasons after the poisoning of them, by the weight of the
Sanctua^ie, be found too light. I will bear that loss, so the rest, being
pure gold and silver out of God his word, may pass. Yet I warn all, that
when they come to weighe them, they bring not only the Lords waightes: but
also keep a steady and true hand, in the doing thereof.

Prove all: hold fast that which is good: abstain from all appearance of
evil* And if this do thee any good, help me with thy prayers.

Thine in Christ Jesus. D.F.

A SHORT AND PROFItable Treatise of lawful and unlawful recreations, and of
the right use and abuse of those thar are lawful.
The first rule, Of all the benefits of this life.
BEsides godliness contained in the first table, and righteousness in the second:
There is commanded in the whole, Sobriety or temperance, which is the moderate
and sparing use of all bodily benefits, as of food, apparel, rest and
recreation, the which temperance is a means to maintain and increase both the
other. Tit. 2.11. The grace of God teaches us, to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world. 2. Pet 1.6. Join with your virtue knowledge* and with it
temperance, and with that, godliness and brotherly love, etc. Which does show,
that this sparing use of these benefits is commanded, as a nurse or staff of
godliness and righteousness.

2 Declaring more plainly the nature of temperance.
AL these must be sanctified by the word, with prayer before, and thanksgiving
after, yea so used, as every one do it to the glory of God, without offense,
and keep himself within his calling: as for the first part, the Apostle
says, 1. Tim. 4.4.5. For every Creature of God is good, and nothing is to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer. Whereby we gather, if meat and drink, and the use of
marriage, must be sanctified with the word of God and prayer, much more
recreations, which are not of that necessity with the other, and whereby we
are more in danger to fall into abuse, especially the sober minded, who will
not lightly abuse the Creatures of meat and drink: For the second part he
says: 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God: Give no offense, neither to the Jew nor to the
Grecian, nor to the Church of God. And again, The apparel even of Women, must
be such as becomes godliness. Tit. 2. and 3.1. Tim. 2.10. Much more must the
same be understood of recreations, as both the nature of them compared with
the nature of meat and drink (more necessary then recreations) and his
general words, whatsoever do convince.

3 Of the use of them to the glory of God.
TO use these things to the glory of God, is so to use them, as we neither be
drunk or a sleep in them, as the Apostle says, which are the works of the
night and darkness: not of the day. 1. These. 5.6.7.8. To be drunk, it is to be
overcome with the delight or the motions which they procure, so as we fall to
open outrage of swearing, chaffing, fretting, quarrelling, and such like, which
we would never do being sober, in our use of recreations, or any such other
benefits. To sleep in them, is to be overtaken with delight of them, as it
occupies our minds and bodies in such sort, as it makes us vnwatchful
against the motions of sin, as it breaks our reastes, and weaneth us from
some duties of our calling, and the service of God: making us to rest from
these things, as sleep does from our labors; when as all these are given to
the clean contrary end, so the Apostle expounds him self, saying: Let us
not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober. 1. These. 5.6. And our
Savior Christ gives warning; That we be not oppressed with these things,
least that day come on us unawares: and we are commanded, to rejoice in them,
as if we rejoiced not: 1. Cor. 7.30. That is so, as the pleasure we take in
these benefits, be no more hinderance to any good duty of the first or
second Table, then if we had no use of them at all.

4 Of the use of them without offense
TO use with offense, is then to use them, when it edifieth not, or hinders
the weak in godliness, whereas the abstaining from them, brings no hurt to the
abstainers, or at the least very small, as S. Paul in the first to the Cor,
6.12. says: All things are lawful unto me, but all things profit not: All
are lawful unto me, but I will be brought under the power of nothing. Chap.
10.23. All things are lawful unto me, but all things edify me not. Romans
14.20. All things are clean: but evil to him that eats with offense: It is
good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor do any thing whereat thy
brother stumbleth, wherewith he is offended, or weakened.

5 Of the keeping within our calling.
TO keep within the compass of ones calling, is neither to go above our
ability in them, nor yet above those with whom God has sorted us in age,
degree, condition of life and trade: but in diet, apparel, recreation, to
square our selves according to the most sober of our age, degree, condition and
sort of life. Apparel must not be costly. 1. Tim. 2.9. Now that is costly to
every one which is above his ability: And if this be a rule for aparel, much
more in recreation, so that he which does play more away then he may well
without any dout or scruple, bestow upon honest delight (necessary maintenance
of other things, and liberal contribution to the poor proporcionallie to his
measure, being first provided) does abuse his recreation. 2. Sam. 13.18. And
she had a garment of diverse colors; for with such garments were the kings
daughters (that were Virgins) apparelled. So the holy Ghost shows, that David
gave noe occasion to the evil which came on his daughter, because in apparel
(and so in other such benefits) he kept her within the rule appointed, that
is, of her age, degree, and condition of life, which is the cause why he gives
a reason for for it, least the Reader should suppose, that the occasion had bin
partly offered by some such abuse in David his daughter.

Special rules of Recreation.
1 What is a Christian recreation.
A Christian recreation, is an exercise of some thing indifferent, both for the
nature and use of it, only for the necessary refreshing of the body or mind,
or both. So are allowed in the Scriptures the use of the Bow. 2. Sam. 1.18. Of
Music, Nehe. 7.67. Of hunting, Cant. 2.7 but so as we do not stir up, or
provoke Christ with it. Lastly, for the exercise of wit, honest ridles, Iud.
14.

Rules for the better understanding of every part of the declaration of
Christian exercise: And first what is indifferent both in nature and use.

In nature.
AN indifferent thing in nature is that, which is left free, so as we are not
simply commanded or forbidden to use it, but when we shall find it in Christian
wisdom beneficial, or hurtful unto us. Such is not the taking up of the
iesture, behavior or speech of evil men: or the feining of them in plays,
because we are expreslie forbidden to take up the outward fashion or shape of
the lusts of ignorance, 1. Pet. 1.14 where the word [ Suschematizomeno^] which
the holy Ghost uses, signifies the very manner of faining the outward shows
which are used in plays. Such also is not that which Salomo^ speaks of, to
cast firebrands, arrows, and deadly things, and say, Am I not in sport? Pro.
26.18.19. Such is not the dancing of men and women together, which thing
neither agrees with the shamfastnes, of the one, nor with the gravitie of the
other. Nay, the very sight of it in a woman, is found to overwhelm men more
tha^ strong drink, Mark. 6.22. And necessarily draws with it, that which
Solomon gives to unchaste women: That her feet dwell not in the house. Pro.
7.11.

2. In use.
BY a thing indifferent in use, is meant that which is not only free to be
used, but also convenient in that time and place, before those persons where we
are presently to use the same as if the thing be made by the Law unlawful, and
withal to have no good report, praise, or virtue in it, then is it not
indifferent. Phil. 4.8. As dicing, wanton pictures, vain gestures, or what
soever has any show of evil. 1. These. 5.10, 22. Lastly, they are not
indifferent in use, if they give offense, as has bin proved before.

The 3. Rule: Of the only both lawful, and proper end of exercise.
EXercises must be only for the refreshing or strengthening of the body or mind,
or both for by this they differ from all other benefits granted of God.
Therefore as he that oppresses the heart with meat and drink, abuses those
benefits, and his action is unchristian, so he that spe^deth much time,
breaks his rest, weaneth his mind from any duty of godliness, he abuses
exercise or pastime: for of such abuse says Solomon, There is a way which is
right in the sight of men, whose end is the way to death: yea, with laughter
the mind is made heavy, and at the last* gladness is made sorrow. Pro.
14.12.13. Such joy and pastime he calls madness and folly. Eccles. 2.3. So in
the Prophet Esaias. 5.12. a woe is threatened to them, in whose banquets is the
Harp, Violl, Pipe, etc. but the work of the Lord is not looked upon, and they
consider not the work of his hand. So we are commanded, To redeem the time.
Ephesians. 5.16. Which we do not, when our exercises do not make us more fit to all
godly duties.

4 What things are unlawful to be used in recreation.
BEcause recreatio^ must be in indifferent things, neither simply commanded nor
forbidden, therefore things sanctified to some especial and holy use, must not
be made a recreation: as we must not pray, use the word, or such like, for
recreation, but for necessary duty, in that manner which God has prescribed.
Upon this it comes, that I think with diverse godly and learned men, that the
use of a Lot for recreatio^, is unlawful, because a Lot is an especial mean,
whereby God has ordained by himself from heaven, to end such controversies, as
otherwise cannot conveniently be ended, as Pro. 16.23. The Lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposition of it, is of the Lord. So the nature of a Lot
lies wholly in this, that although the thing be of us, yet the disposition is
wholly of God, that is, he uses not here our means of cunning, practice,
strength, stedines of hand, or such like; but takes it wholly to himself. And
this shows the nature of the Lot: so Prove. 18.18. The holy Ghost shows the
only lawful use of it: saying, The Lot remooveth contentions, and makes
partitions amongst the mighty. So showing the only lawful use of it, is to
end controversies, which otherwise cannot convenientlie be ended, for each
contender without the Lot, is too mighty to yield.

First, because as it is meant of an oath, Heb, 6 16. when he says, for men
verily swear by him that is greater than themselves, and an oath for
confirmation, is amongst them an end of all strife, that he would by these
words, not so much teach us that men use an oath to end controversies (which
every one knows) but that God has dedicated, and made an oath holy and
sure, only for that use of necessary deciding of doubts of importance amongst
men: so in the like words in this place of the Proverbes, concerning a Lot,
must be understood in the same sense, not so much to teach us, that a Lot
ended such controversies amongst men (which all know) but that God has
ordained it only for that use.

Secondly, we see that the Scripture makes a Lot, so the sentence of God, as
in the most weighty matters of God and man, of life and death, it is the
very. Oracle and declaration of God his will, wherein man must rest without
any contradiction or motion to the contrary. So Act. 1.24.26. Numb. 26.55.
Levit. 16.8. for matters of God. So Joshua 14. for the matters of life: yea, the
Gentiles themselves knew it to be the very Oracle of God. Jonas. 1.7. Now
such Oracles of God, must not be used for recreation: seeing they are his name,
and must not be vainelie used.

Thirdly, all Lottes used in recreation, do either necessarily draw or
tempt the very best, to horrible profaning of Gods name, as to think or say,
What luck is this! how crooked? Which in plain words, (unless we will
brutishly give God his glory unto Fortune) is, What a God? what perverse and
crooked providence of God is this? Neither is the case here as in other
pastimes, where our own infirmity or want of skill may be blamed for all
imperfection, because in a Lot nothing can be accused, but Gods immediate
direction. From all this I gather, that Dice, dealing of Cards, or such like,
where the matter is laid on hazard (as they call it) or rather God his
providence, without using any cunning of ours to dispose it, is upon the same
reason of a lot unlawful. Neither is it any reason to say, We use it not now,
to end controversies, or to so a weighty use, but only for an honest
recreation: for the end for which we use it, is not of the nature of the
lotte, but only of the use or abuse of it. For when the Jews cast lottes for
our Savior Christ his garments, it was still in the nature of a Lotte, though
the good end of a Lotte was laid aside. And seeing in all these, the whole
disposition of it to try the matter (which is, what cast we shall have, or
what cards we shall have toward a good game) is wholly in the Lord, and
not in any cunning (unless we cogge, cheat, and play false play, which thing
the very Roisters condemn) it is manifest, that it remains in the nature of
a lot, to what end soever we use it. It is manifest (I say) not by my
collection, but by the express declarion of Solomon: yea by the common grant
of all, who say in the lightest matters, Let us put it to lot, chance hazard.
etc.

Lastly, my hearty desire is in the Lord, that if these reasons cannot
persuade my good brethren, to think this unlawful, (which in my judgment is
evidentlie proved to be so) that they would (as I hope they will) be
persuaded upon the reasons of the holy Ghost following, to abstain from that
which although it were lawful, yet they may exchange with many other
recreations, as pleasant and of greater praise, as Chesse, Music, etc. First,
because we shall by it offend the church of God, which the Apostle expressly
forbids to be done in ane indifferent matter. 1. Cor. 10. For the church of
God, for the most part, both long ago and in these days, has left it upon
these reasons: and we cannot be ignorant, that many godly persons with grief
will marueill to hear it used of us. For maintenance of this reason, the
Apostle says in the 14. unto the Romans: If thy Brother be grieved for thy
meat, thou walk not according to Charity. Secondly, because we shall
contrary to the like Commandment of the Apostle, offend those which are
without. 1. Cor. 10. when they hearing we profess so much zeal in religion,
good order, and other such like, they will say. Yet they use these vain
pastimes, as well as others: yea when they may have better. Of which the
Apostle says expressly in the 14. chap to the Romans, Why should your good be
blasphemed? that is, evil spoken of. Thirdly, because they shall confirm
others, who cannot but greatly abuse it, when by using others in steed of it,
they may draw them to a right and lawefull use of recreation.

FINIS.

