AN ANTIQVODLIBET, OR AN ADVERTISEMENT TO BEWARE OF SEcular Priests.

Romans 16. verse. 17. 18. 17 I beseech you brethren, mark then diligently which
cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned,
and avoid them.

18 For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple.

MIDDELBVRGH, By Richard Schilders, Printer to the States of Zealand. 1602.

THE GENERAL HEADS and contents of the Antiquodlibet are as follows.
1 That there is an insufficiency in the Quilibet to debate matters of
Learning. 2 That the principal drift of the Quodlibets, in the purpose and
practice of the Priests, is the reestablishing of the Popes authority amongst
us, with the fall of her Majesty and the Gospel, so far forth as in them
lies. 3 That the contention betwixt the Jesuit and Secular Priest, being of
such nature, and in such degree as is pretended, is a color and pretext only:
or in case it be unfeigned on their part, yet on the part of the Superiors and
heads of their faction, it is interteyned out of a policy dangerous to her
Majesty and the State. 4 That toleration of Popish Religion is persuaded by the
Quilibet, upon idle and false grounds.
AN ANTIQVODLIBET OR ADVERTISEMENT TO BEWARE OF Secular Priests.
CAP. 1.
Wherein is laid open the insufficiency of the Quilibet for matters of
Learning.

THis question should pass untouched, were it not that I hold it meet, to
encounter the opinion conceived of the Quilibet, as well for the rarenes of his
wit, as for his dexterity to discourse of any questionable subject, specially
such as is of State or Religion. With which conceit it may probably be
presumed that himself concurreth, considering how gloriously he rufleth in
words and sentences: and with what contempt he censureth, not the Jesuits
alone, against whom chiefly in his Quodlibets he pretends hostility, but
the Professors of the Gospel also: who in the account of this Secular Priest,
are peremptorily held for Grossum caputs, and to have not one learned man
amongst them. It shall not be amiss therefore to take a view of his
sufficiency, and to examine how well he is qualified for the office of a
Censor, and this service of Booke-making, wherein he is employed. I hold it for
clear and confessed, that such as are fit for employments of this nature, are
of a discerning and judicious spirit, able to deliver their apprehensions by
weight and measure, without being subject to palpable and ridiculous
ouersights, specially in a short discourse. Where the work grows large, the
Artificer finds pardon, though sometime he slumber or sleep, while he
fashioneth the same, having had care to pollish and grace the first members
thereof. But this Priesting Quilibet, howsoever he rest admired by some of his
faction, or others who have hitherto beheld him with a careless and partial eye,
yet being seriously examined, will be found liable in all reasonable
construction, to the imputation of extraordinary defects in judgment: his
proceeding being such in the very front of his book, and in an argument easy
and of few pages, as is without salt, and unworthy the least regard. To
justify my charging of him in this behalf, I will be bold to sift and lay
open the workmanship of his preface: which being weighed in the true and
indifferent balance of reason, will appear to be such as I have said. His
preface is of two parts: the one, a comprehension of certain principles: the
other, an advertisement of the motives, inducing the Quilibet to deliver his
Decacordon by way of a quodlibeticall method, and to publish the same.

The principles are in number five, collected and reserved by him (as it
seems) for some fit opportunity, whereby to give taste, unto the world of the
excellency of his knowledge, without purpose to perform any service by them,
as shall appear. I will in this place repeat them: though in fewer terms
then some of the^ are delivered, yet such as express the full and entire sense
they carry in the Preface. They are as follows.

1 That a fool or dulhead may by show of argument be forced to acknowledge the
cleerest ax^om in Divinity or other profession to be false.

2 That there are as many examples for vice, as for virtue: for heresy, as for
Religion.

3 That there is no invention, but another wit can equal it by inuenting the
same: which he proves out of Eccles. chap. 1. verse. 9.

4 That all things on earth are subject to mutation and downfall.

5 That the generation of one is the corruption of another.

Now before they be brought into muster by the Priest, he does honor them
with a remarkable and very worthy preamble. Having said that experience
makes the case clear, touching the inexpugnable condition and nature of them,
he adds that it does so in all arts and professions,

Wherein humane capacity (that is the wit of man) does show the souls
excellency in apprehension, discourse, and judgment of things, by invention,
moral conjecture, and the wit of man*

Let us examine how learnedly he does here acquit himself. He says, that the
wit of man shows the souls excellency by invention, moral conjecture, and
the wit of man: and so makes the wit of man in this work, both a principal
efficient, and yet a secondary and different mean from it self. If it were
said by any, that Secular Priesthood conuerteth souls by auricular confession,
by a devout Mass, and by Secular Priesthood: I think you would hold such a
speech, to proceed from some craze in the brain. He affirms also that the
wit of man shows the souls excellency, by invention in the apprehension,
discourse and judgment of things: as if there were a possibility in invention,
to be a mean in this behalf. When the thing is once invented and disclosed,
the faculty and act of invention does forthwith determine, without yielding any
address for directing the wit in judging: God having so bounded and
distinguished the faculties of natural reason, that they cannot in their
several and proper works confer the one to the other, any reciprocal
furtherance. When the builder has singled out and made choice of his stone
and timber: the practice of this particular skill, does together with the
choice immediately cease and expire: it being not able to assist and guide him
in the artificial structure of the house.

Further, he adds that the wit of man shows the souls excellency by moral
conjecture. Why not also by Mathematical or Physical demonstration? As he
does overmuch abridge the subject, wherein humane capacity does make known the
dignity of the soul, it being not shut up within the compass of things
iudiciable, but extended to inuenting likewise, and therefore of an equal
reach with the faculty of natural reason: so falls he short in the account
of the means, whereby the surpassing worth of the soul is deciphered. For
besides invention and moral conjecture (of which the one is general, the
other a particular judging restrained to some special kind of object) there
are to do this service unto the soul, as well other transcendent means,
whereby the truth, consequence, and order of things with their contraries is
discerned, as in each special Art and profession other particular actions in
great variety.

You see now the preamble to the principles and the credit of wit he has
gained by it. It remains to examine the principles themselves. He that
should read them in the Quilibet, and consider both the multiplicitie of words
wherein they are comprised, and the honorable recommendation yielded unto them:
would take them for such as are unmatchable, and rather inspired into this
Priest, then observed by him. But if again he shall consider, that the two
first are childish, and unworthy so great a title: that the third is
expugnable, or at least doubtful, and so no principle: that four of them, if
not all five, are produced and mustered without sense and scope, other then to
serve as mock-chimnies do in a large house: that the demonstration of them is
defective and frivolous: he cannot but wonder out of what idle conceit it
proceeded, that they should in the front and eminentest part of his Decacordon
be exhibited and represented to the world.

That the third principle may justly be excepted against, may appear by the
testimony yielded from holy and profane histories to some persons for
singularity of wit and knowledge. Here of the Quilibet does minister unto me
an instance page 216: where he reports that Solomon had the rarest and
chiefest gift that ever was given to man His meaning herein I take to be
agreeable with that which in the third and fourth chapter of the first of the
Kings* is by the holy Ghost recorded of the said King, touching his excelling
in wisdom above all other of precedent, present and future ages. Whereupon I
deduce this conclusion: that if no man ever did or shall equal Solomon in
wisdom, then might he invent something which cannot possibly fall within the
reach of any other man's invention. But how then shall we answer that divine
sentence of the same King? who says that there is nothing new under the Sun.
Solomon gives us hereby to understand, that for as much as al things which
have come to their period, do by generation or other means return, though
not in particular, yet under the title and subsistence of their common nature,
we must in that regard account nothing for new or different from that which
has bin. Whereupon I infer that the Priest cannot without wrong allege the
said sentence for clearing his third principle, which speaks of inuenting the
selfsame thing in particularitie and not in the general.

That these principles are idly and without drift alleged, I make it evident
hereby. Whatsoever is comprised in this preface besides the said principles and
their illustration, concerns the motives inducing the Priest to deliver his
Decacordon by a quodlibeticall method and to publish the same: so as these
worthy principles must either be imploved to this service of persuading the
choice of the said method, and of notifying the end for which the Decacordon is
published, or else be inferred to no purpose. If the citing of them be to employ
them in those two services: then have they some logical coherence with them:
and so shall it be no absurdity or inconsequence to say: A Dulhead may by show
of argument be forced to acknowledge the clearest axiom whatsoever, to be
false.

Therefore I a poor Secular Priest, have thought it sit both to write my
Decacordon in a quodlibeticall method, and to publish the same.



Or thus.

There are as many examples of vice as of virtue: and the generation of one
thing is the corruption of another.

Therefore I the Priestly Quilibet, have thought it meet to write my
Decacordon in a quodlibeticall method, and to publish the same.

If these deductio^s be warrantable in common sense: the^ the consequence from
Hannibal ad portas unto Mill meaesiculis errant in montibus agnae shall go
for logical and current. But if they shall pass under censure for such as
grow from a debilitie in the brain: I hope the Quilibet will disclaim the
allegation of them for the employment above mentioned: and rather confess the
presenting of them in public to be without all intent of using them, then
expose his wit and priesthood to an imputation of that nature. But he may
happily plead for his defense in this behalf the marginall note, whereby we
are certified that the author in all these five principles does clearly
convince the Jesuits faction of many gross errors. Is it fitting with the
reputation of a quodlibetical Doctor to range and muster principles in a text
which have no correspondence with any member thereof, and afterward to adresse
the reader to the margent, there to be informed of the employment whereto they
are destined? And yet the margent does not here satisfy. It tells us that the
author conuinceth the Jesuits by them: which being supposed, yet can it not be
inferred, that therefore they were transported into the text to that end. But
how does he skirmish with them against a Jesuit? The Jesuit holds rules
opposite to these, viz. That their general with his prouincials cannot err:
and that their order is a state of most perfection. Whereupon it follows that
either the Priest in his principles, or the Jesuit in his opposite rules,
aberreth from truth. Howsoever the Jesuit dote in his maxims: yet if the Priest
discharge against them no other shot but his principles, he will not be able to
give them the defeat and route: the opposition being not such, as that in the
encounter the one must of necessity supplant the other. Besides, if the later
maxim of the Jesuit be repugnant to the said principles: how comes it that
the Quilibet holds the like? page 6. of his pref. ver. 4. and 5.

Now concerning the Demonstration of them: It has pleased the Quilibet to
single out the fifth principle only, and to grace it with his painful
endeavors: the rather (I think) for that he borrowed it from Aristotle against
the Philosophers will: and would hereby give satisfaction for the indignity
offered by him to the said principle. The Demonstration is drawn from an
induction, and stands chargeable with an unsuitable applying of particulars:
with untruth in some part: and beside with intermixed absurdities.

That the application in some members of the induction is impertinent: the
first period of the second page of the preface will testify with me. For there
propounding unto himself a proof of the fifth principle, he falls through a
defect in judgment to such a course of exemplifying, as naturally serves to
clear and conclude the fourth. Excellencies (says he) complexions,
Majesty's, powers, foundations, Commonwealths, Societies, Corporations and
states are subject to decay and fall. Hereupo^ it follows, that each thing
and person (taking the induction in the sense of a part for the whole) is
subject to a decay and fall: which is absolutely the fourth principle: and thus
by accident besides the Quilibets purpose concluded. If upon the Antecedent you
would infer that principle of Aristotle: there will appear a disproportion
betwixt the argument and the conclusion. For the argument mentions not a
generation of the particulars with a precedent or concurrent corruption of some
other thing, (which it should have performed in case the proceeding had been
suitable to the Question) but only a ^all and dissolution of them.

As through this and some other impertinencies, which I do with regard t^
brevity forbear to debate, the induction halteth: so does it offer unto us an
untruth in that particular of Moses law: the generation whereof is by the
Quilibet made to be the plain corruption of the law natural, page 4. As if
when men beheld that knowledge diuulged and set forth to the eye as it were in
characters of gold, which before rested secret and confined within the
unsearchable cabinet of their hearts, they were then occasioned the rather to
stumble, having a double direction and light to guide them in the train of
their life. We may with greater probability think that the Lord of heaven
discerning the law, which he had imprinted in the heart of man, to be defaced
first through the defection of Adam, and after by an irrespectiue and
dislimited carriage of life in his descendants, did out of wisdom to prevent
the total abolition thereof, and out of mercy to reclaim his people to a
course of duty, resolve upon a new and second impression of the said law:
which upon the mount Sinai he accordingly performed. But let us see how he
handles this question. I will do him the credit to spend a little time in
unfolding the frame of his dispute herein. He reasons thus: If presently upon
the publication of Moses law men fell to infidelity and idolatry, and not
before: then upon the generation of Moses law ensued the corruption of the law
natural.

But presently upon the publication of Moses law, men fell to infidelity and
idolatry, and not before.

Therefore upon the generation of Moses law ensued the corruption of the law
natural.



If by infidelity he note the state of deprauation or the original and root
of all inconformitie to the law: the proposition may pass as blameless:
whereas if under that term he conceive a distinct and particular sin, and
such as is a branch it self: then may we charge the proposition with
inconsequence. For man's freedom for a time from some two or more special
corruptions, does not prove his freedom from al other during the same time.
David could not be taxed with the crime of blood and adultery till the time of
his defiling the bed of Vria: if hereupon it should be concluded that David
till the said time had observed the Moral law: I think the Quilibet would
not endure so loose a sequel.

Touching the assumption: howsoever he interpret the word of Infidelity, he
cannot justify the sense thereof: it being contradictory to the Author of all
truth, who in the sixth of Genesis mentions a visible malignant Synagogue,
distinguishing it from the true Church. Now where there is a Synagogue of that
quality, their infidelity, which is as it were the very life and form thereof,
must necessarily rest and bear sway. The same Spirit also in the said chapter
setting down the corruption of the heart of man before the flood, and thereby
discovering with what disobedience and rebellion to the law of nature he had
demeaned himself till that universal deluge, avouches that the heart is
depra^ed and wicked, not in some thoughts, but in every thought whatsoever: not
in some particle of it self, and of his thoughts, but in every part and
particle. not at some time, but without intermission continually. If then the
hearts of the people that lived before the flood, were such as they are
described in the said chapter: it follows of necessity that they were fallen
to infidelity. For if they believed the promises and comminations of their
Creator: then were their hearts at some time in some apprehensions and parts of
duty free from that touch of corruption before mentioned. Besides in the 24. of
Matthew, Christ himself charge them with an exceeding carnal security, and
particularly with ignorance of the inundation to come, till they beheld it with
their eyes Whereupon I infer, that if No^ failed not in the denunciation
thereof, and his ministry of calling them to repentance, they grew thus
carnally secure and ignorant upon a resolved disbeliefe and contempt of the
word of the Lord* This infidelity of that people, is noted also in the 11. to
the Hebr. and by the Apostle Peter in the third of his first epistle.

Further, that infidelity and idolatry reigned in the world many years before
the promulgation of the law of Moses, appears by the 24. chapter of Iosuah,
where it is recorded that the ancestors and predecessors of Abraham worshipped
strange Gods. And in the one and thirtith of Gene^^s, Labaa is reported to have
had his Idols and marmon^ets. Now if in those families, where God entertained
his church, idolatry and unbelief found approbation and place: what shall we
judge of the nations and people extract from the line of Ch^n? or of those
which issued and branched out of the stock of Iapheth? The wickedness of Sodom
and G^^^^r: the Gods of the Egyptians and their Sorcerers in the time of the
Israelites pilgrimage there: the full measure of Atheism and other strange
iniquities in the land of Canaan, before the Lord would proceed to displant
and extirpate the inhabitants thereof, will testify against the assumption of
this syllogism, and eu^^t that infidelity and idolatry did not then begin to
advance themselves in public, when Moses upon the mount Sinai, received from
the hand of the Lord the Moral law.

But the Quilibet finding his assumption subject to question, has thought
meet to yield it this proof: When the distinction of Jew and Gentill first
began, then also began that fall to infidelity and idolatry, and not before.

But presently upon the publication of the laws of Moses, the distinction of
Jew and Gentill first began.

Therefore upon the publication of Moses laws, began also that fall to
infidelity and idolatry, and not before.



For answer to the proposition, it must be reme^b^ed that the effect and the
cause or occasion thereof do not always concur in time* it being clear both in
reason and experience, that where the occasion and the event have a coherence
not of nature and necessity, but dependant on accident and the will of man, the
one may a long time precede the other. And so in this case of the above named
distinction, though it be supposed to have taken beginning not before the
inacting and delivery of the law Mosaicall* yet might the occasion thereof,
namely the fall to infidelity and idolatry, be of some growth many years
before.

The assumption is of a more apparent untruth. For howsoever the name of Jew
and Gentill was not of so great antiquity and note: yet the thing it self was
in ^ss^ and nature long before the flood: and so, many hundreds of years
before the publishing of the Decalogue. There is in the sixth chapter of Genesis
a record delivered in express terms of two visible and distinct Churches:
the one of the Sons of God: the other of the Sons of men. Further, in the
17. chap. of Genesis, the said distinction betwixt the true and the false
Church, is by a public act and ordinance of the Lord diuulged and famed to
all the world. For to the covenant made with his people, which could not be
unknown even to the inconfederate, he added Circumcision as it were the broad
seal of his favor, and to be likewise a notorious and distinguent mark of
his Church: So as now the world rested divided into the Circumcised and
uncircumcised: both aspectable and conspicuous to the eye. Besides, as if
Circumcision were not on the behalf of his people a sufficient badge of
distinction: the same Lord in the third of Exodus does renounce and disclayme
all other nations, with this public profession that he is not the God of them,
but the God of the Hebrews: the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: and that this
shall be his name. And this much Moses must proclayme and no^^^ie before
Pharao. Here then the Lord by this his profession and proclamation, as well
before Pharao and the Egyptians, as in the ear of his select Israel, does
set out and publish a very special and eminent difference betwixt his Church
and all other Synagogues whatsoever. Hereby therefore it appears, that before
the publication of the Decalogue, the distinction of Gods Church from the
profane and rejected assemblies of the world, did exist both in nature and in
common acknowledgement.

As this is incontroulable, so can it not be denied that there passed at least
400. years after the said publication upon the Mount Sinai, before the
distinction of the true Church from the rest of the nations was made public
and acknowledged under this term and title of the Jew. For if the whole
Church was so entitled and styled, then all the tribes received denomination
from the Tribe of Judah, within the compass of the years above mentioned. But
this is convinced by the holy history: wherein we find that each Tribe did
first for a long time communicate in the appel^ation of Israel: and then after
the defection in the time of Rehoboam, that as they were ranged under the
obedience of several Princes, so they were severed and distinguished in title:
the ten Tribes reteyning the common name of Israel: the other the title of
Judah, which was proper to the Tribe. Had there been within the said time a
real and known communication of this title in general with all the Tribes,
then the occasion of calling them answerably thereto being so frequent, it is
more then probable that the holy Ghost the inditer of the history, would not in
euer^ passage have omitted it: And then likewise in the case of this
communication* Jeroboam and his successors should have been entitled Kings of
the Jews: and so that memorable difference of name betwixt the Kings of Judah
and Israel, observed in the history with special regard, by this confusion of
titles utterly abolished.

The Priest not contented to have proposed a bare affirmation of this
assumption nitherto refelled, has out of the gravity of his judgment supplied
it with the strength of this argument: All men lived under the law of nature
without distinction, till the publication of the law Mosaicall, and no longer.

Therefore presently upon the publication of the said law, the distinction
between Jew and Gentill began, and not before.



That there was before the said publication upon the Mount Sinai, a current and
known distinction of the true Church from the false, has been already
cleared: so as one clause of the Antecedent prohibited unto us, needs no
further discussing. That all men lived under the law of nature till the time
of Moses, is refelled by that, whereby the existence of Gods Church, and the
distinction thereof from the contrary long before the reprinting of the Moral
law, has been proved and justified For if there were an holy Church, then was
their faith in the Messiah: and so consequently the Gospel: under which as a
supernatural grace, and not only under the guidance of the law natural, the
faithful since the fall of Adam in all times lived. The promise made to our
first Parents: the Sacrifice of Abel: the walking of Enoch with God: the
preaching of repentance by Noe: his offering of burnt offerings after the
flood: the covenant made with Abraham and the promise of the blessed seed: the
repetition and ratifying thereof with Isaac and Jacob: their careful endeavors
for the instruction of their children: all these particularities do testify
that they had for direction of their life not only an address from nature,
but some divine and extraordinary informations from the Lord.

Thus much concerning that member of the Induction, drawn from the generation
of the law Mosaicall, and the corruption of the law natural supposed to ensue
thereupon.

The like untruth is presented unto us page 7. in the exception there made of
the Popish priesthood, against that principle of the certain decay of all
things. For the said priesthood being a mere forgerie and of direct
contradiction to the doctrine of the Gospel, as it has already received an
irrecouerable wound by the sword of the Spirit, so must it to the incredible
comfort of the true Church, deliver in the Lords good time the last gasp. But
the Quilibet ^reameth upon an eternity of this priest^ood: and concludes it
out of 110. Psalm. thus: David says: Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech.

Therefore Popish priesthood is eternal.



Here the Quodlibeticall Doctor discovers both his ignorance and an act of
blasphemy. For what the spirit of God by the mouth of David delivers of that
omni potent King Christ Jesus as his prerogative proper and incommunicable, the
sam^ this inconsiderate Priest does interp^^ and apply as meant not only of
that gra^ Dagon the Pope of Rome, but of ever base and mercenary sacrificule.
That David, or rather God the Father by David speaks it of Christ: Christ
himself ^^ the 22 chapter of Matthew. does expresse^ testify: That the said
prerogative is pec^liar to Christ, and without possibility deriuation to any
other, may appear by that excellent discourse thereof in (...) Epistle to the
Hebr. chap. 7. out of whi^^ chapter we may thus conclude for (...) most holy
priesthood of Christ, again that Antichristian rasure of all iug^^
Masse-babiers: A Priest after the order of Melchisede^^ is without carnal
rites in consecr^^ ordained immediately by God with oath, is eternal in person,
and thereupon eternal in Priesthood, and so a perfect Savior. Hebr. chap. 7.
verse. 16. 21. 24. 25.

But no Pope or Shaueling is ordained by God himself with an oath, and without
carnal rites in consecration: none of them eternal in person, and for that
cause none of them eternal in Priesthood and able to Save: whereas every one
of these prerogatives do agree to Christ and to him only.

Therefore no Pope or Shaueling is a Priest after the order of Melchisedech,
but Christ only.



This may suffice to diseternize and shor^^n the Popish Priesthood: to the
establi^^ing whereof to draw a logical conse^^ence from the Priesthood of
Christ, is (...) less impossible then for some lame ^ephibosheth, to advance
himself by one (...) leap from Dan to Beershebab.

There remain associated with the in^^tion certain absurdities, of less
mo^ent I confess then the untruths before ^uted, yet such as serve to deto^t
the in^fficiency of the Quilibet. To omit the ^^ference he makes betwixt a
ground in divinity and an article of our faith: his ascribing of paradoxes unto
Orators: his senseles comparison of Societies, that they have their fates with
a no less fearful eclipse of their former same, then a notable diminution of
their wo^ted glory: Can it proceed from judgment, to affirm that the whole
body mystical of Christ consists of three estates. Ecclesiastical, Temporal
and Monastical? page 4. It should seem that the party from whom the Quilibet
borrowed this distribution of Christ's mystical body, lent it the poor Priest
by way of disport, and to expose him to the derision and taunt of others. For
what stayne or ridiculous imperfection may befall unto a partition, with the
same this distribution is deformed. First, the parts of it are vnsortable with
the whole. For the body of Christ* which is the entire company of the Sainte^
in heaven and earth that are chosen in him to eternal life, being spiritual,
and far remo^ed from the eye, in case it be distinguished into parts, must
have such as an of the same quality and nature with the whole not such as are
corporal and visible there being no affinity betwixt things mystical and
sensible, spiritual, and carnal Now the parts of the distribution in hand,
are material and subject to sense: and consequently of an unsuitable and
opposite quality to the total divided. And therefore an impossibility in the
total to be distributed unto them. Secondly, whereas it may be pleaded that
howsoever the body of Christ, so far forth as it is mystical and spiritual,
be incapable of the said parts, yet so far as it is visible on earth, it may
be divided into them: I must except against this plea as incompetent: it being
an extrauagancy from the matter in question, which is of the whole body of
Christ, and not of one member thereof: of a thing mystical, not of any visible
subject. Besides, it being supposed and set down for a distribution of the true
Church on earth: yet shall it not be warrantable, but offend through a gross
impropriety. For whereas by the law of distribution, the parts ought to carry
a proper and reciprocal affection to the whole: here in the case propounded,
the parts are of too large a compass and reach, they being not peculiar to the
Church of God, but common to heathenish and profane Synagogues, Pharao in
Egypt, the Philistines in Palestina, the old Romans and Grecians in their
several countries, had in former times, as likewise the Turks and other
infidels at this day, not only estates temporal, but degrees also and orders
Ecclesiastical. Thirdly, though again supposed that these parts do agree
only with the ^rew Church: yet because they are not of a real coherence with
each church at the same time, or with the same church at all times: the
distribution into them is frivolous. Fourthly, we may with no less justice
charge the said distribution with redundancy of parts. For the estate
Monastical, is either of no use to Gods Church; or of some use and service
thereto. If of no use, yea, rather an impediment and bar to the performance of
duties to God and man in public societies: then being repugnant to the law
natural and moral, it cannot hold the place and office of a part in the body
or church of Christ. If it be of some use and service: the same is
Ecclesiastical or civil* so as this Monastical condition shall not be a
different member from the former estates, but comprised under the one or the
other. Fifthly, as if he had not already in the said distribution folded up a
sufficient number of absurdities, it pleases him to make it not only
redundant, but halting also and defective. For the estate of Popes and
Cardinals, being not purely Ecclesiastical or temporal, but raised out of the
mixture and union of both swords, cannot be raunged distinctly and severally
under any one of the estates specified, but must of necessity make a fourth
order or degree in the church, or rest sequestered from the same.

With these his Priestly disputes, I will couple the disgraciue and unworthy
conceit he has of our most worthy Country. For delivering his opinion by
whom the honors point for martial exploytes these later years has been kept,
he bestows the garland upon the Spaniards, partly out of partiality and
affection to them, whom in his Quodlibets he pretends to hate, and partly
out of malice to the Religion of such, who to the incredible honor o^ her
Majesty and this State, have managed the principal charges of Military
employments amongst us. I will not derogate from the Spanyard: but I cannot
yield him the precedence herein. For whether we call into comparison the
sufficiency of the Commanders, the quality of the service undertaken by them,
the politic carriage and resolute execution thereof, or lastly the success
that has ensued: we shall find that the Spanyard is equalled in all these
particulars, and in some of them exceeded as well by our Generals of most
honorable rank and State, as by our Commanders of inferior place and
dignity. But I will not further insist upon this comparison: it having been of
late very accurately handled.

Hitherto have we examined the principles, and such their incidents as are se^
down by the Quilibet. We are now to consider the moriues, which have induce^
him to deliver his Decacordon by a quodlibeticall method, and to publish the
same He does impart with us the special inducements to the choice of this
method in a period that offends not in shortness (...) being a comprehension but
of fifty larg^ lines, parenthesed not oftener then in seu^^^ places. To
facilitate the vnderstandin^ whereof, I hold it not amiss to couch it this
compendious form: Because al things and persons here on e^^^ are subject to a
change and downf^^^ hereupon there arising so many thousand absurdities, which
cannot be set down in a positive discourse without loss of labor: I have
therefore thought upon this easiest method of Quodlibets, whereby to deliver my
Decacordon: not doubting but it will satisfy all well affected parties, and
prevent as well just occasion of complaint, as any evasion or means to escape
from disclosing our knowledge. page 7. 8. of his pref.

My purpose is not to spend time in weighing each particular motive. I will
only dispute the chiefest: it being one of ^is five principles: which why he
has culed out and employed rather then the rest ^o this service, they being in
this behalf ^ll alike serviceable, cannot well be discer^ed. But let us
enquire into the service ^erformed by it: whereof we may take ^nowledge by
this his course of reasoning: All things and persons on earth, be subject to a
change and downfall.

Therefore have I made choice of this quodlibeticall method for delivering my
Decacordon.



He might well have spared his principle, and reserved it for some other
employment, since the service of consequences which it yields in this
syllogisticall action, though it be drawn even from the utmost limits of the
earth, is yet so strange and exorbitant. For if the alterable condition of all
things and persons on earth does justly occasion the choice of this method:
then the consideration hereof (the said method being supposed to be the best of
all other) should have forced all writers both ancient and modern,
Ecclesiastic and profane, howsoever the matters deduced by them were
qualified, to a continual use of it: all things and persons on earth in the
time of each several writer being of the like mutable constitution and nature
they are now of: so as either this respect of mutability and decay in all
things is insufficient to persuade the practice of this way in the frame of
discourses, or the authors who have omitted it, stand chargeable with a
special oversight. But to fortify the consequence, the Quilibet pretends
that the brittle stat^ of things does, in the case he has in hand breed so
many thousand absurdities no^ disposeable in a positive discourse without loss
of labor, as that he is for such regar^ moved to think upon this method by
way of Quodlibets. For answer whereto: first, it is not unknown that
absurdity does originally grow out of the disposing of such notions or terms
in a sentence as yield a falsehood: (truth and absurdity being incompatible)
which being subscribed unto, there issues from thence an infinity of
absurdities and disagreements to common sense and reason. If then the root,
from whence they spring, be other then ^he decayable constitution of things
on ^arth: the said consequence receives no ^trength from this plea. Secondly,
it is ^ot the multiplicity of different cases that ^isableth a positive
discourse to compre^end them, but an insufficiency in us to ^ispute and order
them. For if we shall ^ote out and distinguish each particular ^ubiect offered
to be treated on, then (...) it by the light of pregnant and sound ^uidence,
and lastly, marshall in their pro^er ranks and places, all and singular the
^uestions and several illustrations of them: ^e shall not need to fetch from
the consi^eration of the nature and state of things ^n heaven and earth, any
inducement to ^he intertayning of this or that method: it being not material,
so as our preceding in discourse be such as I have spoken of, whether the case
presented to demur on be propounded by way of interrogation, with freedom left
for pro and contra, or set down without the circumstance of interrogatorie
terms, with liberty notwithstanding to debate and resolve al difficulties and
scruples that shall occur.

There belongs to this general question of the method chosen by the Quilibt,
a justification in particular of his quodlibetical distemper and brabble
against the Jesuits. Which because it discouers not only the weakness of his
judgment in an ordinary and clear position of theology, but his colorable
pretext also of drawing into dispute her Majesty's proceedings and and other
matters of like nature and moment, I judge it meet to bring it under trial
and examination. The argument ^^ sed by him to justify this his reverend and
priestly brablation against the Jesuits, is drawn from the greater to the
less, and is thus concluded: If we may without all sin and scandal dispute
pro and contra of God, wheth^^ he or the Devil be to be honored: the^ may we
dispute pro and contra of the Jesuits.

But we may without all sin and scandal dispute pro and contra of God,
whether he or the Devil be to be honored.

Therefore may we dispute pro and contra of the Jesuits.



How this syllogism will relish with a Jesuit, I know not. It may be upon
taste thereof, he will approve it, as being guilty of the Quilibets drift
herein, or at least ready to hallow in and concur with him in the same upon
notice given: as the manifold pamphlets diuulged by that viperous progeny,
which ca^ breathe naught else but calumniations and proiects of treason against
Princes, do sufficiently testify. But leaving the Jesuit in this behalf to
his liking, I will deliver my conceit of the argument proposed. I do therefore
except against the Assumption, as containing not only matter of untruth, but
of impiety also: and do hold the inference depending thereon very
prejudicial to the State of Princes. That it is of a manifest falsehood and
repugnancie to the law of God, may appear by calling into consideration the
maine scope of the third Commandment, which is, that all mention of God should
be honorable and worthy his Majesty. Now to dispute pro and contra of God,
whether he or the Devil be to be honored, cannot stand with that honor and
reverence which is due to so glorious and fearful a Majesty. For by this
course of dispute we are drawn to avouch and prove that mighty Lord, at
whose name every knee should bow, and at whose words every heart should
tremble, to be destitute of those divine attributes of holiness, eternity,
omnipotency, wisdom, justice, mercy, and to ascribe them unto the Devil.
How the Priest will free this proceeding from scandal and blasphemy, I can not
discern. He will happily allege that as it does lay reproach and dishonor upon
God, to deprive him (out of opinion or affection) in our disputes of his divine
and essential attributes, and to appropriat^ them unto Satan, so if it be done
upon a good and warrantable intent, it cannot then fall under the title of
blasphemy. For answer whereto, let it be remembered that no action, which in
it self and in the nature thereof is a mere sin, can by any good intent of
the Actor be made a conformity to the law of God. For were a good intent thus
qualified, as that it could alter and rectify in the sight of God the means
subordinate thereto: then should humane device take place in the true worship
of the Lord, and in the case of so ready an apology and pretense, as this of
good intention, few would be found who would not stand upon peremptory terms
of justifying their courses before the tribunal of Christ. Now if any man
shall think it questionable whether the vndeifying of that eternal and
omnipotent Spirit, and the crowning of Satan with the glory and majesty of
the Godhead, be an action in it self, and in the nature thereof contradictorie
to the will and statutes of the immortal King and lawgiuer: he may with like
reason doubt whether an acknowledgement of the true Iehoua for our God only,
and a carriage with all reverence and honor toward him on our part, be
conmaunded in the Decalogue. If then the said action be originally an
aberration from the law, how can it receive from any intent of man, though
never so good, this pr^rogatiue of being made correspondent to the same?
whereas it is a principle known and undeniable, that ill is not to be done,
that good may grow thereof in case the intention of the Agent could privilege
and dispense with the pollution of our actions, the said principle should
contain an idle direction or restraint of our proceedings. Further, if the act
in question be not in it self a disobedience to the law, but of a nature
indifferent and newterall: then some transferring of the Deity from the true
God unto the Devil, and some premeditate mention of his most blessed name
accompanied with terms of the highest blasphemy, shall find in the Decalogue
no prohibition. Then likewise are we not commanded, without calling into
question and doubt, to believe and rest persuaded by testimony of the word and
Spirit that Iehoua only is our God, and he only to be worshipped. But if both
the one and the other be in theology a great incongruitie: then the said act
can in no sort partake of newtralitie. But let us ^ebate a little what should
be the int^nt and end of disputing against God. There is in all probable
discourse but this ^ne ground and cause thereof that bear a show of lawfulnes:
namely, an inten to confirm our judgment in the truth upon sight and
conference of the weak arguments concluded against God, with such as are
alleged for him. But this purpose of reenforcing our judgment in the truth,
cannot warrant any dispute in this behalf. For our judgment touching the
divine nature and actions of God, and the honor due unto him, having already
received the greatest confirmation that may be from the voice of God himself
in the Scriptures, from the public and constant testimony of the Church, from
the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost, from the evidence yielded and
proclaimed by the creation of Heaven and earth: the intendment and endeavor of
this crooked and left handed proof, whereof we speak, must ^^ the presence
of so excellent a brightness, as the demonstration specified does afford,
utterly quail and rest in the same account, as a poor silly candle does, that
for enlarging and better clearing the surpassing luster of the Sun, is
lighted at noone day. Besides, why should the sight of a lean misshapen
argument, invented and alleged against God, rather confirm the disputers
judgment in the truth, then give him cause to accuse the dulnes of his wit,
that could not invent a better? May he not apprehend also, that others of a
deeper reach and knowledge then himself, are able to disclose some proofs of
strength, and such as he cannot answer, and so rest doubtful and no whit
confirmed? Nay, may not the disputer himself, in the search of allegations
against God, stumble on an argument of such constitution and temper, as neither
himself nor some others can resolve? In which case this course will be so far
from confirming the judgment in the truth, that on the contrary it will rather
occasion the suspecting of it, and serve to strengthen erroneous conceits of
God. Experience has made it clear, that this course of disputing against God,
is of a dangerous consequence, and as it were a bridge for Atheism and other
impieties to pass into the opinion and life of man. The quodlibet propounded
by the Serpent, to our grane and prime mother, against the most just and holy
proceedings of our Creator with her and Adam, thereby to raise in her
apprehensions of Soueraynty, and a desire of equality with God, she being
ready to give ear thereto, and either not willing or unprovided how to resolve
and answer the same, proved in the issue of the disputation, a quodlibet of
unspeakable loss and infelicity to either of them and their posterity, and
not otherwise satisfiable, then by the most precious blood of the eternal
Son of God.

As this quodlibeticall method served amongst other furtherances, as a special
mean to draw our first parents to a defection from their Creator: so if we
should inquire into the occasions of Atheism, of heresy, of disloyalty and
treason in their descendants: we shall find that it has in sundry ages given
life and nourishment to the same. But I will not insist upon particularities
herein: what has been already said, I hope will suffice for conuincing the
Assumption in question of im^^^y.

The inference that is necessarily deduced thereupon, and which is of preiudyce
to the state of Princes, is a liberty of disputing against their persons, their
title and interest to their Crowns, their resolutions and proceedings. For if
we hold it for lawful to call God into question, to arraigne him as it were
at the bar, and to deuest him of his prerogatives royal: then is it much
more allowable to frame in our disputes, a bill of an indictment against the
Monarchs of this world, to heap personal imputations and scandals upon
them, to prove a nullity in their titles, to justify the excommunications
thundered out against them and the absoluing of Subjects from their alleageances
to avouch it for an honorable and meritorious act, to remove them from their
thrones by public arms, or indirect practices, to traduce and proclayme to
the world their proceedings for such, as exceed for tyranny and cruelty, the
actions of the most barbarous tyrant that ever had Scepter in his hand. Now
howsoever the Quilibet disguiseth with us, as if he had for no other intent
made choice of this method, then to bandy a Jesuit too and fro: a^^ redly his
principal scope, was the having of some pretext and color to deliver his
spleen against her Majesty's proceedings: which he has in his Quodlibets
formally done: and yet so, as he would have it interpreted, that they are thus
branded and depraved not by himself, but by the intemperate tongue and pen of
others. But it is neither his good intent, nor the prerogative of a
quodlibeticall method, that will procure him a discharge in a court of justice
and impunity in this behalf. If he or any for him should plead that opposits
marshalled directly in opposition one to the other, do so much the more clear
and notify themselves: it will be remembered unto him, that this maxim holds
true, not when the one is proved to be the other, but when each of them is
severally in his proper nature and colors presented unto us, and so a
conference made of the one with the other: as her Majesty's most honorable,
just, and temperate proceedings with those tyrannous and barbarous massacers
that have been in other Countries violently and often performed against the
true Professors of the Gospel.

I would here give end to this quodlibet of the Quilibets insufficiency, were
there not offered unto me for some further blasing thereof, one extraordinary
particular and fruit of his wit. page 138. of his Quodlibets, where he thus
speaks: The doctrine of the Catholic Church consists of three special
causes: the one is Faith, which is the matter thereof: the other, Charity,
which is the form or efficient: and the third, Hope, which is the final end
thereof, etc.

Whether this piece of learning had his original from the Priest, or were
furnished unto him by his friends, I know not. Sure I am it will not make for
the credit of his wit, as shall appear First, he delivers for essential
causes of the whole distributed, such things as are consequents thereof, and
severed in place from it. For faith and charity, which he sets down for
particular virtues infused and resident in each true Christian, receive their
conception and birth from the doctrine of the Gospel, accompanied with the
effectual operation of the holy Ghost: so as in regard of priority in nature
and time, which the said doctrine has of the existence it yields unto them,
by the ordinance^^ God, of the separation in place it holds from them, they
cannot be essential causes of the same. Secondly, whereas faith is the root,
from which charity and hope do spring and branch: is it not beside all sense,
to make the root the matter of the said doctrine, and of the two branches,
the one the form or efficient thereof, the other the final end of the same?
If he had conceived that the matter of this holy doctrine did in part consist
in the precepts and documents of these infused virtues comprised in the
Scripture, his speech had favored of learning But suppose faith to be the
matter of it. That it should run in account for the whole matter of the
doctrine professed by the Church, is impossible: there being so many other
different particularities recorded therein, which will challenge place in the
matter thereof. To make it a part only of the matter, is contrarv to the
intention of the Quilibet: who speaking of the whole doctrine, and withal
describing the general form and end of it, will out of common wisdom note
unto us a matter proportionable thereto. Further, if favth as it is a virtue
residing in the heart of man, be the matter whereof the holy Scriptures
consist: then as faith does determine with the person of the believer, so does
the matter also of the sacred Scripture proportionably. And consequently, if
that which supplies the place of this matter be the faith of all Gods
children: then for as much as the greatest part of them is already retired into
paradise, and their faith upon the instant of their departure abolished, it
must of necessity follow that the matter whereof the Scripture is consisting,
is for the greatest part thereof already wasted and extinct. Or if the faith of
some only be the said matter: let him note out the persons unto us, and render
a reason, why the faith of one rather then of another, should have this
pre-eminence: or why the other virtues mentioned should be excluded.

Touching charity, he cannot resolve whether it be the efficient or form of
the said doctrine. Is he a Priest of such rare parts, and of that expedition in
deciding of Quodlibets, and yet can be not satisfy us in so vulgar a
Quodlibet? Beside the argument already in general delivered, whereby these
Theologicals are convinced to be effects and no essential causes in the case
propounded: let him call to mind by whom the doctrine of the Scripture was
inspired and indicted. I trust he will not ascribe the performance of this most
holy and admirable service to the virtue of charity, that harbors in the
breast of man, and so deprive God of the honor due unto him in this behalf. As
God himself is the author and efficient of that doctrine, and not charity: so
neither can charity be the form thereof, unless we make imperfection the
form of perfection, and that which is apt to receive diminution and increase
the form of that which is immutable and free from such alteration. If in the
latter age of the world charity shall grow cold, and faith almost to an utter
decay: and yet the one rest the form of the written word, the other the matter
thereof: the said word must necessarily fall into very hard terms, upon the
enduring of so great an eclipse both of matter and form.

The final end of the doctrine professed by the Catholic Church he affirms
to be hope. True it is that faith in the Messiah ^^d consequently hope of
eternal happ^^^s through his blood, is an end where^^ the said doctrine does
look and aim: and yet but an end subordinate to that main and sovereign end
of the majesty and glory of God shining in the salvation of his children. So as
whether he take hope ^o be the only or principal end, he fayles ^n either.

There are in this text of his three special causes, whereof the doctrine of
the Church consists, other fantastic inco^gruities, as, that charity should
therefore give the Crown to King and Queen, because she is the form and
efficient of the said doctrine: and that faith should be the gate of entrance
into the Church, because it is said, Hebr. 11. Accedent^m ad D^um oportet
credere. But I will no longer stand upon the refelling of such dreams.

CAP. 2.
That the principal drift of the Quodlibets^ i^ the reestablishing of the
Popes authority amongst us, with the fall of her Majesty and the Gospel.

Having in the former chapter discovered the insufficiency of the Quilibe^
which by sundry particularities of his discourse appears to be such, as
where out of conceit and partiality he infranchizeth professors of the Gospel,
into the company of grossum caputs and men unlearned himself may upon just
desert challenge the freedom and privilege of the same will now proceed to
take view of his Quodlibets: which being many in number and containing variety
of matter, I will draw into question only such points of them, of which it
does specially import us to be informed: least in this seed time of Romish
proiects and treacheries for supplanting the Gospel, our ignorance in this
behalf be abused in the quality of an instrument and mean to advance the
growth thereof. And because in all proceedings of moment, the end whereto they
are directed, is a matter considerable and worthy of note: I will in the first
place examine and dispute the main and principal scope of the Decacordon:
which I take to be the restoring of the sovereign interest and authority of
the Pope within her Maiest^^s dominions, and consequently the fall of her
royal Scepter and the Gospel professed amongst us. The grounds or verifying
this assertion, we shall find dispersed and delivered in several passages of
his Quodlibets. In his preamble thereto, imparting with us some other
collateral ends of diuulging the same, he does with solemnity protest and
auerre his intent herein also to be the giving unto the Romish Church her due.
Now that which he supposes to be due unto the said church, is a regal and
unlimited power in the Pope the head thereof, to guide, dispose, and reform
all persons and causes Ecclesiastic, having withal annexed thereto the
prerogative of superiority above the Prince, as he does covertly insinuate page
221. where making the Ecclesiastical state, the first and principal of the
two members in a body political: and holding it for an infallible axiom that
in the Pope absolutely resideth the supreme headship and sovereignty over the
said State: he cannot hereupon deduce other conclusion then that, as the state
of the Church has an eminency and precedence above the Civil, so the supreme
head of the same state, shall hold the like proportion of superiority over the
sovereign Commander of the Civil, which is with us, her acred Majesty. If
then this regality over both States, be the due he would by publication of his
Quodlibets, restore and reinuest in the head of the Romish Church* I wrong him
not in charging him with this drift and intendment of exalting in this land,
that purple pontifical Antichrist of Rome, with the fall of her Majesty and
the Gospel. If he shall plead that his giving unto the Sea of Rome her due,
is no more the capital end propounded to his Decacordon, then his freeing of
the ignorant from error, and his endeavor to make known what loyalty ought to
be in every Subject toward his Prince and Country: we may justly except
against this plea, as being of no validity. For since the pamphlets which passed
the press, before this Decacordon was tendered unto us, do labor to satisfy
the Reader, partly in the matter of difference betwixt the Secular and the
Jesuit, partly in the points of duty owing from the Catholic subject to the
Prince: the pretenses mentioned here by the Quilibet cannot be allowed for
sufficient: unless both the text in hand for informing herein the Readers
^nowledge and conscience be so obscure, and the Reader likewise so dull of
conceit, as the one and the other require an iteration and supply of
quodlibeticall disputes. Besides, the question of the Subjects loyalty to his
Prince is so coldly and unskillfully debated, as in regard of the insufficiency
thereof to persuade, it cannot be in common sense conceived that the
instruction of the Catholic Subject in his carriage and affection to her
Majesty was specially intended by the Decacordon. Wherein if he had proceeded
with purpose to inform and rectify the iudgem^et of misguided Catholics: he
should by light of argument out of the holy word of God have cleared it unto
them, that the alleageace due from a subject to his prince is of that nature
and temper, as in the case of any communication thereof with a foreign
potentate, whether in causes Ecclesiastic or Civil, it cease to be sincere
and unblemished. This course being professedly omitted by him, and the contrary
enforced, it is dotage or delusion to pretend the directing of Catholics in
the way of true and undivided obedience to her Majesty.

But howsoever he shall with complement and formality of speech, color the
intent of his Decacordon: yet that it is such as I charge him with, may further
appear by calling into consideration, not only his patheticall and often
protestations of indisguised obedience to the Pope, even to death, accompanied
with an humble submittance of all his actions and discourses to the censure of
his venerable Holiness, and with a profession of vowed and most careful
endeauours on his part, for conversion of this Realm to the Sea Apostolic:
but especially, the course he holds of winning favor and reputation to his
side, by a palpable soothing and admiring of her Majesty, by extolling
(contrary to all former custom and humor in Romanists) her Highness
proceedings, by offer unto her of all duty and service on the part of the
Catholics, and likewise, as well by infaming the Jesuits, and discovery of
their plots, as by purging his fellow Seculars from all imputation of
disloyalty and Treason. Can he hold this course, and yet propound unto
himself no special end and employment of the grace and favor he would
obtain? Or can there be in discourse of reason, other end and use thereof,
then the fortifying and advancement of the faction whereof he is? And can this
advancement succeed and take place without the suppression of the Gospel?
The opposition of it, and Popery being such, that the one laboreth the
subversion of the other. I do^ therefore upon his holding of the said course,
infer that he intends thereby the reviving and erection of that foreign and
Antichristian soueraynty over us.

Moreover, if his deseigne and intent were other then is charged, he would not
so affectionately meditate and press the procurement and grant of such
means, whereby the estate of her Majesty might be perilled, and the
proceedings of the holy Ministry established amongst us, impeached. That he
does insist hereupon, and veremently affect the compassing thereof, his
Decacordon will give testimony with me. For in it he pleads for a repeal or
mitigation of such penal Statutes as were enacted to secure her Majesty's
royal person, and the state of Religion, against all attempts and practices,
as well of the Secular Priest as the Jesuit. In it he urges a toleration of
the public exercise of Popery, as well in some Colleges of the Universities,
to be allotted to this several use and profession, as in other parts and
divisions of the Realm. And lastly, in it under that odious name of Puritans,
he does with an extraordinary passion and rhetorique, solicit an utter
extirpation of many thousands, both as sound professors of the Gospel, and as
loyal subjects to her Majesty, as ever lived under the Sun. As the due
execution of the said Statutes, the suppression of Romish seducements in
opinion and affection, the multitude and love of the subjects to her Majesty,
with the sole intertainment of the Religion already authorized, are capital
and infallible means of strength and surety to her Highness person, and the
sacred truth professed in her Kingdoms: so upon the withdrawing and failing of
them, both the one and the other must quail and determine. But he will deny
the abolition of these means, to be of so dangerous a sequel, especially to
her Majesty, considering that upon the grant of the repeal and toleration
desired, it is intended she should be against all tre^s^nable attempts secured
by sufficient caution. Were not Romish Catholics in a dream, or had they any
politic sense, or in case they did honorably apprehend of her Majesty's
wisdom, they would never propound so silly an ex^^dient for prevention of
peril in this behalf. First, there is an impossibility of such caution: there
being nothing that this or any foreign nation can yield, which could be in
value satisfactory and answerable to her Majesty's life. Secondly, a
possibility herein supposed: yet cautions of what nature soever, will be found
exposed to so many incertainties, as that they cannot serve for grounds of
assurance in the case of so precious and inestimable a jewel. Obligation of
oath is with Romanists dispensable: Ostages subject to mortality and other
accidents: pledges in the nature of lands or chattels, decayable: caution of
towns from foreign Catholics, full of difficulties and inconuenients.
Thirdly, upon the succeeding of an attempt against her Sovereign and
invaluable person, how shall we in so great a confusion and astonishment,
either reteyne in our hands without present danger, the caution given, or
pursue the recovery of satisfaction if we be not seized thereof* Speech
therefore in the case proposed of caution is senseles.

But he has happily some better ground for displanting and extermination of
Puritans. Howsoever it pleases him in show to distinguish betwixt such, as
agreeing in the opinion of doctrine against the church of Rome, do
notwithstanding differ in some honorable additions and circumstances of
discipline: yet in truth, and in the secret account of his popish heart,
whosoever acknowledges not the soueraignety of Peter's chair, or stands in
opposition of judgment to the Counsel of Trent^ is unto him and to all of his
stamp a Puritan: and shall in that day of Iubiley, which they have so long
attended, pass as convict of heresy to the faggot or sword. In those times
of Queen Mary, when the Pope swayed the Scepter in this land, it was not
enough to plead a concurrence with them in opinion, touching the government
of the state Ecclesiasticke by Bishops and other subordinate officers of the
Clergy. It was neither the Episcopal Roc^et, nor the ornament of Typpet, nor
the squarenes of a Cap, nor the mustring in Cope or Surplice, that could then
privilege a Protestant against the Clinke, or the Purgatory of Smithfield. And
do we think, if then every Professor of the Gospel, from the Archbishop,
to the poor Curate, and from the person of Honor to the Cobbler were drawn
into question of life, that any hereafter shall for respect of his Typpit or
Rochet, find favor and impunity? I doubt not but there have been many of
each sort and quality in France, Germany, the low Countries, and else where,
who should have been spared from the hard measure and extremity offered unto
them, if their liking of the ancient dignities, and outward formalities in the
Church, could have procured them regard and grace. It were against common
sense, to conceive that they will persecute the refusing of the Surplice, and
leave uncensured the contempt of the Mass: punish all inconformity to
external ceremonies, and bear with contradiction to the Popes Supremacy. As
to the Duke of Medina, if in 88. he had prevailed in his attempt against us,
each Catholic would have seem^d: Protestant, his sword not discerning the
one from the other, but resolutely proceeding on to make room for the King his
Master: So, if the Lord in his justice should abandon this sinful Land to the
mercy of the Secular Priest and Jesuit then to smooth the way and passage for
S. Peter's Vicar, every Protestant should be adjudged a Puritan. Whereas
therefore he pretends in word the ruin of the Puritans, I hold it for
certain he intends in deed the general dispatch of all Protestants. For
what else can we probably conceive to be his drift herein? It is clear, that
his heaping of so many scandalous indignities upon them, and his charging them
not only in general, with endeauours to pull down Kings and Princes, but in
particular, with practice to kill her Majesty, and to subvert all other
Protestants, cannot have other scope then the raising and nourishing of
perpetual ielousies, great fears, and bloody hatreds, not only betwixt the
Protestant and the supposed Puritan, but specially betwixt her royal self,
and many thousands her faithful subjects, and consequently, the absolute
depriving her of their ready and dutiful services. If then he labor to
destitute and strip his Prince of the loyal affection and service, which an
infinite multitude would tender and perform unto her: if he would likewise
stir the flame of civil contention amongst all the Protestant subjects of
this State: does he not thereby aim at some fearful eclipsing of her
Majesty's power and strength: Does he not prepare and fashion an ouerture to a
desolation and change of State? Either Religion and peace with the love,
service, and multitude of people on the one part, and the reciprocal favor
and respect from the Prince on the other part, are not the true foundations and
pillars of the stand and greatness of Monarchs within their several dominions:
or if they be, then he that shall employ the whole force of his wit and
affection, as well to the expugnation of Religion, and the mutual amity
amongst compatriots, as to disarme his Sovereign of the love, service, and
multitude of his subjects, and to work in him a reiection likewise on his
part, of all Princely and respective conceit toward them, cannot but stand in
the judgment of impartial men, justly chargeable with the imputation of a
traiterous heart to his Prince and Country. As therefore the urged repeal of
the said Statutes, and the toleration of Popery is of a pernicious
consequence: so would he through the side of the Puritan, wound both Prince and
Subject, both Bishop and Curate.

Besides, to yield unto the main question in hand some further light, let it
be considered what doctrine he delivers in his Quodlibets, of State and
Succession, for resolution and direction of the Subject, in case of the Popes
excommunication. The regard of the time, and the present affliction endured by
Catholics, makes him (as he says) unwilling to maintain positions odious
to the State: but yet he is bold to inform the Subjects of their duty
herein. First, therefore he gives them to understand, that it is lawful for
his Popeship to excommunicate Princes, and lawful also for the Subjects to put
in execution the sentence of such excommunication. Secondly, he does advertise
them, that howsoever both the one and the other be lawful, yet in regard of
the manifold inconueniencies ensuing thereof, it is not expedient so to
proceed. Thirdly, because the question of expediency should not upon occasion
offered, for advancement of their religion, either entangle scrupulous and
nice consciences, or minister discouragement to the forward and hotspirited
Catholic, he clears it, and directs them when they are to refuse their
allegiance unto their Sovereign, and take arms against him for execution of
the said sentence. He does therefore (the Bull and the denounciation thereof
being supposed to be of sufficient validity) teach and instruct ^g. 255. r 256.
them, that when they may without any notable hurt or loss unto themselves,
withdraw their obedience from their Prince, and do otherwise find themselves
enabled for the prosecution of this service, they do then stand bound to see
the say de Bull executed. Now whereto is the publication of this seditious and
treasonable doctrine addressed? Is it not to resolve, prepare, and direct the
hearts of all Catholic Subjects, to a most disloyal attempt, for displacing
her Majesty from her Imperial throne, with a final extinction of the light of
the Gospel? Might he prevail in his mediation, for liberty to reconcile whom
he could, to obedience unto the Sea Apostolic, and for the ride dance of so
many thousands her Highness most affectionate servants and Subjects, as he so
often brandeth with the odious title of Puritans: then would he no longer
dispute this question of expediency, but found the alarm to the field. And
whereas now upon consideration of the punishments justly inflicted on the
Catholics, for enterprising the execution of excommunications against her
Majesty, he does with all bitterness censure and reprove both the procurers and
actors thereof: had their unnatural and detestable proceedings for^ed to
effect: then would he have chaunted io poean, and composed Panegyricks in their
honor: then should you never have received from him any Satyrs against the
Jesuit. But since these Papalb censures have in issue been prejudicial unto
them, and occasioned question of their lives, liberties, and goods: now out of
policy to amusevs, and to masque the carriage of their disseignes, under the
credit of the Seculars loyalty: they must tax the Pope himself with credulity
and indiscretion, his Bulls with inualidity, the denounciation of them with
insufficiency, the plotters, abetters, and actors, with treason and rebellion:
the lesuits who contrived the tragedy, must be capital enemies to her Majesty,
and the Secular Priests who acted it, loving and faithful subjects.

I will end the question of the Quilibets main end, with an argument drawn
from the consideration of the pretended difference betwixt the Jesuit and the
Secular. If the said difference which is ^pilried in show on the part of this
Priest, as well with all violence of spleen and detestation toward the
Jesuit, and with ^^ small prejudice and dishonor to the Pope and Spanyard, as
with profession of extraordinary duty and allegiance to her Majesty and the
State, be notwithstanding a matter only of color and disguisement: I hope the
Seculars themselves will acknowledge (considering the correspondence held
betwixt them and the heads of their faction in all proceedings of moment and
consequence such as this is) their intent and drift in this Decacordon too be
principally, an endeavor of furthering the Pope to a recovery of the interest
and title he challenges in the Soueraignety over the Church of England, and
consequently, of transferring the Crown Imperial, from that sacred and most
Princely head, whereon it now rests. For what else can they intend and aim
at, in the course taken by them for gayning of favor and reputation to their
side, in their intercession for a repeal of the said penal Statutes, in
their mediation for the free exercise of laboring the conversion of the Realm
unto the Popes obedience, in their urging the utter extirpation of all
Protestants under the name of Puritans, in their publishing of doctrines,
whereby to resolve and direct all Romish subjects in the question of executing
those barbarous and Satanicall Bulls? Howsoever the consecution deduced in this
proposition here laid down, may happily pass without controulement: I doubt
not, but my assuming, that the said difference is only a counterfeyte and
politic scolding, will receive special opposition. This assumption therefore
I am to clear: which because it is a question of importance, shall be debated
severally, and by it self, in the next chapter, and so serve to furnish an
whole Antiquodlibet.

CAP. 3.
That the contention betwixt the Jesuit and Secular Priest, being in such
nature, and in such degree as is pretended, is a color and pretext only: or in
case it be unfeigned on their part, yet on the part of the Superiors and heads
of their faction, it is interteyned out of a policy dangerous to her Majesty
and the State.

IF I seem in this question to impugn a known and current truth: it may
please the Reader to spare his censure till he have perused the whole
discourse thereof: and then also, to make judgment of the same, not by one
single argument, but out of the joint consideration of all the particular
presumptions. And let not in the mean time either any detection already
performed by the Seculars, of practices against the State, or their present
profession of future discoueries, move him to apprehend the said contention to
be unfeigned. For there have been ever some amongst them, in the time of their
best agreement and peace, who have given intelligence of the treasonable
disseignes and attempts against her Majesty: and therefore this disclosing of
them on the part of the Priests, no argument of so peremptory and violent a
quarrel betwixt them and the Jesuits. Besides, what will these Seculars
reveal other then such proiects and devises, as are of purpose contryued to
delude us? Or if they shall at any time detect some secret practizes
interteyned really, and out of a malicious intent against the State, it will
be with purpose only to win credit, and opportunity to deceive in matters of
like or greater moment. And for detections of this nature and service, they
have undoubtedly received dispensation, according to the course held with their
predecessors: with whom it was ordinary, and answerably to their commission, to
pretend and perform also the disclosing of Secrets. But let us proceed to
clear the position in hand.

If the say de contention being such as is pretended, would frustrate the plots
and courses embraced for the public interest and good of the Romish Church:
And if for that regard there have been always had a careful and vigilant eye
on the part of the Pope and his faction, to prevent and moderate all accidents
that might trouble the common peace of the best Catholics, and empeach their
disseignements for aduauncing the authoryty of Saint Peter's Chair: then either
the Seculars entertayne not the said contention, or in case they do they
renounce all respect of giving furtherance and support to their common cause.
That their difference being of the nature and reach as is supposed, will
disappoynt the proceedings held for the public good of the Romish Church,
may appear first by this, in that it is accompanied with a profession to
reveal all treasonable courses against the State, whether open hostilities, or
secret conspyracies. Now all the practices for reestablishing the Soueraygnty
of the Pope over the Church of this land, fall within the compass of treasons:
so as if the Seculars do effectually answer this their profession, the State
may upon notice given of them, take sufficient order for their prevention.
Again, as they profess this discovery, so they pretend also a peremptory
resolution to oppose personally against all attempts of this nature, and
further to draw unto an actual correspondence with them herein all
Catholics, with whom they shall be able to prevail. Moreover, not reason
only, but experience of all times has taught, that the disunion of
confederates* though followed on the one part only with the extremity of
malice, never fails either to work and raise impediments to the common
cause, or to seek the weakening and suppression of the adverse party. Further,
whereas it is affirmed, that there has been a careful course held to prevent
the disturbance of their common peace, and of their disseignes, the truth
hereof will be testified, by the directions they receive ordinarily from their
Superiors, how to carry themselves in matters of weight, by the order and
discipline established amongst them, to encounter and remedy scandalous
accidents, by the intercourse of intelligence that is betwixt them and the
Commanders of their faction, by their watchfulnes and continual preparation
to take advantage of all occurrents and times fitting their intents. Hereupon
it is, that they want not their Catalogues of the number in each Shire and
City, devoted to their side, and how they are furnished with arms, munitions,
and other abilityes. Wherefore upon the considerations above remembered, I do
infer, that either their quarrel is colorable, and entertained of policy,
or they instruments of hinderance to the advancement intended unto the
public cause of the Sea Apostolic. If any shall in this place outof the
objection above mentioned, reply that their profession to discover and oppose
against all treacheries, whether in plot or action, does clear the pretended
difference from the imputation of disguising and fraud: Igraunt it does so, in
case it be really and sincerely upon all occasions performed, what is verbally
professed But in doing hereof, they shall be found guilty of high Treason
against the authority of the Roman Church, whose cause by this course of
detection and opposition, they do wilfully betray. But against this later,
they do contest and openly profess all readiness to shed each drop of
their best blood, for the public good and honor of Saint Peter's Chair. What
therefore can we conceive and conclude other then this, that both the pretended
contention and the said profession, accompaning the same, is counterfeyte?

Besides, for a further proof hereof, let us draw into examination the
vehement protestation tendered by the Seculars of all sincere and dutiful
allegiance to her Majesty, and likewise of all detestation toward the
Spanyard and his title. If the protestation both of the one and the other
proceed not from any found affection, but from a fraudulent intention of the
heart: we may then with good reason charge them with want of loyal and
faithful meaning in their pretended difference. For of these three, namely
their zeal to her Majesty, their hatred to the Spanyard, their quarrel with
the Jesuits, there is originally the same ground and end, viz. the
advancement and good of their common cause: and the two first are made the
motives of the latter. For out of a zeal to the surety of her Majesty's state,
and upon hatred of the Spanyard and his title, they pretend a capital
abhorring of the Jesuits, whose complots tend to the destruction of the one,
and to the advantage of the other: so as of what quality and tincture the two
former are, of the same we are to judge that to be which grows from them.
But the question is of this protestation whether it be feyned. First, that it
is so in that part thereof which is of duty and allegiance to her Majesty, I
have these presumptions to persuade me. Where the same opinion in Religion, the
same obligation of dutiful respect and obedience to the Pope, the same
endeauours of supplanting the Gospel and aduauncing Popery, the same distrust
and fear of her Majesty infinitely wronged and dishonored by them, the same
apprehension of supposed vexations and tyrannies executed upon them, and in
general, where the same cause of malice and hatred to her royal person and
the State does remain, there in all likelihood can be no change of affection.
For the disposing of a malicious and traiterous heart to duty and fidelity,
must proceed from a surcease of those causes which gave life and breath to
malice and treachery. As they nourish in heart the original and spring of
their disloyalty and malice: so is there no probability of their inclination to
alter and remove it, their means being as great as heretofore, their
confederates as many and strong, their aduauntages against us increased: as may
appear by their glorious vauntes of favor in Court and Country, their
enlarged hopes and insolency, their conceyt and report of desperate hostility
betwixt Protestants and Puritans. Besides, were they out of a grieved heart,
for their former rebellious carriage sincerely affected to the safety and
preservation of her Highness, would they persuade the grant of such means,
as threaten a present and an inevitable danger to her person and the state?
They prease a repeal of the Statutes which secure her Crown and dignity: they
solicit a tolleration of their religion, that they might without peril and
controulement employ their service in effecting reconcilements to the Pope:
they direct catholic subjects when to proceed to the execution of most
Antichristian censures and Bulls, for deposition of our Sovereign: lastly,
they labor a final disunion and division, first, betwixt her Majesty and her
Subjects, and then betwixt Subject and Subject: and so consequently, the
subversion both of Prince and people. Can they solicit and labor the ruin of
her Majesty, and yet be reputed sincere and unfeigned in their profession of
allegiance and fidelity unto her? Again, were they resolutely and soundly
devoted to perform loyalty and duty unto her in all such points of service
as concern her honor and safety, and particularly in detection of treacherous
disseignements, in recovery of disaffected subjects from the Pope to her
obedience, in aduenturing their persons and goods against all foreign
attempts: then would the Pope and Spanyard surcease their plots and practices
against this State, upon fear of their discovery, defection of Catholics
from them, and despair of preuayling. To conceive, that the inuadors will come
furnished out of their own sufficiency, and so stand absolutely upon their
domestical and proper strength, not looking to find the help and succor of a
faction amongst us, is idle: or to think they shall be able to prevail,
notwithstanding the discovery made of their proiects and attempts, were to hold
us for accessory to our own ruin, in leaving to the inuadors the helps they
attend and hope for, and in failing to furnish all due means on our part for
resistance. If then upon seasonable advertisement given of their intended
enterprises, we shall disappoynt them of the strength and supplies they expect,
and enable our selves in every respect, with preparations of all natures
fitting an honorable and assured defense: they grounding their attempt partly
upon our weakness and defect of preparing, partly upon hope of a faction and
all needful supplies amongst us, and finding a frustration of their hopes in
this behalf, will in all probable discourse lay aside their thoughts and
intents of proceeding against us. If it shall be objected that the surcease of
attempting above mentioned, is already performed on the part of the Pope and
the Spanyard: their late combination and practice for the conquest of Ireland
and Ostend, the present courses held for reconciling unto the Pope, the
directions given and secretly executed for winning a party unto the infanta, or
to the King regna^t, will sufficiently answer and convince this doubt. But for
a further inforcement of the Seculars protestation in this particular of their
allegiance, and to win credit thereto, it will be anouched, that the
auncienter sort of them ever misliked this course, of restoring religion by
treason and invasion. If they always disliked it, why did they not detect it,
and so prevent (as much as rested in them) the peril intended to her Majesty
and the State? They answer, That the respect of their common cause, and the
hope they had, the political Fathers would (...) grown more moderate in their
disseignements against our Sovereign, moved them to be silent in this
behalf. Which is in effect, as if they should say, the hope conceived that
their said disseignements would in the mean time have prevailed, moved them
to this silence. Were they touched with so simple and light a regard of her
Majesty's life, that they had rather she should in her person receive a mortal
wound, th^^ themselves utter a word to prevent it? Is it in the imminent
danger of the Church and State, which by their disclosing might be diuerted,
a sufficient justification of their silence herein, in that they hoped the
contriuers of the peril would have reclaymed themselves? If the issue had
answered your desires, then would you have honored the Machiauillian Fathers
with a crown of glory, whom now in show you pursue with the greatest
infamies and indignities. If then in the time of so present an hazard, you
refused (notwithstanding your pretended fidelity and mislike of the course in
hand) to afford so much as one syllable from your Priestly lips, for
preserving the life of your Sovereign: there is no probability, that hereafter
in the like case of attempt and hope of success on your side, you reteyning
the same dutiful respect to the Pope and your common cause, rather in an
higher degree of affection then heretofore, you will fall to a ready
performance of the loyal service, whereof you make so often profession. But
what is it that drew you to a mislike of the practices interteined by the
Jesuitical Fathers, for executing the Popes sentence? It cannot be the
consideration of any unlawfulness in them. For howsoever you find it against
the reason of expediency, that either the Pope should excommunicate, or the
catholic subject execute the sentence denounced, till the proceeding thereto
might be without notable hurt and prejudice: yet you hold both the one and the
other to be lawful. Neither can it be the inconvenience and trouble which
befell unto your persons, upon the issue of the said practices, that moved you
to detest them. For in the question of aduauncing the honor and good of the
Roman Church, you hold no account of liberty or life: the glory of your
supposed martyrdom, does weigh more with you then any worldly respect: you are
not either so unwise as to esteem of the resolutions and courses by the event,
or so enamoured with your selves, as to prefer your particular before the
general. Besides the said course being not only warrantable de iure in your
opinion, but de facto, plotted with all politic foresight, out of due
consideration of the means, for prosecution and compassing thereof, out of the
best intelligence that could be procured, and with special regard to the good
of the Seculars: what ground of just exception can they have against it? If
there were imperfection in the carriage of it: the blame must rest upon the
Actors, and not upon the plot. Again, whereas the success of the courses
held, became also prejudicial to the Jesuits, why do not those Fathers indite
Satyrs against the Seculars? Why do not they who had their part in contriuing
of them, discharge their spleen against the Seculars, who had a principal
hand in acting them? Or why do not both Jesuit and Secular, publish their
detestation of the Pope, by whose warrant and authority they proceeded, both to
the plotting of their courses, and the execution of them? If then the Seculars
hatred of Jesuitical practices, cannot probably grow from the ground and cause
pretended by them: it cannot run in other account then of forgery: and
therefore their protesting of showing loyalty to her Majesty, in opposing
against the said practices, must needs receive the like ^^and and censure. But
let us grant unto them that, whereof they would have us to rest persuaded:
viz. that the enacting of penal laws, the restraynt of their persons, and in
some the loss of life and goods occasioned by the said practices, did draw
them to a dislike of the same. First, in this confession they contradict
themselves: this their pretended dislike being a censuring of the said courses
for detestable treasons: and so are they styled by them in sundry passages. Now
if they partake in nature with treasons: how can they be reputed lawful? But
you allow them for lawful: and give direction when they may be executed.
Secondly, if the said inconvenience to your persons and goods, were the
principal motive of your hatred to the said courses: then did you approve
them considered in themselves, and so far forth as they intended her Majesty's
destruction. And this latter would you have well disgested, in that her
proceeding against you, was adjudged by you to be a tyrannous persecution and
oppression. You never notified your mislike of those courses, till experience
acquainted you with the danger of them to your persons * you betook your
sel^es to your beads, solicited al your Saints, plied the mumbling of Masses,
persuaded others to their particular devotions for the happy success of the
same: and were ready also to be employed personally in some part of the
appointed service. If then the disseignes in question (they being considered in
themselves, and for such, as by warrant from the Pope, did intend the
advancement of the Sea Apostolic, with the suppression of her Majesty) were
allowed by you: and if the supposed persecution only, occasioned by the issue
of them, moved you to mislike thereof, and to an hatred of her Majesty, as may
appear by your infamous discourses and libels: what are we to apprehend of
your professed allegiance? which grows not from conscience of duty, nor from
persuasion of unlawfulness in the said disseignes, nor yet from consideration of
the pretended hurts you have received by them.

Hitherto touching that part of the Seculars protestation, which is of
allegiance to her Majesty. Let us consider the other, which is of detestation
to the Spanyard and his title. And this also I hold for a me^^e disguisement.
For neither has the Spanyard done any act, that can justly incense them
against him, neither is there in the opinion of Catholics, any so choice and
meet a person besides, on whom in reason they may rely and build their future
hopes. If they object his plots and several invasions, they were solicited by
some of their own coat and profession: and furthered by their aduertisements:
they were in part for their advancement and good: they were warranted by the
authority and commission from the Sea Apostolic: they were assisted not only
with contributions from the Pope, but with supplies of other quality. And
therefore no ground out of this objection for their hatred to the Spanyard:
unless they will both hate him, who was at an extraordinary cost to relieve
and advance them, and likewise detest the Pope who was in this action a
principal concurrent with him, yea themselves also who were deeply engaged in
it. If the fear of his future cruelties does stir this passion against him:
they ground their hatred upon an incertainty and accident which the Seculars
should not do, considering the experience they have had of his favorable
inclination toward them in his public attempts and private courses: out of
which he has affoorded them succors and relief in their distress and
peregrinations: erected Colleges for their maintenance: allotted unto sundry of
them annual pensions. Neither can their hatred upon this original be in that
degree as is pretended. For having received at his hands sundry demo^strations
of his princely favors, and never any disgrace or wrong of note: there cannot
be any foundation for so great a fear and hatred of him, as they publish. And
shall we think that they will without special ground and cause show
themselves so ungrateful as to hate him, who has so often reached his hand
of strength and bounty to their help? and who concurreth with them in religion
and in purpose to advance the same? whereas also in the conceit of most
Catholics, he the said Spaniard, as well in regard of his power and
opportunity of means, as of his resolution and readiness to restore the
Popedom amongst us, is the fittest and sufficientest Prince, on whom to repose
for their future hopes and aduancements: in case they abandon him to whom will
they have recourse? if to any besides him: they encounter the Popes design and
resolved furtherance of the Spanish title: they incur the danger of his
heavy censure: they run a course repugnant to their profession and oath of
being ordered by him in all cases and actions of this nature. To rely upon
some domestical competitor, Dolmans censure will not permit them, they being
not assured either of his abilities or devotion to the Pope. And as for the
Scot: how can they hope for toleration under a Prince of his profession, and
who has seen experience in her Majesty, in himself, in other States, of the
advantage and benefit growing from the suppression of Popery and sufferance of
the Gospel only? The law of God therefore, the president of other Princes,
the consideration of the perilous inconveniences accompanying the said
toleration, will make him a professed adversary thereto. Seeing then there is
rather cause of their love unto the Spaniard and dependence on him, then any
just pretext of hatred toward him and his title: I do conclude that this part
also of the protestation in question is to pa^se in account for a fiction. If
therefore this their whole protestation be in the several parts thereof unsound
and fraudulent: what can we judge their pretended quarrel with the lesuits to
be, other then a plotted and devised brabble? Which may further be cleared by
consideration of the gain and advantage that will accrue unto the state of her
Majesty and the Gospel, in case the opposition betwixt them the said Seculars
and Jesuits be serious and with a resolute intent to discover and withstand all
practices and attempts entertained against her Highness Throne and the Religion
established by her. For this course of opposition will serve to secure and
advance her imperial Crown and the sacred truth professed within her
dominions. But such means as are directly and effectually serviceable to this
use and purpose, will not be embraced and followed by them, who protest and
offer even unto death the performance of al duty and ready service for
recovery of the Popes interest and sovereign power over this Church of
England: it being a principle in reason and policy, that no faction or
multitude will betray and ^rustrate the advancement of that cause, which out of
conscience and hope of future benefit it does affect: so as I may probably
conclude, that one thing is pretended, and another intended by them.

Moreover, whereas they concur, according to their solemn protestation on
this behalf, in the same general end for the good of the Romish Church: as
difference in ends and intentions does ordinarily divide confederates: so this
concurrence will hold them so far united, as that they will not for
particular respects expose to peril and ruin the general cause. For in doing
hereof they could not be said to concur in the same end: so as either the
Seculars fail in this concurrence and aim, or if they rest constant therein,
they will not prosecute the means whereby to overthrow the said common end: and
therefore not be carried in so violent a course of opposition to the Jesuit, as
is pretended.

Besides, it is acknowledged by them that they are resolved to continue in all
faithful obedience to the Pope even to death, and witha^ in word and fact to
maintain the honor and authority of his sword. If they stand thus affected:
it is altogether improbable they will proclaim against the Jesuit a war of
that heat and fury, as shall draw them either to tax and challenge publicly
the Popes indiscretion, his credulity in matters of information, his rashness
in excommunicating, the inualidity of his censures the insufficiency of
Commissions given to his Legates and ministers: or to contest openly and oppose
against him in case of his personal coming into England. For hereby they
should wilfully bring S. Peter's chair, unto which they profess all reverence
and duty, and to whose censure they submit all their actions, into public
contempt and obloquy: and themselves into an estate of present and exceeding
danger, unless his Hollownes should out of his fatherly compassion be pleased
to seal them an Indulgence. Whereas therefore out of the sharpnes of their
humor and spleen to the Jesuit they have entered into this course of disgrace
and reproach to his Popeship: either they are serious therein: or they do it
upon a presumed dispensation to make it so much the more probable that they
(...) contention with the Jesuit. But their often and unfeigned protestations to
the contrary, do apparently convince them of not being serious therein.
Whereupon I do infer it to be done to win at our hands a belief that
their quarrel is such as is reported. But it will be said, that the Popes have
been abused with misinformations, and so drawn to excommunicate her Majesty
and to proceed accordingly. Whereto I answer, that it stands with no
likelihood that so many holy Fathers and Potentates joining with them, should
not discern the insufficiency of the suggestions presented. Pius 5. Gregory
13. Xistus 5. and the King of Spain, with some other Princes of the same
confederacy, received from England the best intelligence and direction for the
carriage of their designs against her Majesty, that the Catholic Laity or
Clergy, Nobles or Gentry, Soldiers or Mariners of the Realm could afford: so
as the objected misleading through informations is not likely. And if error
herein had been committed by one of them, the matter being of that consequence
it would have ^^n reformed by another.

But let us examine the original of this their contention, and see whether it
will not yield some argument whereby to charge them with collusion. In the
first Quodlibet the Jesuits affecting of sovereignty over the Seculars, is set
down for the true original and cause of this strife. In other places he
imputes it to the inconveniences and h^^^s which ensued upon the practices
held by ye Jesuits against the State. Touching the superiority affected by the
Jesuits: it is strange it should be the root of so dangerous a war, as
wherein the Pope himself is like in the point of his supremacy and in the
graund cause of the Catholic Church to receive a deadly and incurable wound,
It was granted and ordained by his Holiness, advisedly no doubt and upon due
consideration of the necessity thereof. Could not this respect of the Popes
authentical grant and ordination, be of force to temper and satisfy the
Seculars, who profess all dutiful obedience and ready submittance of their
actions unto him? If it could not stay their priestly wisdoms from
quarrelling and from notifying their ambition and pride unto the world * might
it not yet have restrained them from proceeding to a contention in so high a
degree and of such sequel, as will by discoueries secure the estate of her
Majesty and the Gospel, defeat the hope and cause of the Roman Church, cast
reproach upon the Pope and his authority? will they for a matter of private
spleen run this desperate course? Themselves disclaim it: their profession of
hatred to the Gospel, of their vowed endeavors for advancing the good of their
Church, of all reverence and devotion to the Pope will testify the contrary.
If then they run not this course of ruining their common cause: the said
contention, touching this degree and the effects thereof, is feigned: and so the
said affected Sovereignty no cause of the same. Does it then take budding and
growth from the supposed persecution and oppression inflicted on them, by
occasion of the practices and conspiracies which the Jesuits wrought against
the State? The persecution they speak of, which was in truth no other the a
justifiable, moderate, and necessary severity in the punishment of detestable
treasons, was for prioritie of time before the question of supe(...) betwixt
them: so as either the affecting of Sovereignty gave not beginning to their
pretended contention, or in case it did, then cannot the original thereof be
ascribed to the supposed persecution: of which because there has been
already sufficient speech and proof made, that the Seculars hatred to the
Jesuit and his courses can have no just or probable foundation thereon, I will
insist no further in this argument.

To these presumptions of dissimulation in the said contention, may be added
the repugnancy showed in the Quilibets affection and speech. For were the
quarrel of that nature and in that condition of heat and reach, as he would
make it, and the heart of the Quilibet of such sincerity and singlenes, as
becomes the profession of priesthood: he would not breathe out and publish
repugnancies in the discovery of his intentions. He admires her Majesty's
proceedings for gracious and moderate, yet calls them an unjust vexation and
heavy persecution: he professes a perpetual hatred to the Jesuit, and an
infallible allegiance to her Majesty, yet he submits himself in this
behalf to be ordered by the Pope. He (...) all unfeigned loyalty and duty to
her Majesty, yet instructs and directs her subjects when they may take
arms against her: He professes the perfourming of all faithful service to
her Majesty, and yet would for her overthrow raise a mortal division and war
betwixt her and her loving subjects, as also betwixt subject and subject: He
professes all careful endeavors for securing her person and State, yet would
^ee strip and deprive her of the best means for her preservation and safety;
He commends the ancient Seculars for their mislike of treasons against her
Majesty, and yet approoueth their concealing of them in the case of imminent
danger to her royal person and Crown: He pretends detecting all Jesuitical
practices against her Highness and the State, yet labors under hand a
reconcilement of her subjects unto the Pope: He pretends a kind conceit and
affection toward the Protestants, yet would work a subversion of them and
their religion: He censureth for rebels all such as attempted to execute the
Popes excommunication, yet allows the execution thereof when it may be
performed without (...) and loss to the a^tors: He protests his devotion
and employment of his person with the loss o^ his life for the advancement of
their common cause: and yet offers her Maiesti^ his service for discovery of
the designs and means that tend to the said advancement: He challenges the
Pope for ^^dulous, indiscreete, rash, partial, and exposes his authority to
contempt and obloquie, yet professes all readiness even to death, to maintain
the honor and reputation of his holy Fatherhood: He purges the Seculars from
the crime of disloyalty to her Majesty, yet acknowledges their priuity and
allowance of treasons: He protests a perpetual detestation of the Spanyard
and his title, yet offers herein to be ordered by the Pope: He condemns
Jesuits for contriuing the treason, and commends the Seculars who acted it.
Whether these and such other repug^ancies do not discover in the Quilibet a
double and disguising carriage of himself in his Quodlibets, I refer to the
judgment of the wise and impartial reader.

Hitherto has been showed that the contention betwixt the Jesuit and the
Se^ular priest being of such nature and in ^uch degree as is pretended, is
counterfeit: ^t remains to prove that in case it be vn^ayned on their part,
yet on the part of the ^uperiours and heads of their faction, it is ^tertayned
out of policy. The reason in^ucing me to this apprehension is this:

The said Superiors and heads being ^ade acquainted with this contention, and
particularly with the whole nature and carriage thereof, do either politically
intertayne the same, or labor the suppression thereof: it being clear,
considering the terms wherein now it is, that it will be of advantage or
prejudice unto such their designs as concern our State: and it being likewise
not unknown, that all occurrents and matters of moment are carried and ordered
by direction of the said Superiors: who are so careful for advancing the
common interest and good of the Romish Church, as they will not suffer any
course to proceed that may be an impediment or harre to their proiects and
practices in this behalf. Such is partly their inconsiderate zeal to the Sea
Apostolic, or rather Antichristian Synagogue of Rome, and partly their hatred
to our profession, and desire of revenge upon many and great supposed wrongs
and (...) offered by this State unto them: so as what opportunity and advantage
the time or i^ expected accidents shall present for furtherance of their
proceedings, they are real to embrace it. Upon consideration where of I take it
for evident and confessed, that they will not in an accident of this importance
demean themselves in the quality of neutrals or idle spectacles, but
according to the use they may make thereof to their common cause, they will
intertayne it in policy, or suppress it. But the suppression of the same is
not labored by them. For in case it were: then would the said difference
betwixt them expire and determine. If, notwithstanding the endeavor and course
taken to suppress it, the prosecution of the same be continued on the part of
the Seculars: then the insuppression grows either from want of power in the
Superiors to effect what is meet in this case, or from the desperate
contumacy of the parties who will not be ordered. But it is apparent that there
is no defect of sufficient authority and power whereby to ^ompell the said
parties unto order and agreement. And as for the point of con^umacy. they do
renounce it, and pub^^kely profess an absolute submittance of ^ll their
actions to the censure and ordering of the holy Father. I conclude therefore
that in truth they labor not to supresse it. Besides, there is no cause that
^ay justly induce them to stay and end ^e same, as may appear by this, in that
the carriage of the said quarrel, howsoever prejudicial in show to the
Catholic cause in regard of the profession made for discoueries, is indeed of
special advantage and consequence for aduauncing the public good of the said
cause. For it holds a course of winning favor and credit to the Seculars, in
respect of their ancient dislike of treasons, their pretended detections, their
profession of all allegiance to her Majesty, and of opposing to the Pope
himself: it sows discord, and indeuoureth a disunion betwixt her Highness and
her subjects, and betwixt subject and subject: it soliciteth a repeal of
penal statutes, and a toleration of the public exercise of Popery. If then
the said contention be not suppressed, as appears by prosecuting the same in
printed pamphlets: and if there be neither laboring for suppression thereof,
nor any (...) prete^ why it should be suppressed, but speci^^ cause why it
should be intertayned: I do hereupon infer, that it is intertayned by the
heads and Commanders of their fa^tion, out of a policy dangerous to her Majesty
and the State.

CAP. 4.
That toleration of Popish religion is persuaded by the Quilibet, upon idle and
false grounds.

AMongst the means which are serviceable to the main end aimed at in the
Quodlibets, Toleration of Popish religion is one which yields very special
and assured furtherance thereto: and therefore in four several passages
cunningly persuaded by the Quilibet. Now because the fog and mist of this
persuasion stands betwixt our eye and the light of truth: it shall not be
inconvenient, to disperse and remove the same. He does insinuate, page 151.
that the Jesuits for sundry particular re(...)vued and absolute dislike of
toleration, will employ their best endeavors with a brace of thousand pounds to
undermine and cross all motions in that behalf. Wherein as they should, in
case of their serious disaffection thereto, do a service more aduantageable to
the state of religion, then agreeable with their humors and designements: so
there being no likelihood of the least opposition in them to the same, we are
upon observation made of the disguising used by the Seculars herein, justly
occasioned to raise and improoue our suspicion of extraordinary fraud on their
part. The Quilibet forsooth will not directly and as from himself present any
motives in this causes least he might seem to be carried rather with respect
to the particular good of the Seculars and their faction, then with any due
regard to the public interest of her Majesty and the State. And therefore to
deceive our eye, and so to win favor and approbation with us, whom he
knows to be already incensed against the Jesuits, he pretends yt toleration
is infinitely odious unto them, and that in hearkening thereto we shall not so
much satisfy the Secular, as distaste the Jesuits and impeach their courses,
to the inestimable benefit and security of her Highness royal Scepter an
present government. But let us weigh the reasons, which having drawn the
Ignati^n Fathers to so extreme an hatred of toleration, as that they prefer
in their choice death before the same, may on the contrary induce her Majesty
to approve and embrace it. The first is an effect proceeding from toleration,
concluded thus: What course will dull the spirits of English Catholics, and
disable them for practices and attempts against the State, the same her
Majesty may with good reason approve and embrace.

But toleration is a course that will dull the spirits of English Catholics,
and disable them for practices against the State.

Therefore toleration may with good reason be embraced by her Majesty.



The proposition is a (...) and may not pass without check. For howsoever her
Majesty may in politic reason wish all popefied persons blunted and dispirited
in matters of device and conspiracy against her: yet can she not allow and
accept of the course leading thereto. unless she find it warranted by the law
of God, and standing with the public good and honor of the State. Wherein the
course of toleration fails, having no such ground. For as the doctrine of
Rome is in the worship it tendereth unto the Lord, and in sundry other
particulars of greatest moment opposite to the law of God: so must it needs be
even for that respect of special prejudice and dishonor to the State:
considering that the prosperity and glory of a kingdom proceeds from
intertayning such constitutions and decrees in religion, as God himself has
enacted and delivered. And whereas the said doctrine and practice thereof does
privilege the whole state Ecclesiasticke, against the judicial Court of the
Magistrate and in the case of ordinary contributions, and does likewise deny
unto the Prince himself an absolute soueraignety within his dominions,
rendering him subject to a foreign power, and reputing him, whenever he
shall pass under the censure of excommunication, a Prince de facto only, and
not de iure: how can her Majesty without apparent hurt to her honor and
state, intertaine the toleration of such a docttine? Besides, the practices of
the Ro^^^^^ts being uncertayne and defeaseable, whereof her Majesty (to the
praise of Gods power and mercy toward her self and her subjects) has had
often experience: it were not sitting with the quality of ordinary wisdom,
much less with the deep reach of a Prince to remedy uncertain and the lesser
accidents, by opening free passage to more assured and greater perils. The
Assumption likewise must run in the same account. For how does it appear
that public liberty of conscience will make the Romanists unfit for practices
against the State? It cannot be said that they have in this case attained unto
their end, and will for that regard retire their thoughts from all further
complots: the said liberty being only a step and subordinate mean to the end
propounded unto their designs: so as the said end remaining vncompassed, their
desire and inducements to recover it continuing the same, their possibilities
greater, their distance from it less then heretofore, what hope is there they
will abandon all care and study of the means whereby to come unto it? The
nearer we draw to our long atte^ded good, the more eager and sensible we are in
our appe^^^es t^er^to: and the more we do sharpen and bestirre our conceits
for the remove of all impediments, which may disappoynt our approach and full
enioyance of the same. Neither can it in favor of the Assumption be alleged
that grief and trouble is inuentiue and stirring: and therefore such as live
under it more apt for practice and attempt. For first it is by accident that it
has this effect, it being of a far different operation in many natures,
which are so altered and dejected by it, as they lay aside all apprehensions of
practicing their deliverance, specially by means indirect and perilous.
Secondly, when trouble is accompanied with passions of fear, extreme malice
and revenge, as we find it in the case of priesthed and Iesuited Romanists,
then the eye of the mind and wit beholding as it were through the dim glass
of the said passions such objects as present themselves, must likewise be
dimmed and hindered in the sight of them, and consequently fail in discerning
and judging, if not of the thing it self to be done or omitted, yet of the
needful circumstances of time, place and persons belonging thereto: whereas
when the mind is in some (...)me from these passions, it is clear and not dim
of sight, mature in deliberation and advised in execution. Thirdly, these
Romanists retavning in their hearts, notwithstanding this release from trouble,
the true and ancient causes of aptnes and readiness to practice against the
State, namely an inflamed desire of reestablishing the authority of S. Peter's
chair, together with the humors of malice and revenge, which the said
toleration agreeably to the nature of the Romish reconcilement and doctrine,
will from time to time feed and nourish: how can it be true either that their
resting in the condition wherein they are, is the principal cause of their
practicing, or that their enlargement from the same will be a mean to disable
them in this behalf?

The second argument to persuade tolerat on is this: If upon grant of
toleration there will be no pretext left to traduce in foreign nations her
Maisties proceedings against Catholics for cruel and tyrann^call
persecutions: then may it with good reason be allowed and intertayned.

But upon grant of toleration there will be ^^ pretext l^^t to such purpose.

Therefore toleration may with good reason be allowed and int^rtayned.



The proposition is a ridi^ulous fanc^ of an idle brain. For to intertayne and
establish toleration of Popery, that there might be no pretext left to
slander her Majesty's proceedings, were to cure an ulcer by admitting a
gangrene, and to remedy a scratch of a pin by a potion of poison. If we
compare the slanderous reports vented out against the State with the toleration
solicited, and diligently consider as on the one part the authors of the said
reports, the insufficient ground of them, and the little measure o^ prejudice
grown thereby to the honor of her Majesty, so on the other side the
inevitable dishonor, danger and mischief of the said toleration: we shall
easily discern that the former is not worthy of the least regard with us, when
there is question of the latter. It is an admonition no less wise then
ancient, that in matters of mean importance, Non sunt ponendi rumores ante
salutem: much less therefore in the case of a kingdom, and such as concerns
not only the scepter of a Prince on earth, but the glory of the immorta^ God:
from the advancement whereof no respect of peril o^ obloquy ought to withdraw
a Christian Magistrate. If it be replied that the said reports, how lightly
soever we value them, have wounded the honor and reputation of the State: to
omit the disbeleefe and contradiction they have encountered amongst all forrayne
States and persons, who are not car^ed with partiality or passion against us,
it is clear that her Majesty's proceedings against the Romanists, cannot in
equity receive blemish or stayne thereby, unless it appear by sound proof
that they have been unjust oppressions or tyrannous persecutions, and not
moderate and justifiable punishments upon offenses of treason. They exclayme in
Courts of Princes, and blaze through all parts of Christendom by their
malicious libels, that they endure a most barbarous and extreme persecution
for religion: and this Jesuitical Quilibet, howsoever he seems elsewhere to
admire her Majesty's clemency and equity in her proceedings, being rapt into a
wonder that (the occasions and circumstance of their offenses considered) any
Romanist should be left alive, does notwi^^^^a^^ing exceedingly deprave the
honorable justice of the State, calling it an iniust vexation, and vaunting
that numbers of their faction have d^ed of late years amongst us in the
glorious condition of Martyrs. For disproofe whereof, and in justification of
the proceeding held against them, I will by way of a pertinent and allowable
digression, present to the grave consideration of all wise and impartial men
this brief dispute: If the Romanists suffer for the true and Catholic
religion, the religion for which they suffer is grounded upon and warranted by
the word of God.

But the religion for which they suffer is not grounded upon and warranted by
the law of God.

Therefore the Romanists suffer not for the true and Catholic religion: and
consequently are no Martyrs.



The proposition is free from all just exception: the whole scruple is touching
the Assumption, which is cleared thus: No religion in the articles thereof
grounded upon and warranted by the word of God, is treason against the lawful
authority and state of a prince. For in case such religion were trea^on * ^^en
^^ou^d God be repugnant to himself, and maintain in his word a direct
opposition betwixt his own ordinance, which is the lawful authority of
Princes, and the articles of doctrine delivered in his said word.

But the popish religion is in the articles thereof, for which the Romanists
suffer, treason against the lawful authority and state of a prince.

Therefore the p^pish religion in the articles thereof for which they suffer, is
not grounded upon and warranted by the word of God.



For proof of the Assumption in this latter syllogism, it must be remembered
that the Popes excommunication or bull is with them a matter of religion: and
that they do in general acknowledge the same for a lawful and just censure,
and likewise themselves bound to see the contents thereof executed in case of
his commandment And whereas in particular the said bull does import and
declare his Popeships sovereignty above her Majesty, by virtue whereof he
proceeds against her, the ground of his proceeding, namely her defe^^^on ^^om
the Roman faith, his depriving her from the Crown imperial of this Realm,
his discharging her subjects from all allegiance unto her, his charging them
to disobey her and her laws: hereupon our English Romanists out of a
persuasion of an erroneous and misguided conscience, carrying them according to
direction given in that behalf to an execution of y said censure, have taken
boldness to avouch their immunity and exemption from her Majesty's power over
persons and causes ecclesiastic, to repute and adiudge her for an heretic, to
deny her to be the lawful Queen of England, being in their judgment justly
deprived of all such regal title and dignity, to hold themselves absolutely
discharged from al duty and subjection to her and her laws, to reconcile and
withdraw whom they could from allegiance to her Majesty unto the obedience of
a foreign Potentate, thereby to fit and prepare them for courses of
alteration, to plot and practice the destruction of her royal person, to
solicit both domestics and strangers to take arms for her deposition, to
allow and justify home insurrections, and the Popes hostile proceedings in
war against her, to give interta^^ment, comfort and advice to such whose hand
is in conspiracies and attempts for subversion of the State, to indite and
disperse sedicious writings, whereby to raise all contempt to her Majesty, and
all reverent estimation and respect to the Popes bull. Now out of this, which
is here set down, I deduce this conclusion, which is a confirmation of the
assumption in question: The actions above mentioned for the execution of the
said bull, are treasons against the lawful authority of her Majesty and the
State.

The articles of popish religion, for which the Romanists suffer, are the
actions above mentioned for the execution of the said bull.

Therefore the articles of popish religion, for which the Romanists suffer, are
treasons against the lawful authority of her Majesty and the State.



The proposition being the express letter and text of the law, falls not
within the compass of controulement: unless ^t be auerrred that the royal
authority of her Majesty is usurped and unlawful, as some of the Priestl^
and ^^uiticall progeny have not blushed to publish, taking for warrant of this
their treasonable assertion the said bull of Pius 5. and his successors. In
refutation whereof, though unworthy of answer, we may allege what the Quilibet
in this question of her Majesty's in deprived and lawful authority, has from
such his authors as are of note and account with the Church of Rome, received
and set down, viz. that Princes cannot be removed from their scepters propter
defecti^nem a fide: page 250. Item 293. where he has labored to yield an
ample demonstration hereof, agreeably to that maxim of reason and law: Cuius
est imperium adimere, ^iusdem est confer. But the Pope has no warrant either
from the law of God, or the particular laws of this State to confer, and
bestow the Crown of England. Therefore it rests not in him to transfer it
from that most princely and sacred head, on which it is invested and feated by
God himself, according to the right of succession by blood and inheritance
established by the laws and statutes of this land. Were it not a labor
needles in so cleere^ sunneshine of truth* I would further ins^st upon the
illustration thereof.

The assumption is a matter of authentical record in such Courts of justice
where the Romanists have iudicially received trial and sentence: and sundry of
them have under their hands, as may yet appear, confessed the actions and
disloy^lties charged upon them. Neither is it now a competent and justifiable
plea in behalf of the condemned Seminaries, to affirm the proceeding against
them to be for matter of Religion and conscience; when the politic laws of
the State, agreeable with the holy ordinances of the Lord, do find such
Religion to be treason, and censure such conscience for a disloyalty in
judgment and affection. And were the above named actions, which are warranted
by the said bull, of the nature and quality that is pretended: then would there
ensue ^ confusion of matter civil with spiritual: whereas both divine and
humane reason has ever distinguished betwixt them: ^olding that for matter of
Religion and ^avth, which being prescribed in the first able is a part of Gods
worship, and di^ectly regards a future life: and that for ^iuill, which
(...)ded in the ^^cond, is not originally, and in it self a part of Gods
spiritual worship, but may oncerne the fame and the life to come, ^v
consequent and interposition of some ^hird thing. And therefore the savd bull,
(...) far as it imports the deposition of Princes from their regalities,
being in ^uery particular article and action leading thereto, a direction for
matters of this world, enjoined or prohibited in the second table, and not
communicating in nature with the spiritual service of the Lord, cannot fall
under the account of a matter spiritual and of faith. And so the poyn^ of
Supremacy being no part of the worship required in the first table, but a
soueraigue power delivered unto Princes from the second, to see the said
worship accordingly performed, must not be reputed for other then a temporal
and politiq^^ royalty or soueraignety. It is true, that by consequent, and in
regard of the thing ordered by direction from the same, it d^^ concern faith
and Religion: but it is n^ employment in any function or office Ecclesiasticke.
For had it been of other the of a civil consideration: the religion Kings of
Judah (...) in^^ meddling in the same, as a matter not co^patible with their
callings.

The sum therefore of this latter ^^gument is this: Matters of Religion and
faith, are parts Gods spiritual worship, and prescri^ in the first table.

But the articles and actions for which Romanists suffer, are not parts of Gods
spiritual worship, and prescribed in the first table.

Therefore the articles and actions for which the Romanists suffer, are not
matters of Religion and faith.



The Assumption may receive proof hereby: Matters of this world, and which
concern obedience or disobedience to princes, commanded or forbidden in the
second table, are not parts of Gods worship prescribed in the first.

But the articles and actions for which the Romanists suffer, are matters, of
this world, and which concern obedience or disobedience to princes, commanded
or for bidden in the second table.

Therefore the articles and actions for which the Romanists suffer, are not
parts of Gods worship prescribed in the first: and consequently no matters of
Religion and faith: and so the said Romanists no Martyrs, but Traitors justly
executed.



Thus much of the second argument and of the persecution implied therein, and
charged upon the State by the Quilibet, though indirectly.

The third not unsuitable with the second, is of this sort: Upon the grant of
toleration, the Jesuits can have no cause to publish and tradu^e England for
the nurcery of all faction and war amongst the potentates of the world.

Therefore her Majesty may with good reason admit and intertaine the said
toleration.



First, touching the antecedent, we cannot pass our allowance thereof. For if
the reiection of Popery from amongst us were the motive on their part for
delivering a slander of this nature against the State: then the same Popery,
notwithstanding the admittance of toleration, standing rejected and disclaymed,
as yet some remarkable degree by the law^ of the land, and the public
profession of he Majesty, and the best part of her subjects, the Jesuits will
proportionably, and with respect to the degree of disgrace continued upon their
religion, continue likewise their course of slaundering in this behalf^ For
they being resolved, as the Quilibet reports of them, either to have a perfect
and entire reformation or none at all, will not be induced through the grant
of toleration, to an absolute surcease of their de^aming and malicious tongue.
Besides, this surcease being altogether uncertain and accidentary: it cannot
be in policy a sufficient ground for the embracing of so important a matter as
is in question. But if the publishing of the reproach here mentioned, and the
occasion of offering unto the State so great a wrong, has originally proceeded
either from the humor of malice and hatred conceived against the truth we
profess, or from some coffeehouse, in that others have found grace and
preferment before them: then what likelihood is there, that (while they shall
in their hearts entertayne and feed the very spring of this odious proceeding
held by them, which no toleration is of force to dam and stop) they will
retire their tongue or pen to a course of silence herein?

But let us suppose a truth in the antecedent: yet the consequence deduced
thereon, is fond and unworthy of regard. For were it an act answerable to the
wisdom of so renowned a Prince as her Majesty, by admitting toleration, to
prefer the stay or prevention of a slander before the glory of Christ, the
safety of her person, and the public good of her most affectionate subjects?
or in case policy could allow the redressing of a light and uncertain
distemper in the body politic, by a wound in the heart, were it not yet
exceedingly offensive and against sense, to commit evil in an high degree, and
of a perilous issue, that some mean and slender good may grow thereof? For
the good yielded to the State from the silence of a few seditious Fugitives,
what is it in respect of the mischiefs accompaning toleration?

The fourth argument follows: What course will be a mean to stay all
Catholic potentates from host^e attempts against the Realm, the same her
Majesty should in politic reason allow and embrace.

But toleration will be a course and mean to stay all Catholic potentates
from hostile attemptss against the Realm.

Therefore her Majesty should in politic reason allow and embrace it.



As against some part of his sophistry already presented unto us, so against
the proposition of this syllogism, I must allege these two maxims: the one,
Non est faciendum malum vt inde preueniat bonum: the other, ex periculis minus
eligendum. Now in the case proposed, toleration for the free exercise of
idolatry, and for publication of doctrines, whereby to displant and remove
Christ Jesus from amongst us, being a capital sin, and in an high degree of
treason against the majesty of God, and being likewise a course of more
certain perils, then in reason the hostile attempts of Catholic potentates
can be: (which in that their carriage is open, and such whereof good
intelligence may be had, are preuentable, whereas toleration proceeding with
show of holiness and duty to God and her Majesty, may by secret and inexpected
practices, without suspicion taken of them surprise the State) the said
toleration ought not upon any such regard of preventing foreign invasion, to
receive place and entertaynement with us: weighing with all the often
experience her Majesty has had of Gods mighty protection, and manifold
blessings upon her self and her people during this whole time of her resolute
and most Princely opposition thereto, which consideration may be a worthy
inducement to so worthy and unmatchable a Princess of remaining Semper eadem.

Concerning the Assumption, that also is not to find credit with us. For it is
not religion that has ^^barked them in courses of hostility against this land
(I deny not but it has served in part for a pre text) but they have been
drawn thereto, by the violent humors, partly of ambicious aspyres to a
monarchy, partly of malice and revenge upon supposed indignities, and partly
of securing their own greatness, by impeaching their neighbors: so as if the
true grounds of their enterprising against us have been such as are
mentioned, and not the cause of religion: why should we think that the grant
of popish religion, which concerns not the said potentates more, then the
establishment of the Gospel within their dominions concerns her Majesty,
will be of such regard with them, as to move them to a surcease of hostility?
They are not either so unwise or so hot in devotion, as for the pleasuring of
English Fugitives and some our domestical malcontents, to enter a course of
infinite charge to themselves, of blood and destruction to their subjects, of
perpetual quarrel with their neighbors, of privation of traffic, of
jealousy and envy abroad, of discontentments and mutinies at home. Howsoever
they pretend an honorable care of restoring Religion: they will
(notwithstanding a toleration admitted thereof) never grow to peaceable terms
and capitulations of vnfe^ned amity with this State, until they either receive
satisfaction in the respects which first drew them to arms, or be compelled
thereto through some extraordinary necessity and disability. But let us suppose
with the Quilibet the cause of Religion to be the ground of their hostile
proceedings: shall we conceive that they will engage themselves in a war for
toleration, and will attempt nothing for an absolute and perfect reformation? It
is this latter and not the former, that is in special regard with them, if in
this behalf they have been ^ed at all with apprehensions of Religion. Having
therefore in the case of toleration, not attained to their disseignements, we
cannot with probality think of any readiness on their part, to a surcease of
hostility: but they will continue the same, either publicly as before, or
secretly by way of indirect practices: the opportunity and means for
interteyning whereof, the said toleration will fitly minister and supply unto
them.

The fifth reason to persuade toleration is this: Upon grant of toleration, the
platform for establishing the Jesuits monarchy over the whole world would be
frustrated.

Her Majesty therefore may with good reason embrace it.



Here first, the Antecedent does suppose the Jesuits in so deep a melancholy,
as to dream of a Monarchy, not over the parts of Europe only, but over the
whole globe of the ear^h: which is altogether improbable, considering the
reputation they carry for wisdom and discretion. Secondly, the compassing of
such a monarchy, is a mere impossibily, and therefore the reason taken from
thence of no force to persuade. Thirdly, in case it were a matter possible: yet
would there fall out so many years betwixt the platform and the real
existence thereof, as that we should not need for fear of the same to show
the Seculars the least courtesy, much less run a course of special
dishonor and prejudice. Fourthly, if the possibility thereof were such, as the
erection of it amongst us were not otherwise impeachable then by admittance of
the said toleration: yet for as much as the main end of toleration aimed at
within her Majesty's dominions, is one and the same with the scope and drift of
the Jesuits, viz. the reestablishment of Antichristianity with the subversion
of the Gospel and the State: for the effecting whereof, the course in question
would be a fit and serviceable instrument to the Jesuit: it were no less a
frenzy to intertaine toleration upon any such respect and ground, then for
preventing the miscariage of a ship to sail from Scilla to Charibdi^.

But what confirmation has the Quilibet yielded to the said Antecedent? If it
be not of better strength then the in^erence depending thereon, it is not
answerable to the credit of his reverend priesthood. Such as I find it shall
be presented to examination. In this manner then he disputes: What course
will be a mean for establishing Catholic Bishops in England, the same will
frustrate the platform of the Jesuitical Monarchy.

But toleration will be a mean for establishing Catholic Bishops in England.

Toleration therefore will frustrate the said platform.



Were he not a Secular Priest, that is, a professed enemy to the Gospel and
the present government: I should think he did in this argument collude and
betray the cause he has in hand. For if toleration draw with it into allowance
within the Realm the office and jurisdiction of Popish Bishops: then as the
authority and commission of the most reverend Fathers and worthy Prelates of
this Church will grow short and limited, they being not to deal with persons
and causes subject to this new Romish Court and Hyerarchy: so likewise will
there ensue an insufferable incrochment upon her Majesty's scepter and
soueraignety: these new Bishops being to represent and supply the person and
office of the Pope, in all such affairs as shall concern his supremacy. But
let us examine the Quilibets reason. The proposition we may justly deny. For if
the Bishops established, be Iesuited in affection, or otherwise commanded by
the Pope rather to give furtherance then any impediment to the said platform:
then can it not be true that such course will furstrate the designs of Jesuits
in this behalf, and interrupt all dependency upon them, as will serve for
erection of a Popish prelacie.

The sixth motive for toleration, whereto I will add that which he sets
down for the eleventh, has this conclusion: What course will be a mean to
discover al malicious devices, plots and conspiracies against her Majesty and
the State, the same she should in reason admit and embrace.

But toleration will be a mean to discover all malicious devices and plots
against her Majesty and the State.

Toleration therefore should her Majesty in reason admit and embrace.



He cannot with any art so color the Proposition, but that the fraud
thereof will forthwith appear, if we shall examine it by the square or rule of
the maxims above remembered. For if we may not walk in the train of sin and
disobedience to God, that thereby some advantage may grow unto us in our
particular: and further, if it be a gross error in policy for the prevention
of an accidentary peril, to make choice of a certain mischief: then cannot
her Majesty, for the stay of proiects and confederacies (they being incertayne
for their birth and carriage, as also liable to disappoyntment by the gracious
providence of the Almighty, and such politic means, as have formerly in like
cases been used) allow intertaynment and place to toleration.

Neither is there less deceit offered us in the Assumption. For if the free
exercise of Popery will double in Romanists, their allegiance and devotion to
the Pope, trebble their detestation to our Religion, nourish and raise their
desires of a full and entire reestablishment, that they may be in their
professions and estates secured against all dangers of future alteration: how
can it be probable that they will, contrary to the approbation of their
conscience, and preiudicially to the public good of their Church and their
private interests, tender such aduertisements and discoueries as is pretended?
Their exercises of religion being of the quality and operation as is remembered:
will they, the more they malice us and our profession, be so much the more
ready to do offices of extraordinary benefit and advantage to us and it? Will
they, the more they love their religion and honor the Pope, so much the more
endeavor to frustrate the advancement both of the one and the other? And will
they, having as it were, gained the wall and places of special strength, in
the siege of our Jerusalem, sound the retraite and proceed no further? If the
Merchant or Mariner should tell us, that after a long and tedious Navigations,
being within ken of the port wished for, he would rest satisfied with the
sight of the same a far of, and so lay aside all purpose, and cross all
means of attayning thereto: we could not believe him, nor conceive him to be
so phranticke and senseles in his apprehensions. The like opinion we are to
have of the Seculars in this tale they propound unto us, of discovering
practices and conspiracies.

Besides, it being supposed that the Seculars and others so affected as they
are, will be ready to do service to the State in this point of discovery: yet
can they perform no more herein, then is answerable to their intelligence: so
as if they are too short in knowledge of disseignements (as needs they must,
it being certain, that upon notice of their disposition in this behalf, they
shall not be made acquainted with any plot or practice of moment) what reason
has her Majesty to allow toleration in regard of an advantage, which she
shall not rece^ue thereby?

The seventh inducement is of this kind: What course will be a mean to
prevent the rebelling of English Romanists, upon promise and hope of
preferments under a foreign Prince, the same her Majesty may allow and embrace.

But toleration will be a mean to prevent the rebelling of English Romanists,
upon promise and hope of preferments under a foreign Prince.

Therefore her Majesty may allow and embrace it.



The Proposition having the same defect and imperfection that has been
observed in others above set down, is to receive the like answer. For we may
not for the respect of any good, public or particular, attempt ought that is
offensive to the highest Majesty: neither must we in the case of dangers,
remedy an uncertain peril, by another that is assured and of equal hurt and
mischief.

The Assumption, least we should censure it for an untruth, is thus
demonstrated by him: A League being made with foreign Princes, French and
Spanish, English Romanists can have no hope of preferments under them within
England.

But upon the grant of toleration, there will follow a League with the said
foreign Princes.

Therefore upon the grant of toleration, English Romanists can have no hope of
preferments under them within England.



I may justly dissent from the Quilibet, touching the proposition. For whereas
Popish Princes hold all confederations no further obligatory, then may stand
with the advancement of their particular deseignes: and do find also the
violation of them dispensable by the Pope, in cases importing the interest of
the Romish Church: why may not the English Romanists, (considering withal the
variety of occurrents and causes drawing Princes to faction and division)
attend a disunion of the said confederats, and so be carried into hopes of
preferments under them, in case they prevail in their attempts? Now concerning
the Assumption of this latter conclusion: how does it appear, that upon grant
of toleration, there will ensue a League with foreign Princes? If he could
make it clear, that the true ground of their hostile proceedings against the
State, were in that hitherto toleration has not been condescended unto: I
would approve his Assumption. But it has been already declared, that other
respects, and not this in question, have drawn forrayne potentates to these
attempts of hostility: and therefore no probability, the said respects
continuing, of any confederation to ensue upon the only regard of the said
grant. Further, why should we not rather apprehend, that upon our denial to
yield unto a perfect and entire reformation pretended to be sought by them in
their courses of invasion, they will refuse to grow to any capitulation and
terms of alliance and peace with us?

The eight argument, is to this effect: If toleration will cut off in English
Romanists two bloody practices, the one for her Majesty's death, the other for
the advancement of some Competetor: then may her Majesty with good reason
allow the same.

But toleration will cut off the said two bloody practices.

Therefore her Majesty may with good reason allow it.



Toleration concurring with all other Jesuitical practices and attempts
against her Majesty, in the main drift and issue, which these Priesting
perswaders thereof, propound unto themselves: I must give such answer to the
Proposition of this syllogism, as is formerly made to others of the same
moulde: out of which he would fashion a special point of wisdom for
prevention of perils: it being according to the train of his persuasion in
this behalf, no mean policy for avoiding our perishing in some other part of
the Sea, to run a course over the Goodwin San^s. For so should we do in the
admittance of toleration, thereby to prevent other practices of danger.

To the Assumption he has yielded this proof: What course will frustrate and
waste all hopes and thoughts of alteration, the same will cut off the said two
bloody practices.

But toleration will frustrate and waste all hopes and thoughts of alteration.
For the Romanists being freed from trouble, all disloyal apprehensions and
affections will cease in them.

Therefore toleration will cut off the said two bloody practices.



He does so reason in the first sentence of this syllogism, as if the said
practices had originally proceeded from the desire of alteration in religion,
and had reference only thereto, as to their main end: which being untrue in
sundry of them, which had for their principal ground, in the chief authors
and contriuers, either malice and revenge, or the humor of ambition for
growing to an higher pitch of greatness, or some respect for securing their
states, by casting this flourishing Realm into confusion and combustion: it is
likewise untrue, that the said practices will determine upon the expiring and
vanishing of the thoughts and hopes that tend to alteration. The second
sentence also here set down does carry with it an evident untruth. For having
not attained unto their end by the grant of toleration: it is not freedom from
trouble that will free their minds from thoughts and hopes of compassing it.
They will no more rest satisfied in this behalf, then a traveler, who having
passed the one half of his way, will not lay aside his hope and means of
gayning the end of his journey. The Quilibet affirms page 232. that every man
is bound to propagate and establish the religion he is of to the uttermost of
his power. The Romanists therefore employing themselves with all care and
diligence for the advancement of the public cause of their Church, some in one
course of service, some in another, cannot but hope for such success of their
endeavors, as shall both ruin the State of the Gospel, and restore unto the
Pope his usurped heretofore and now challenged soueraignety amongst us. And can
they hope for this issue of the toleration allowed them, and yet not hope for
alteration? Further he says, page 152. that many good Catholics are loyal
subjects, who yet will not reveal any unnatural and monstrous conspiracies
against her Majesty. To omit his treasonable description of a loy all subject:
Can the Romanists stand thus affected in the case of a most barbarous
conspiracy against her Highness royal person and scepter, and yet not conceive
hopes and thoughts touching a change? If they find favor, they will in the
opinion of the Quilibet renounce all wishes and cogitations of this kind. Being
then scanted in their proportion of grace from her Majesty, they will return
unto them. Further, if we consider the quality of the doctrines and multiplicy
of Jesuitical instructions, they are in this seed time of toleration to sow
and disperse in each Province, City, Village, and corner of this kingdom: and
shall with all remember that they are to proceed in this husbandry according
to direction from the Pope and his subordinate officers: we shall then easily
discern, that as some fundamental points of their Romish doctrine or capital
treasons against her Majesty and this State, so howsoever they pretend a
disclayming of the said hopes and thoughts, they labor notwithstanding and
attend no other event then an absolute alteration of the present religion and
government.

The ninth argument.

What course will stay the combining of the English Romanists with the
Spanyard, in case of his attempts against England, the same her Majesty may
with good reason allow and intertaine.

But toleration is a course that will stay the combining of them with the
Spanyard, in case of his attempts against England.

Therefore toleration may with good reason be intertayned by her Majesty.

Touching the proposition: first the readiness he supposes in the English to
assist the Spanyard in his said attempts, is a matter improbable: considering
that restitution of Religion, which must be the ground of this readiness, is not
the scope and end the Spanyard herein propounds unto himself, as may hereby
appear. For what should move him to undertake a service of this nature,
whereto he stands no more bound, then her Majesty to the planting of ye Gospel
in Spain? Is it any spirit of zeal to the glory of Christ? An unlikely
affection in a Prince trained up in pleasures, so little regarding the
extirpation of Atheism, and moral enormities within his own kingdoms,
served also by such who measure religion by the line of policy. Is it any
direction or persuasion from the Pope? He is not so base as to be employed as a
vassal and instrument at the appetite of a Priest. Is it the importunate
solicitation of our English and a compassionate regard of them? It is neither
zeal in himself, nor instigation of the Pope, nor any respect to fugitives,
or to the supposed distress of others of their faction, that can draw a Prince
of his wisdom to an enterprise of such difficulty and streams of blood, of
so unmeasurable expense, of so infinite hatred and quarrel, of so little
advantage to his particular. For having performed the restitution intended,
what has he gained thereby? If you say a kingdom, or the spoil of a rich and
furnished Country, with a disabling of us to impeach him in his estate, or the
benefit of confederation and alliance against his enemies, or a revenge of the
dishonors and injuries offered him: the answer is frivolous and importing the
end of this action to be other then the restitution of Religion: whereto only
if he directed the aim of his attempts, having compassed his design, he is
answerably thereto to retire his forces from hence. But let us grant that he
intends the restoring of Popery: as I think he does accidentally and by a
collateral intent: it being credible that having seized upon the imperial
Crown and sovereignty of this kingdom, he will erect, as Jeroboam did,
certain golden calves, whereby to draw the people from all thoughts of the
Lords house in Judah. Yet may we justly presume, that (his principal disseigne,
being to satisfic his ambition in the scepter, and his malice in revenge) the
due consideration of the infinite, both public and private indignities and
calamities that will accompany the Spaniards attempt in this behalf, will
restrain the better and wiser sort from com^ining with him. They will call to
mind ^he experience and records of his proceedings elsewhere: and apprehend
they cannot receive better measure from him; then the Portingals in their
cities and villages, the Italians in Millan and Naples, the Netherlanders in
the Low Countries. They will remember the speech of the Duke of Medina: and
thereupon conceive that he will not bring with him, an eye to discern betwixt
a Papist and a Protestant. They cannot but reteyne in their conscience some
remorse of duty to their Sovereign, some sparks of piety to their native
Country, some fear of insolency and oppression to be offered on the part of
the Spanyard. They will weigh with themselves, that a stranger, and the same a
Spanyard, cannot be carried with that tender affection toward them, as her
Majesty their natural Prince: under whose gracious and sweet government they
may enjoy the private liberty of their conscience, the comfort of Wife and
Children, the solace of their houses, lands and goods, the intercourse of
kindness with their friends, and all privileges of a Subject, upon their
outward conformity to her Highness laws: whereas, in case they fall under the
authority and scepter of the Spanyard, howsoever they may happily be allowed
the public and free exercise of that idolatrous Mass, yet must they be
content to lie exposed in themselves, in the persons of their Wives and
Children, in their houses, lands and goods, to the unbridled appetite and
villainy of every Dom Diego. They will then find that departing from her
Majesty to the Spanyard, they have exchanged a Solomon for a Rehoboam: whose
little finger will exceed in weight, the whole strength of her Majesty's body.
I doubt not, but these and other like regards will be to all English
Romanists, no mean inducements for restrayning them from all correspondence
with the Spanyard in his enterprise against this State, at least during her
Majesty's life.

But let us with the Quilibet suppose in the English Catholics, a readiness to
join with the Spanyard in his said attempt. Should her Majesty, for
preventing thereof, intertayne toleration? First, why rather at this present
then heretofore? Are not her means for an honorable resistance in a most
worthy cause, against an unprincely and irreligious attempt, as great and
accomplished as formerly they have been? Are not her people as many, faithful,
and valiant? Is not the providence and favor of God the same toward her?
Secondly, are there not besides toleration, other as effectual and sufficient
means to disappoynt their co^currence with him in this so unjust an action?
Thirdly, is not toleration as ready an address and instrument for the
reestablishing of Popery as the Spaniards attempt? in admitting whereof,
thereby to prevent all confederation with him, what should her Majesty else
do, then amongst different ways to the utter desolation of her kingdom, make
choice of that which will soonest direct and bring her unto the same? wherein
she should also proceed disagreeably to the law of God by committing a sinful
act, that some good may grow thereby. Hitherto of the Quilibets supposition and
consequence included in the proposition of this latter syllogism.

In the Assumption also he offers unto us an abuse. For toleration is no more
fit a remedy against the combination of the English Romanists with the Spanyard
in the case of his said attempt, then is a large proportion of the noblest wine
against a burning fever. Such is the nature of their religion: such the drift
of popish reconcilement: such are the courses they hold to intertayne their
friends in the hopes of perfect reformation: and so to fashion and prepare them
for all oportunities that shall be presented to that purpose. I cannot compare
toleration more aptly then to a protection granted to the Irish rebel. For as
he does under the countenance and commodity of this protection repair unto
the principal towns and places of his acquaintance, where he both gives and
finds encouragements to obstinate himself and others in a rebellious
disposition, with directions for performance of service against the State: and
where likewise he recey^eth intelligence as well of all resolutions and
proceedings on our part, as of the means and abilities thereto, together with
a supply of his particular defects and wants of victual, money, munitions: and
being thus furnished in every respect, does immediately renounce the benefit of
his protection, and employ himself and his followers in courses of treason and
rebellion: So upon grant and opportunity of the said toleration, the
Romanists will boldly visit each Province, City, and corner of the Realm,
where ministering to others, and mutually receiving from them some heat of
encouragement they will bestow their best endeavors in the service of
reconcilement unto the Pope, in raising to an higher degree the hatred already
conceived against our profession, in clearing the doctrine and obligatory power
of Popish bulls and censures, in procuring intelligence in Court and country,
in giving and taking directions when and how to proceed in all services for
the Romish Church, in supplying themselves with abilities and furnitures of
each sort and nature: So as the time of toleration will not prove other then,
partly a seed time as well of hopes and desires to have an entire
reestablishment of the Popes sovereignty amongst us, as of sundry proiects
tending thereto, and partly also a mean of special advantage whereby to
fortify their side, and to enable it for the execution of the said proiects.
But for that the Assumption may seem questionable and doubtful, the Quilibet
yields it this light: If there be no excommunication against refusal of
combining with the Spanyard, the English Romanists will not combine with him.

But upon grant of toleration there will not be any new or old excommunication
to that purpose.

Therefore upon grant of toleration the English Romanists will not combine with
him.



Albeit the proposition be subject to question: yet shall it at this time pass
for a probability. But the Assumption may not find the like favor. For who
should hinder the procuring of a new and formal excommunication to that
effect, or an absolute repeal of the old? Are the Seculars in greater credit
and grace with the Pope then either the Jesuit or the King of Spain, who is
specially interessed in the cause? Will the Pope in so great a likelihood and
opportunity of prevailing against our religion, and advancing both his own and
the Spanish title, as toleration has offered unto him, forbear to use in
furtherance thereof so powerful a mean as excommunication is held to be? The
Quilibet speaks in this assumption, if he disguise not, as if the Pope and
Spanyard were at his devotion, and would in regard of a courtesy done to the
Catholics in the cause of toleration, disclayme their titles of sovereignty to
England: and the nearer they approach to the long attended and wished issue of
their deseignments, the more irresolute and backward they would be in seconding
the same.

The tenth argument.

Upon grant of toleration the Jesuits should be disabled to intertaine brokers
of their treacheries and slanders, and to win any to their side.

Therefore her Majesty may with good reason grant the same.

To justify the Antecedent, he tells us that the collections of money,
which now the Jesuits enjoy, and whereby they stand enabled for the services
here specified, would be otherwise disposed of upon the admittance of
toleration. For answer whereto, first it is improbable that the Jesuits, men
of rare gifts, of special favor with the Pope and Spanyard, of extraordinary
care and dexterity for the advancement of the Catholic cause, should be left
unfurnished of such contributions and means as may serve them in that behalf.
Secondly, though the said contributions should determine or be otherwise
imployde: yet should they not rest destitute of instruments for broking their
treacheries, and many others that would side and confederate with them. For
toleration would in a short time supply unto them gratis, a generation fitted
to their humors. Thirdly, notwithstanding there were a truth in the
Antecedent: yet the consequence implying that gross error in piety and policy,
which has been in this dispute so often observed, deserves check and
reiection.

The eleventh motive is of no more validity then the former.

Upon grant of toleration, every Catholic would be ready to abandon and
expel the Jesuits, as the authors of their former troubles.

Therefore it may please her Majesty to admit it.

The Quilibet so deals with us, as if the nature of toleration, and the
effects, accompaning the same, were unknown to the State. When he tells us
therefore, that toleration will be a mean to raise in the hearts of
Catholics, such a detestation of the Jesuits, as that they will labor the
extermination of them and their confederates: we must apprehend and interpret
it as a mere delusion: being not ignorant that the doctrine and directions,
which will (during the time of toleration) be sown and dispersed, do require
the employment of Jesuits, who in the account of the Commanders and heads of
these factions, are reputed men of best sufficiency for managing the
advancement of the Romish Church. And whereas he alleges for the ground of
this hatred against the Jesuits, that they have been the authors of trouble
to the Catholics: herein the Catholics, (who knew that the plots and
practices against her Majesty and the State, have been intertayned, not only by
the Jesuits, but by the Secular Priests likewise, yea, by the Pope himself and
the Spanyard) may justly censure him for calumniation and forgery. But it being
granted that the Catholics would hold such proceeding against the Jesuits,
yet the regard thereof cannot be a sufficient warrant to her Majesty, to
commit an impiety, and such as is joined with dishonor and peril.

Hitherto of the motives delivered by the Quilibet, page 151. Here he cease
not: but soliciteth elsewhere the same cause: and namely page 229. where he
pleads thus by a twelfth argument.

The twelfth argument: If toleration will secure the present interest of her
Majesty, of the State in generals of the Nobility, of the Bishops: her
Majesty may in reason admit it.

But toleration will secure the present interest of her Majesty, the State,
the Nobility, the Bishops.

Therefore her Majesty may in reason admit it.



The Proposition presents unto us an inconsequence. For unless the vtility
and advantage of toleration recommended therein, be evident and of
continuance also (which points are not cleared by the Quilibet) it cannot in
the case of so notorious a change, stand with the policy of this State, to
allow and imbrac^ it. Besides, if it were apparent, that the say de toleration
would bring with it an assured and perpetual security to her Majesty and her
Kingdoms: yet till it appear to be justifiable by the law of God, it ought
not from the Scepter of a Christian Prince to receive allowance. Let us examine
therefore what proof he has of this pretended security. The Assumption is to
acquaint us herewith. First, he shows the security her Majesty reapeth
thereby.

It is (says he) a prevention of all dangers to her Royal Person: for it
will discover them.

Therefore it will secure her present interest.

For answer to the Antecedent, and the reason thereof, it may please the
Reader to allow my remittance of him, to the refutation already set down of
the same, in the sixth and eight argument. The consequence inferred thereon, is
no less idle and unworthy then the Antecedent. For he so reasons, as if her
Majesty's royal interest and State, did wholly and entirely rest in the safety
of her Person: whereas in truth it is in general extendable to each
particular of her Soueraignety: so as she may be free from danger in her
Royal Person, and yet suffer exceeding prejudice by incrochment upon her
Crown and Supremacy, by reconcilement of her Subjects to the obedience of a
forrayne potentate, by courses held for the ruin of the Gospel, established
by her authority, by practices for discovery of her resolutions, and for
betraying some part of her dominions unto her enemies. The Quilibets
consequence therefore being the concluding of a general upon a particular, is
to receive no approbation from us. Secondly, touching the security that is to
grow to the State in general: the ground of his dispute is the same which is
set down in the precedent argument of safety to her Highness Person: and
therefore to receive the same answer. Thirdly, concerning the Nobility and
Bishops, he yields no proof of sesecurity growing by toleration unto them:
as in deed he cannot: it being clear, that they shall receive thereby
special prejudice, if not presently, yet at least, in regard of the
proceedings likely to be held, for undermining the Soueraignety of her Majesty
and the State in general, both Ecclasiasticke and Civil: unless it be
conceived, that they are not to communicate in the public calamities and
miseries of the Commonwealth. The Honorable and Reverend Fathers of our
Church are not (I grant) immediately upon the admittance of toleration, to
sustain any hinderance in they present incumbency, and the authority annexed
thereto, or any abatement in their revenues. But who can warrant and assure
their continuance in these terms for any time? Considering they are to have on
the part of the Catholics sundry concurrents: who out of opinion that the
honor and present interest of the places Episcopal belongs unto them, will
accordingly prepare the way for their future inuestiture.

For a further inducement of our allowance to toleration, he persuades it
page 271. The thirteenth motive therefore is this.

Her Majesty permits Puritans, Brownists, Barowists, Familians.

Therefore she may with like reason, tolerate the free exercise of Popery.

Concerning the Antecedent: such of them as do scandalously and with schism
withdraw themselves from our public congregations, refusing there to serve
the Lord with us in Prayer, in hearing the word preached, and receiving the
Sacraments, her Majesty permits not, but punishes their contempt and
irreligious carriage, according to the law provided in that behalf. The
Antecedent therefore contaynes an untruth. The consequence also deduced from
it, is no less exorbitant and out of square. For first, the Sectaries
mentioned in the Antecedent hold not, for ought I know, any opinions directly
opposite, either to the Majesty of God, or her Highness Soueraignety, as the
Romanist does: and they were never found as I think, convict of treasonable
practices against her sacred Person and the State, as numbers have been of the
Romish faction: Secondly, if they did disloyally offend, both in opinion and
practice, yet could it stand with no policy, by admittance of Popery, to add a
multitude of Romanists to the said Sectaries, and so to suffer a multiplication
and increase of disloyal Subjects. Thirdly, the peril from the said
Sectaries, and the English Romanists, is not to her Majesty and the State
alike: the latter being more dangerous then the former, not only in opinion
of doctrine and undutiful carriage, but for their number and dependency at home
and abroad. And this is the judgment of the State, as may appear by the
sundry penal statutes, provided against the one, and not against the other. So
as there is not the like reason for toleration of the Romanist, as there is for
permission of the Brownist and the rest. But the Quilibet fearing the
weakness of the said consequence, does thus strengthen it: The consequence
deduced by Athenagoras in his Apology to the Emperor Commodus, from the said
Emperors allowance of other sects, to persuade his allowance of the Christians,
was sound and warrantable.

Therefore the consequence from her Majesty's permission of the above named
sectaries, to persuade her toleration of the Romanists and their religian, is
likewise sound.



If the Brownists and the rest above mentioned, were as impious in opinion as
the Heretics and Idolaters permitted by the Emperor Commodus: and if the
English Romanists were in the articles of religion as sound, and in the
practice of obedience to their Sovereign as loyal, as the Christians were, in
whose favor Athenagoras tendered his apology and humble suit: I would then take
no exception to the said consequence, but allow of it for such as were no less
justifiable then that of Athenagoras. But since there appears a main
difference betwixt our Romanists and the said Christians, these being free from
just charge of Idolatry against God, and of disloyalty toward the Emperor,
whereas the said Romanists stand convinced of both: and since likewise the
Barowists and Brownists do offend in a less degree of error and impiety, then
the Sectaries and Idolaters to whom the said Emperor allowed place for the
exercise of their superstition: we must censure and reject the Quilibets
consequence in the case proposed for an inconsiderate point of sophistry.

The fourteenth argument.

The persecuting Emperors in former ages allowed unto the Christians some
places for exercise of their religion, and were far from inflicting such a
general and heavy affliction upon them, as the English Catholics do sustain.

Therefore her Majesty being behind none of them in goodness of nature, should
show the like favor to the English Romanists.

The Quilibet being careful to record and publish to the world her Majesty's
proceedings against some Papists, for such as exceed in barbarousnes and
tyranny the acts and courses of the greatest persecuton that ever breathed
under the Sun, does, not out of his own conceit and in his own name (for he
would traduce and defan^^ her Highness and the State, and yet without peril to
himself) but out of the apprehension of others and in their name, deliver at
large that all former persecutors come short of her Majesty in cruelty against
Catholics. But in the end, least he might (notwithstanding the carriage of this
traiterous imputation under the shadow of others) be challenged for the same:
he smootheth the matter on his own part, and as if he allowed her Majesty's
proceedings, which elsewhere he brandeth with the title of an unjust vexation
he tendreth an answer and defense in the behalf of them. He says therefore
that considering the English Romanists sought the death of their Sovereign,
the conquest of their native country, the subversion of the State, the
alteration of all laws and customs, the destruction of all the ancient
inhabitants of the land: it is rather to be wondered that one Catholic should
be left alive in England, then that their persecution has been so great.
Which answer of his her Majesty may take for a sufficient warrant for her
forbearance of imitating the said Emperors in this particular of allowing
Chapels and Churches for the exercise of Popery. The Christians, to whom this
favor was yielded, were not in opinion, affection and action traitors to God
and to the Emperors, as some pretended Catholics have been and are unto God
and her Majesty: and therefore the cause of the said Christians and the
English Romanists being so unlike and different, her Majesty is not to hold the
like course toward the one, as the Emperors held toward the other.

The fifteenth argument.

Under the Persian and the Turk there is liberty of conscience granted to all
men.

Her Majesty therefore may with good reason grant the like liberty unto
English Romanists.

No action of a Pagan and atheall Monarch ought in a question of the worship
and service of the Lord to be a president unto a Christian Prince. Besides,
such to whom the Persian and Turk allow this liberty, do neither in opinion
derogate ought from their sovereignty, nor in action attempt any thing against
the same, nor for number or other respects are able so to do: whereas in the
case of the Romanists within this kingdom it is far otherwise: they being
for opinion adversaries to her Majesty's supremacy, for loyalty freed by
popish bulls from acknowledgement of allegiance unto her, for affection devoted
to a forrayne Potentate, for their carriage in plot and action heretofore
conspirators against God and their Prince, for intention and wish aymers at
alteration, for number dependency, confederacy as well foreign as domesticke
and other correspondent abilities, strong and to be suspected. Upon which
regards I do infer that the proceeding of the Persian and Turk in this cause
of toleration, ought not to be unto her Majesty a direction for doing the like.

The sixteenth argument.

All Kings and princes of this age have thought it the fittest and safest
course to grant liberty of conscience to their subjects: as in France,
Flanders, Germany, and other countries has bin practiced.

Therefore her Majesty should allow unto Papists the same favor for exercise
of their religion.

The Quilibet offers unto us an (...) truth in the Antecedent. For the
Princes and Governors of the Countries here mentioned, and all other
Potentates holding correspondence in religion with the Pope as they do, have
for the most part both in plot and action employed their utmost policy and
means to the supplanting and extirpation of the Gospel and the professors
thereof within their kingdoms and territories: having for warrant of their
proceedings in this behalf the decree and resolution of the Council of Trent,
particular directions from the Pope, and the judgment of the Prelates and
Clergy within they own dominions. It is not unknown how passionate and
violent the Spaniard has been now a long time for an utter suppression of the
holy truth, professed by some his subjects. His Inquisition, his secret
combination with the Guisian, his armies by sea and land do testify against
him. The rivers of blood that France in the days of Henry the second, but
especially of his three sons successively has seen in attempts and
massacres against the Hugonots, are scarce yet dry. What should I speak of the
courses held against the Gospel in Flanders? and heretofore in Germany and
England? Is there at this day any popish Prince and governor, who is of
sufficient power to displant and subvert the profession of the same within his
several jurisdictions, and does it not? If any shall allege the toleration of
religion at this present in France: he must consider that the said religion is
allowed upon the same ground of necessity and dishability on the part of the
Catholics to expugne and ruin it, as it was in the time of Charles the 9. and
Henry the third. ^or were they of sufficient strength to remove or abolish it:
well might the memory and name of Hugonots remain in their records: assuredly
their persons should not hold other place and interest there, then now they do
at Seuil in Spain, or at Millan and Rome in Italy: in which places there is
straight order taken to proceed with all rigor against them whereas if the
Pope, Spanyard and other Princes of like judgment and affection in religion
held it the safest course to grant liberty of conscience, as the Quilibet
untruly insinuates, they would repeal their Edicts and decrees against
Protestants, cancel and frustrate the power of the Inquisition, spare all
search after their persons, surcease their confiscations and all criminal
process against them.

As the Antecendent deserves no credit with us: so the consequence inferred
thereon may justly be censured. For, disproofe whereof, we must remember that
R^tion^ and legibus viuitur non exomplis. Experience has euicted it to be a
course of peril for princes to govern themselves by examples, especially
where there is not a co^currence of the same reasons and circumstances inducing
thereto. Now in this case of allowing toleration, the circumstances and reasons
are not like: first, in the Princes themselves, of which the Emperor, the
French, the Spanyard, the Polonian, ^^e for outward profession and practi^^,
devoted Papists: whereas her Majesty professes the Gospel. Secondly, in the
particular to be granted: they supposed to allow the free exercise of the
Gospel, a doctrine in it self most lawful and holy, and which yields unto
Princes, every parcel of their honor, and every point of Soueraignety:
whereas her Majesty is solicited to the admittance of Popery, a thing in it
self impious, and which denies unto Princes, a Sovereign interest and power
over their Subjects, and transferreth it to a foreign Potentate. Thirdly, in
the ground and motives of granting this liberty: the said Princes (I mean
such of them as have yielded herein) induced thereto not out of humor to
gratify their subjects, nor out of respects of security to their persons and
States, but out of extreme necessity, as absolutely disabled to prevail
against them: whereas no such violent and desperate regard does as yet enforce
her Majesty unto it. Lastly in the persons, to whom this favor of toleration
is to be communicated: they, the said Princes allowing it to such, who repute
and acknowledge them for their lawful Sovereigns, and who never plotted or
attempted ought against their Crown and life: whereas her Majesty is to impart
and yield it to those who hold her for disinuested by the Popes bull of her
imperial Crown and regalities, who have disposed of their allegiance to a
forrayne Prince, who have been interessed in proiects and practices against her
royal person and State, and who are ready upon opportunity offered, and upon
direction mandatory received from the Vicar of Rome, to take arms for the
subversion of her scepter and the Gospel. So as the examples propounded to
persuade and enforce an imitation in her Majesty, carrying with them so many
differences in the circumstance of the persons and things in questions are not
meet presidents, and such from which a sound consequence may be deduced to
draw allowance from her Majesty of the toleration solicited.

The seventeenth Argument is in page 280.

Upon grant of toleration all occasion would be taken away of sending english
youths to the Seminaries beyond the Seas, there to be trained and fitted for
practices against the State.

^^^refore her Majesty may with good rea^^n allow the same.

^^^cerning the Antecedent: first, it is (...) and uncertain, whether upon
this occasion they would surcease transmitting their youths to the said
Seminaryes. Secondly, if they should: yet their institution of discipline
within the Realm, may be the same for substance, and to the same intent and
purpose, it has been formerly in the said Seminaryes: considering that
toleration is able to furnish unto them instructors, and doctrines of the same
quality and use. But let us suppose the contrary: should her Majesty, to
prevent their trayning in a school of treachery, give place and intertainement
to toleration? Were not this to cure the indisposition of some members of the
State, by a remedy fitted in every respect to augment the malady, yea, to
infect the whole body? Besides, to consent to an alteration of this nature and
consequence, as toleration is of, were not only against the rule of piety and
duty to God, but against the law also of ordinary policy and wisdom, except
in the case of deliverance from greater and imminenter peril, and in
counterchaunge of profits more importing. To receive and allow the free
exercise of Popery in the State by public authority, were to broch a vessel
of poison and to have the Antidote uncertain: or to raise a flame in a City,
and to leave the quenching thereof to doubtful possibilities.

FINIS.

