A Perfume against the noisome Pestilence, prescribed by Moses unto Aaron. Number.
16. 46.

Written by Roger Fenton, Preacher of Grayes Inn.



Imprinted at London by R. R. for William Aspley. 1603.

To the Christian Reader.
THese times of Gods visitation do beg that at my hands which otherwise, in
this writing age, might very well have bin spared: the publishing of some few
Meditations concerning the times, for the instruction and comfort of such as
shall now stand in need of the same. And albeit it seems to me a matter of
great difficulty to prescribe forms of private prayer for others, since I
have not the scantling of any ones affection but mine own: yet because this
Treatise promises somewhat in that kind: I have annexed three supplications:
which if they may fit thy devotion (gentle reader) I shall be right glad: If
not, I wish thee that which may together with all spiritual comfort in life
and death, to the glory of God in Christ Jesus our Lord,

R. F.
August. 9. 1603.
A Perfume against the noisome Pestilence prescribed by Moses unto Aaron.
Number. 16. 46. Take the Censer and put fire therein of the Altar, put Incense
thereon, and go quickly to the congregation, and make an atonement for them:
for there is wrath gone out from the Lord. The plague is begun.
THis plague as it is a general judgment zeasing upon all sorts, and sparing
none: so it is inflicted for a general sin, as appears by the remedy; in
that the atonement is made for the whole congregation. And who must make the
atonement but Aaron himself, the party offended? advised by Moses; against
whom also all the multitude of the children of Israel murmured, and made
insurrection, verse 41. 42.

This atonement is prescribed by Moses, and put in execution by Aaron, after
this manner.

1 He takes the Censer, a hallowed vessel for that purpose, kept in the
holiest place of the Tabernacle, Heb. 9. 4.

2. He put fire therein to dissolve the odours, not common fire, but taken from
the Altar, where it burned continually, to signify how ready God is to answer
us by fire, and to accept our devotions, if we be not slack in bringing of them.

3. He puts Incense thereon, Incense compounded of sweet Spices; to wit,
Myrrh, clear Gum, Galbandum, Exodus 30. 34.
and pure Frankincense, composed after the Art of the Apothecarie: bruised and
beaten to powder, to make a more fragrant smell. This is the atonement which
must be made with expedition; because wrath is gone out from the Lord,
therefore there is no delaying: and to prove that wrath is gone out, he uses a
sensible demonstration in that the plague is begun.

Of which context, that we may so dispose, as may be most easy for our
understanding; we propound in the first place, the judgment it self which now
begins to be made sensible unto us: Secondly we enquire of the cause
thereof; and how it begun? in that wrath is gone out from the Lord. In the
third place we add the remedy; the atonement made according to the prescript
of Moses, Take the Censer, etc.

1.
The word which commonly is used in Scripture for the pestilence, (...) Leuit.
16. 25. Number. 14. 12. Deuteronomy. 28. 21. 2. Sam. 24 13.
is derived from a verb that signifies to speak, as some think, because,
where it is, every one speaks of it, enquireth after it, how it increases,
what remedies there be for it, what preservatives against it, what be the
symptoms, and qualities of it: wherefore since it is a thing so well known, as
every one is able to discourse of it; I shall need to speak the less. Only
thus much in a word: since we have so long hardened our hearts against the voice
of God, speaking unto us; it seems now that he will indeed speak with us,
in a judgment so quick, that unless some speedy atonement be made with all
expedition; he is but a (...)
word and a blow: that since we would not hear him, we shall now feel him,
for the word which Moses here uses (properly translated Plague) signifies
Smiting: and such a smiting as is fearful and terrible for impenitent sinners
to think upon. Fearful, because it brings death with it: and without
repentance a second death. Fearful, in regard of the terrors which
accompany the same: for which cause David calls it The Pestilence Psalm. 91. 5
that walks in the darkness; taking us unawares when we cannot see to
avoid it: causing such woeful lamentations of distressed souls, that perish
for want of succor; such doleful griping, and towling of Bells, as would make
a sluggard watchful, or a sound man sick to hear. Fearful for the
noysomnesse of it, which depriueth men of the comfort of that friendly and
neighborlike visitation, which otherwise they might enjoy. Fearful, because
it strikes suddenly (which made Aaron make such have) disappointing us thereby
of many blessings, which a deliberate death would endowe us withal; for the
perfitting of our repentance; for the better trial and exercise of our faith
and patience; for the blessing of our posterity, and the more effectual
enforming of others, by the last words which make the deepest impression; for
the liberty of our minds, in setting our houses in order, and making choice of
the fittest soil where the last seed of charity might be sown. Fearful, in
regard of the universality of it; spareing Luke 16. 9
neither place nor person: for as it is a sword pointing to 1. Sam. 24 ver. 19.
Psalm. 91. verse. 5.
the city and cutting near hand; so is it an arrow flying into the country
and smiting a far of. And if any be so senseless as not to be moved with
this fearful judgment, let them remember that Christ reckons this but
amongst the beginnings of sorrow, Math. 24. 8. Mat. 24. 8
signifying that God has yet more arrows in his quiver, and greater vengeance
in store to make an end of such wretches as make no use of these beginnings.

2.
That the Plague is begun, is a thing well known, but how it begun is the
question.

1. Some take it to be a discommoditie brought over in our Merchants
commodities from foreign countries.

2. Others suppose it to be a consequent of drought, and of that want of
moisture which we have complained of so long.

3. Some imagine it to be a matter of course, whereas the elements gather
infection continually more or less, once in certain years gathering to a
head, it must needs break forth.

4. Some take it to be an unhappy conjunction of certain Planets, inflaming
the air unnaturally.

5. Others conceive, that a huge concourse of people in some extremity of heat
and drought, has inflamed and corrupted the blood, and so it begun.

But the judgment of Moses reaches further, in that he makes it an effect of
Gods wrath: for whatsoever secondarie causes do concur hereunto, certain it
is, that the wrath of God is the principal: which being kindled and sent
forth, does fire the rest and set them all a working. He is purblind, as the
Apostle speaks, (...). 2. Pet. 1. 9
and cannot see a far off, who looks only upon inferior causes for if the
cause of this infection were elementary, why must holy fire be taken from the
Altar? fire out of the chimney would purify that and perfume the air as well
as any: it must be celestial fire; which argues that the principal cause is
supernall.

The wrath of God once kindled is terrible: when David did but think of it, it
put him into a passion like men who astonished and half frighted use to bless
themselves, Psalm. 2. 12. If his wrath be kindled, Psalm. 2. 12
yea but a little, blessed are all they that trust in him. It Is like Gun powder
which blows up whole familes before they live out half their days.

But much more terrible is it, when wrath thus kindled is gone out from the
Lord; as in this place where the plague is begun: for long it is before it go
forth: therefore when it is once out, a harder matter to drive it back again.
It has a time to kindle, and a long time: for God is slow to anger. After it
is kindled in the breast it has a time to break forth, in words and threats:
for He speaks unto us in his anger before he vex us in his sore displeasure.
Psalm. 2. 5
After many threatenings and warnings: he has a time to prepare himself to
battle, to whet his sword, and bend his bow, and make his arrows ready, Deuteronomy.
32. 23. 34.
which are rustie and blunt, and all out of order. A time to open his
storehouse, and unseal his treasuries, where all his plagues and instruments
of death be horded up, and hardly drawn from him: he is more liberal of his
blessing, they come from him with less ado: for he neither seals them in
his treasure, nor locketh them in his chest, nor keeps them in his bosom,
but carries them in his hands: It is the opening of his hands and all things
living are Psalm. 145. 16.
filled with plenteousnesse.

Doubtless then, it is no small matter that has kindled the wrath of God
against us: no cords of vanity, but some Cart-ropes of iniquity, which pull
down this judgment from him. Which thing appears, as well by the nature of
the remedy here prescribed, as by the quality of the judgment inflicted.

Here is Incense to perfume and sweeten: therefore somewhat there is which
stincketh in the nosthrils of the Almighty, in that Aaron must dissolve such
sweet Odoures for the atonement. Secondly the noisomnesse of the Pestilence,
notes the cause thereof to be some loathsome abominations which causes God
to turn the light of his countenance from us, as we turn our faces from
persons and places infected:

1. Whether it be therefore our profaneness and neglect of Gods service: which
Moses thought sufficient to cause God to meet us with the pestilence, Exodus 5.
3.

2. Or whether it be our hipocriticall worship of God dissembling with him in
our hearts as the Isralites did, for which they should dye of the Pestilence,
Iero. 42. ^0. vlt. 1.

3. Or whether it be our light accoumpt of the sacrament, and the unworthy
receiving thereof which caused such a mortality amongst the Corinthians. 1.
Cor. 11. 30.

4. Or whether our overmuch confidence in secondary causes (in that God of his
mercy has laid the corner stone, and united kingdoms together) make us to
number the people as David did, and secure our selves in the strength thereof;
which causes God by this kind of judgment to substract (as fast as we
multiply) from Dan to Bersheba.

5. Or whether our stubbernesse in not making use of former visitations has
brought greater upon us as upon the Israelites in Amos. 4. for God has
proceeded in the same order with us as with them. First sending us famine, as
ver. 6. after that drought whereof we have long complained, as verse. 7. thirdly
want of fruit this last year, as verse. 9. and now the Pestilence, verse 10.
and if for all this we will not turn unto him, there remains worse behind;
war, and the overthrow of Sodom. verse 11.

6. Or whether the toleration of such unclean and notorious harlots as keep
about this place, have infected the City: for the Plague cease not in Israel
till Phineas had done judgment upon those adulterous persons, Number. 25. 8.

Unto which you may add those wanton attyres and unseemly fashions wherein
our women disguise themselves: whose ornaments do beautify their Egyptian
Temples (not Temples of the holy Ghost) but where some Crocodile or poysenfull
serpent does inhabit, whose gallant bushes of such curious and costly hair
do hang out to testify that their Wine is of the Vine of Sodom, and Grapes
of Gomorah, commonly sold at the sign of the Painted face and naked breast.
These creatures when they think themselves most sweet and fine, then be they
most loathsome and ugly in the sight of God and honest men.

7. Or whether some treacherous conspiracy plotted and intended by some
murmuring malcontents for insurrection against Moses and Aaron, to the great
peril or overthrow of Church or commonwealth, as it was in this place, verse
41.

8. Or whether the blasphemies of affected Atheists has poisoned our air: for
while they be suffered to breath in a Christian commonwealth, they must needs
infect us, since in the judgment of a Heathen Prince, to blaspheme the true
God was accounted most filthy abomination; insomuch as he decreed their
houses to be made a Iakes, who spoke any plasphemie against the God of
Shadracke, Meshake, and Abedmago. Dan. 3. 29.

Whether these, or all these together, certes some loathsome and abominable
sins they be, which have brought so noisome a judgment amongst us, which
must be perfumed by the incense of sweet odours.

3.
And what is Aaron that he should make an atonement for so great matters? a
sinful man like one of us. He was but a shadow, the true Priest is the son
of God our blessed Savior, by whose only virtue the atonement made even by
Aaron himself was made acceptable unto God.

1. First this Priest of the High God, in the fullness of time took the
Censer, when he assumed our humane nature into the personal union of his
deity, when he hallowed and sanctified that earthen vessel to offer Incense
therein unto his Father.

2. He put fire in this Censer, not sparingly, but in such quantity as he had
like to have burnt up Censer and all, John 2. 17. The zeal of thine house Ioh.
2. 17.
has consumed me. That fervent affection also which he carried to mankind,
was fire enough to dissolve Odours for a thousand worlds. It has been
observed, that as the Son of God when he became man made choice of the
worthier sex, that such a sacrifice might be without the least note of
imperfection: so one the other side did he vouchsafe to be conceived of a woman
without a Father, that he might suck from her such tenderness of affection as
that sex could derive upon him. And yet he received more then she could give;
for so much as her nature was sinful, and sin does naturally harden the heart
and dull the affection* Christ therefore who received all but sin, must
needs have his love and affection much more quickened toward man: for whose
sake it pleased him to be humbled with such passions.

3. Human affection is fervent for the time, but unconstant, like earthly
fire, sometimes in, and sometimes out. Peter his love was hot enough when he
would dye with Christ; but it would not hold: but Christ has kindled his
affection from the Altar, from a perpetual fire which never went out. Humane
love sauoureth of the earth be it never so pure, except the holy Ghost do
sanctify it from above. Peter spoke from love and from an hearty kind
affection to his master, I make no doubt; willing him to favor himself that
such miseries might not befall him; but his love was not taken from the Altar,
it seems by Christ his answer to have been kindled from hell rather get thee
behind me Satan. But Christ in whom the holy Ghost dwells bodily, is full of
celestial fire.

4. Whereupon he puts Incense, offering up prayer unto his Father an
atonement for his whole Church; Incense compounded of sweet Odours,
artificially compounded of such divine meditations as are recorded in the 17.
chapter of Saint John, in that excellent prayer made by Christ, for the entire
mystical body, himself and his members. These spices were bruised, broken, and
beaten to powder, to the end they might send up a more odoriferous smell, into
the nosthrils of his heavenly Father. Were not the thoughts of his heart
broken, when lamenting over Jerusalem in this manner. If Luke 19. 42.
thou had known at the least in this thy day those things which belong
unto thy peace, there comes a sob and cutteth away the rest of the sentence,
and as if his mind were broken in the midst betwixt compassion and
indignation, he concludes: but now are they hid from thine eyes. Were not his
divine Meditations interrupted, and sore bruised, when he stood in a mammering
what to say, backward and forward: when he says, and again vnsaith, How is
my John. 12. 27.
soul troubled, what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but
therefore came I into this hour: Father glorify thy name. Nay were not the
passions of his heart beaten to powder, in that bitter agony and bloody
conflict, where he strives till he sweat, and sweateth till he bleed: so
bruised and broken in heart, that an Angel must comfort the Lord of life.

5. This sweet Incense is an atonement to his Father: but for whom? for the
congregation of men, who murmured* conspired, and made insurrection against
him; for his enemies and bloody persecutors. Yea the first Incense of prayer
which he offered upon the cross, was for those who nailed him to the cross,
Father forgive them, for they wotte not Luke 23. 34.
what they do: and not for them only, but for all mankind was this atonement
made, who pierced the eternal God before he had a side to pierce, Zacher. 12.
10. and Zak* 12. 10.
because we cannot conceive how our sin should pierce a spirit, or our ill
doing extend unto God more then our well doing, Psalm. 16. 2. Therefore Psalm.
16. 2
God is incarnate, and has taken our flesh upon him, that man might conceive,
and see, and look upon him whom he has pierced.

Notwithstanding this atonement made once for all; yet we see wrath is gone out
from the Lord, and the plague is begun amongst us: Aaron with his Censer, and
all the ceremonies of the Leuiticall Priesthood be vanished, what remedy
remains then for us? Much every way: for albeit the Aaronicall Priesthood be
taken away, and the true Priest ascended up on high out of sight: yet
notwithstanding by virtue of his mediation there is a continual intercourse
between the Throne of God and his Church militant here upon earth: for his
heavenly inspirations, and our holy desires are as so many ascending, and
descending Angels of commerce between God and us And as teaching brings us
to know the truth of God, so prayer testifies that we acknowledge his
Goodness to be the only fountain of all blessings: wherefore as there is
nothing to which God is more prone, and inclinable then to communicate his
goodness; insomuch as the Prophet says, he does expect and wait that he may
have mercy: so there is Esa. 30. 18
no part of our service can be more acceptable unto God then this of prayer,
which drawing mercy from him, shows so happy a concurrence between his will
and our wishes. It is with our gracious and merciful Father in this case, as
with a full breast, which aketh for desire to give Milk: then welcome is the
hungry child that can suck the best.

This duty lies principally upon the Ministers of the Gospel, who as
public persons do stand and speak in the presence of God for the people:
for as it was enjoined Aaron and his sons to bless the people in the name of
God; and to offer prayers unto God in the name of the people: so was the same
practiced in the Primative Church (as Saint Paul witnesses) by the Minister of
this function: 1. Cor. 14 16.
whose Prayers and thankesgiuings the people by their joyful acclamation did
ratify: Wherefore the Archeministers of the Gospel, the Acts. 6. 3.
twelve Apostles, seperating others for other employments, reserved themselves
wholye for Prayer and the Ministry Verse 4.
of the word, conioyning those two ghostlye exercises together; as if they
whose care and charge over the people, is manifold more, then common persons,
should have a double portion in this duty of Prayer for the people: which
very duty imposed upon them, is a special seal and confirmation, that the
self same divine love which has made choice of the instrument, will thereby
effect his good work, in blessing his people, and accepting their prayers and
unfeigned devotions: but so much the rather, if the Minister himself do lift
up pure hands in prayer. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Wherefore our great desire is, that as we for the people, so they for us
would pray with David, Let thy Priests (O Lord) be clothed with
righteousness, Psalm. 132. 9.
so shall thy Saints rejoice and sing. Which oblation that it may be the more
effectual, and acceptable unto God; for external incense, we must take unto
us the Censer of the Sacrament, those hallowed mysteries which represent, and
exhibit unto us the precious body of our blessed Savior, which never comes
empty of heavenly fire taken from the Altar: for it is Ioh 6. 63
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: Whereby our odours of
devotion being perfectly kindled and dissolved, our Incense shall ascend even
as pillars of smoke in his presence and cover the mercy seat.

Yet for all this let the people take heed how by conferring the burden of
this duty upon the Minister, they do any way seek to exonerate or ease
themselves: for concerning the spiritual function of offering this Incense of
prayer we are all of us Priests at large. A chosen generation and ^. Pet. ^. ^
Reu. ^. 10
royal Priest hood, ordained and made Priests unto God by the Lamb which now
sits upon the Throne.

1. Let every one therefore bring his Censer, that is* his heart unto the Lord,
a hallowed and sanctified vessel for this purpose, to offer up incense of
prayer unto God, a vessel laid up in the holy of holies, in the heavenly
tabernacle, where Christ Heb* ^ ^. Co^o. 3. 2
sits at the right hand of God.

2. Let him put fire in the ce^ser, the fire of zeal that he may be fervent in
Prayer; for the wrath of God waxes hot, and our high Priest has taught us by
his own example in his agony when the hand of God is upon us, Luke 22. ^^.
then to pray more earnestly.

3. But alas we know not what nor how to pray: happily we shall pray for life,
because that is sweet unto us, or for our household and friends, for that they
are dear unto us, or some such like petition which flesh and blood in this
case shall reveal unto us: neither do we know in these extremities how to
limit our prayers according to the will of our heavenly father: neither will our
earthly fire of carnal zeal carye the smoke of our incense high enough to
cover the Luke 16. 13
mercy seat, besides every blast of wind, every idle and wandering cogitation
will be ready to disperce it into the air before ever it come near the clouds
wherefore we must beg some holy fire from the Altar: and desire God with David,
that he would direct our prayers in his sight like Incense, that they might
ascend directly without interruption* whereof assurance is made by the Apostle,
Romans 8. 20. The spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what to
may as we ought, but the spirit it self makes ^ou^d to God for v^ with (...)
to be expressed.

4 Upon this holy fire must we put incence: that is, power out our souls
before God, and our prayers in his presence: not casting forth vn^^uerently
before his throne our so^d affection, or what ever our heart lusts: nor
presenting before such a majesty, whatsoever our foolish conceit does suggest
for the present: but our incense must be compounded or sweet odours, and
artificially made after the skill of the Apothecary. Choice and select
Meditations are to be provided by mature premeditation, composed according to
the praescript of our Lord and master; who has not only given v^ general
directions, and rules of supplication* but also framed for us a general sum,
an exact form, and most perfect pattern of all prayer.

These Odours must be bruised or beaten to powder* A sacrifice of God (...) a
troubled spirit, a contrite and broken heart Psalm ^^. 17.
O God wilt not thou despise. It is no small grief which breaks the heart, no
slight humiliation which brings us to dust and powder. We say we are sorry
for our sins; but we cannot weep: sorry, but we eat and drink never the
less: we sigh and say our prayers, and by and by as cheerful and light
hearted as ever before. These sudden qualmes be far from that humiliation and
contrition which the Scripture calls the breaking and the ^enting of Joel. ^.
13
the heart: for can we persuade our selves* it is no greater torment Gal* ^. 24
Romans ^. 29.
then so, to have our flesh mortified yea and crucified: or can we assure our
consciences that we do indeed circumcise the foreskin of our hearts, unless we
feel them bleed within us? God prophesied by Zacherie of true penitents, that
after they had looked upon him whom they had pierced, and duly considered how
their sins had offended the Almighty, they should lament for him, as one
mourns for his only son: and Zach* 12. 10.
great reason; that as our sins had pierced him, so sorrow for sin should
pierce us: and as we caused him to give his son, his only son unto death for
us, so our mourning should not be slight and superficial, but as one mourns
for his only son.

To the end our incense may be beaten smaller, our Savior Christ has
commanded us to join prayer with fasting, which makes our Incense both to
asce^d higher, and to smell sweeter: for (...) does not only eleuate the mind
in divine meditation, which was the effect of Moses his fast in the mount: but
in depriving our flesh of her ordinary food, we do work revenge upon our
selves for offending such a gracious God, and withal give unfeigned testimony,
that our selves we condemn as the only causes of our own misery. Thus
displeasing our selves we and our incense are more pleasing unto God: judging
and condemning our selves, we shall not be judged; 2. Cor 7. 1^.
and reue^ging our selves upon our selves, we shall prevent the greater
judgment of God.

If public fasts upon the occasion of this general visitation* should appear
manifestly by the rules of Physic, not to stand with safety of some
weaklings, in a time of infection: then let them perform it privately, that our
Father which sees them in secret, may relieve them openly. For albeit our
gracious God in regard of our fears, and infirmities, does dispense with the
manner of his worship in some cases, as he dispensed with David, who should have
gone to Gibeon to ask counsel of God, but only that he was afraid of the
sword of the Angel ^. Chro. ^^ 30. ^. These. 5. 27.
of the Lord: yet for the substance of his worship we are never dispensed
withal. If we should seriously think of these things, and practice upon our
selves to purpose, we should not only prevent the Prophet his complaint, that
we hang down our heads like a Esa. ^^. ^
Bull-rush, which boweth in a storm, and after stands prick up, as before:
but we should find such alteration in our selves as we should have small
list to commit the same sins again. Yea the very remembrance of them would
make us to love our selves the worse while we lived.

5. And as for prayer, all times are convenient, so is it a general duty to
be performed for all persons: for the whole congregation of what condition
soever, Let prayers be made for all men, for Kings, and for all 1. Tim. 2. 1.
that be in authority: for our enemies, and them that rise up against us, as
in this place against Aaron: for as prayer is a benefit which none so poor but
is able to bestow; so there is none so rich but stands in need of it; and
again, as it is in the power of every one to give; so is it not in the power
for any one to refuse it, though through malitiousnesse they will not vouchsafe
to accept any thing at our hands, yea though they be set on mischief against
Moses and Aaron: yet Aaron his Incense shall stay the plague that is begun
amongst them.

But while we seriously reflect upon our selves, all that has bin said will
not comfort us: for we have neither censer, nor fire nor odours for the
purpose. Our hearts which should be hallowed and sanctified vessels for this
holy action, laid up in the holy place of the tabernacle; they are daily and
hourly profaned and polluted by common and unclean use. Our fire the most of
it is kindled either from the earth or a worse place, for Satan is ever
casting his firebrands at us, or else blowing with the bellows of one temtation
or other: and if we can beg any heavenly fire from the Altar, we have so many
humerous affections, as be ready evermore to quench the same. Our odours
stink, the imaginations Genesis 5. 6.
of our hearts be only evil continually, and if good motions be inspired from
above, there is such a damp of thoughts arising in our Luke 24. 38.
hearts to meet with the^ as must needs choke them. Yea that excellent compound
of prayer made by our Savior Christ himself for our use, if it once pass
through our polluted lips we mar it in saving of it.

And to say the truth, our consciences do accuse us, and our sins do
witness, that we are the offenders who have kindled this wrath of God against
us; and shall we now take our Censers and offer Incense? so did Moses bid the
rebellious people in the 17. verse of this Chapter; Take every one their Censer
and put Incense Number. 16. 17.
thereon before the Lord: two hundredth and fifty Censers: but this is the
next way to kindle the wrath of God more against us, to consume us as it did
them, 35. verse.

It is true, if we be obstinate in our rebellions: but otherways though Aaron
himself have sinned; yet we read that he may take the Censer as well for
himself as for others, and it shall be so accepted that the smoke of the
Incense shall Leuit. 16. 13.
cover the mercy Seat, that is upon the testimony: So he shall not dye.

And against all our infirmities and imperfections which can be alleged, we
are relieved abundantly, in the 8. of the Revelation the 3. verse. A^ Revel.
8. 3
Angel stood before the Altar having a golden Censer, and much Odours was
given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of all Saints.

Our high Priest made not an end of praying for us upon the Cross: but as he
is a Priest for ever, so he prays for ever without end, It is God that
justifies, Romans 8. 34.
who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, or rather risen again, who is
also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us, and as we ever sin,
so the Apostle says, He Heb. 7. 25
ever lives to make intercession for us. There he stands before the Altar in
the presence of his father with a golden Censer: for his precious body which
has bin so often tried as gold in the fire of persecution, is now glorified
in the heavens, which before was an earthen vessel. In which censer there
wants no fire, for he has carried al his affections and bowels of compassion
with him into heaven, neither may we think that he carries less zeal or love
in his breast toward mankind now sitting in glory, then bleeding in the
garden, or dying upon the cross. It was the effect of the thief his petition,
Lord remember Luke 23. 42.
me when thou co^mest into thy kingdom, now in the midst of torment I know thou
can not forget us, since thou art partaker of the same misery with us: but
will thou remember me when all is past, and thou come into thy kingdom; when
thy body is glorified, and all tears wiped from thine eyes, shall not those
pitiful affections be also wiped from thine heart? no verily though he be
ascended above the heavens and stand behind the wall, though the heavens be
Cant. 2. 9.
drawn like a Curtin, or stand like a brazen wall between, that we cannot
behold our beloved with bodily eyes, yet eue^ now also does he look through
the grate upon us, with no less pitiful compassion then when he hanged upon
the cross: for when that bloody enemy Saul made a breach into his Church,
it affected him as much, as if his own person had been assaulted afresh, Saul,
Saul, why do thou persecute me? I am Jesus of Nazareth Acts. 9. 4.
whom thou persecutest. When the blessed martyr Steven stood at the bar in
great distress, then did he behold our Savior standing at the right hand of
his Father, as Saint John Act. 7. 55. Reu 8. 3.
does here see him standing before the Altar; who is wont to sit at the right
hand of the majesty in the highest places; but when his Chucrh is troubled,
then does he stand up and make intercession for the same, such is his
sympathy and compassion toward us.

Upon this heavenly fire does he power sweet odours, and offers them to his
Father, together with the prayers of Saints. So then here is our comfort,
though our Censers be unclean; yet our prayers are offered in his golden
Censer before they be presented unto God: and though they be in themselves
never so unworthy, yet are they sweetened and perfumed by the sweet odours of
Christ: in whom there is more virtue to purify and reform them, then is or
can be corruption in our nature to infect them.

Therefore (to conclude) since we are not able of our selves, as of our selves,
to 2. Cor. 3. 5.
think a good thought; let us desire the holy spirit by his celestial
inspirations, to raise holy desires in us: and since those desires when they
are at the holiest, must needs smell of the caske; let us humbly entreat our
Savior Christ to take them out of our naughty vessels, and offer them in his
golden Censer, to perfume them with his sweet odours, to present them in his
own name for us: so shall they be a sweet savor unto God the Father, to
whom with his beloved Son and blessed spirit (what ever become of us) be
given all glory, power, and dominion, world without end:

Amen.
A Prayer for this time of visitation.
O Eternal and everliving God, Creator and disposer of all things in heaven
and earth, we thy poor creatures bound in duty to give thee humble thanks
for that great benefit of our creation, whereby thou did raise us out of the
dust, above other creatures, to be made conformable to thine own self: do
acknowledge here before thy divine and unspotted Majesty, to our shame and
confusion, that by our own only default we have utterly deprived our selves,
not only of the comfort of that most excellent benefit, but of all power to
be dulye thankful for the same.

We have blemished thine honor, defaced thine Image, brought a curse upon
our selves, and miserable thraldom upon the rest of thy good creatures. We
have left our selves nothing but misery and wretchedness, shame and
nakedness; nothing but mortality, terrors of death, fearful expectation of
judgments, and everlasting confusion.

And albeit there be left unto us some relics of understanding, as the
candlelight of nature for direction, by which we are able to discern some few
things under heaven* yet when we consider how some of our brethren, made of
the same mould, are borne into the world natural fools, and stark ideods;
who by due might challenge as much as the best of us: we are thereby driven to
confess, that this small remnant of thine image is derived unto us, not by any
right of inheritance, but only by the indulgence of such a faithful
creator, who in the midst of thy judgments do remember mercy.

Yet cursed creatures that we are, no sooner do we receive a good gift of
nature from thee, but we arm our selves thereby the more to work mischief:
turning sweetness into poison, and employing all the natural powers and
faculties of soul and body as instruments and weapons of unrighteousness
unto wickedness.

Insomuch, as if thou should not by thy provident power bind in that bag
of poison, and restrain the root of bitterness within us, but should
suffer it to sproute out into the several branches, we should too too soon
bewraye what monsters we are.

Thus are we by nature plunged into the depth of woe, and exposed unto all
misery: so that if all the plagues under heaven should zease upon our bodies,
and send our souls headlong into those hellish torments; we do unfeignedly
acknowledge, that thou in thy judgments might thereby reap honor, and we our
most just deseruings.

Yet notwithstanding for all this, we are encouraged to approach to thy throne
of mercy, as to a most gracious God, and our loving Father in Jesus Christ (O
blessed be that son who has taught us to call thee Father) in whose only
name and mediation we come unto thee, beseeching thee upon our vnseigned
repentance to be reconciled unto us.

We repent, O Lord help our impenitencie, we are out of love with our
selves, we detest our selves for offending such a gracious God: we are sorry
for our sins, and heartily sorry that we cannot be more sorry: yet accept
our endeavors, O Lord, and pardon our infirmities.

Teach us more and more by thy holy spirit to make the true use and
application of the merits of thy son, to our souls and consciences. Let his
humanity encourage us with confidence to come unto thee in the name of our
elder brother. Let his holy conception daily purify our original corruption
wherein we were conceived and borne; that it never bring forth more of this
corrupt and bitter fruit, as it has done in the course of our lives. We have
multiplied many actual transgressions and foul offenses against thy divine
majesty: but yet thy son did never transgress in all his life: he was
obedient to every jot and tittle of thy law for our sakes: look upon his
righteousness. We were slaves unto Satan, but his passion has redeemed us:
bound with the chain of sins, but his condemnation before Pilate has
absolved us: borne to eternal death; but quickened by his death to everlasting
life: cursed creatures we were, but his cross has blessed us: polluted and
unclean, but his blood has washed us.

Let all the lusts and affections therefore of our old man be buried with him,
that we may be renewed in spirit by virtue of his resurrection: and so shall
we have the lotte of our heavenly inheritance daily more and more confirmed
unto us, by his ascension: and we secured of all blessings meet and convenient
for the militant estate of thy kingdom, by his session at the right hand of
the Majesty.

Yea these wounds of our consciences which do now seem to bleed afresh under
thy heavy hand of visitation, shall be suppled and healed up by the sovereign
unction of thy gracious spirit descending upon thy Church, and distilling from
the head to every lively member of the same.

And seeing thou have yielded thus far unto us (most gracious Lord) we hope
further that thou will not deny us any temporal blessings which may stand
with thy glory and our comfort.

Then let this great death and mortality which now reigns be swallowed up
in the death and passion of our blessed Savior: Let his sweet Incense make a
speedy atonement for us: Let it appease thy wrath which is gone out against
us, and stay this plague that is begun amongst us.

O Lord, we have deserved a thousand plagues we confess, but we are sorry
for it: Hold thy hand therefore (good father) and we will do no more so.

Less of thy judgment (sweet Jesus) less of thy judgment, and more of thy
grace, that we may make the true use of thy judgments: so shall our happy
deliverance minister matter of praise and thanksgiving in thy holy
congregation, to the eternal glory of thy blessed name, and comfort of thine
elect children.

These things, and whatsoever our imperfect prayers are not able to express,
which thou in wisdom know to be needful for us and expedient for thy whole
Church, we humbly beg at thy hands for Jesus Christ his sake, thy beloved
Son and our only Savior and redeemer.

Amen.
Another directed by the line of the Lords Prayer, to the same purpose.
O LORD our GOD most Our Father.
gracious and merciful, we give thee humble thanks, for that thou have
vouchsafed to give us leave to come so near thy Majesty, as in the name of
children to call thee Father.

We are astonished (O Lord) at this great mercy, that thou will acknowledge
us for thine own children, who are so unlike the father: ugly and deformed as
Mephibosheth; disobedient and profligate runagates, who like the Prodigal
son have spent our time and wasted all thy good gifts and blessings in the
vanities of this wretched world: disloyal, unnatural, rebellious as Absolon,
who by our obstinacy, and unkind acts, by our most cruel and wicked
attempts against so tender and loving a Father, have deserved a thousand
vntimelye deaths.

Yet notwithstanding David could be no more tender in affection and love
toward Absolon, then thou art over us thy ungracious and wicked children.

He desired to have dyed for his Son: but thou haste given thine only
Son, a thousand times more precious in thy sight, then Absolon could be in
David's, to dye for us. How should thou not then with him give us all things?
since by him thou have made us sons, we hope that in him thou will deny us
nothing.

And albeit we do now feel to our great grief, that we have greeuouslie
offended thee, and that thou art highlye displeased with us; yet we hope this
thy correction, will prove but the chastisment of a Fatherly affection: for
thou art not Which art in Heaven.
like earthly fathers, who change their affections as themselves are
corruptible, but thou art in Heaven, the same for ever, and thy years do not
fail.

Thou art the Father of lights, in whom there is no mutabilitie nor shadow of
change. Those whom thou love, thou love unto the end: but alas we have
changed, we have started aside like a broken Bow: we have gone away, and
therefore is the light of thy countenance turned from us. Yea our sins have
made such a thick cloud that it cannot shine upon us. And because we have so
abused thy patience, and presumed too far upon thy Fatherlye kindnesses,
therefore now it pleases thee to teach us, that thou art in Heaven, and we
upon the earth: that thou can humble us at thy pleasure, and make us by thy
judgments even to tremble before thy footstool.

Teach us therefore (Gracious GOD) so to comfort our selves by thy mercies,
that we never presume to offend: and so to humble our selves in the
consideration of our sins and thy judgments, that we never despair of thy
favor: Assuring our selves that thou art both able and willing as well to
raise us up as to beat us down: For thou art in Heaven, and can do what
thou will.

And as the heaven is above the earth, so is thy glory to be preferred
Hallowed be thy name.
before the happiness of all the creatures in the world.

Gloryfie thy name (O Heavenly Father) and teach us euer-more to consecrate
the first fruits of our desires, and petitions, to the hallowing and
sanctifying of the same.

Sanctify us by thy holy spirit, that we may sanctify it, who have
blemished the same by our former wicked lives, whereby we have given thee just
cause to glorify thy self in our confusion: but thou do always affect
more glory out of mercy then judgment.

Be merciful therefore O Lord in these our miseries: deliver us from the
power of death and the contagion of this noisome pestilence, and teach us by
thy fatherly affection hereafter with more sincerity to hallow, and sanctify
thy blessed name. So shall a Crown of glory be set upon our heads, by the
coming of thy kingdom. Thy kingdom come.
A worthy gift: worthy for such a father to give, though we most unworthy to
receive it: yet it is thy fatherly pleasure to give us a kingdom, to make us
heirs and fellow heirs with thy son Jesus, who carries the scepter in
heaven for us, and reigns within us by his holy spirit, till he have
subdued all his enemies under him: which that we may enjoy give us grace to
do thy will: Thy will be done.
for it is not every one that says Lord, Lord; but he that does thy will
which shall enter into thy kingdom.

Give us grace to do, and patience to suffer thy good will and pleasure,
whatsoever it be: so shall thy will* be done every way, by us, and with us,
to the hallowing of thy name, and enlarging of thy kingdom: and that not with
murmuring and grudging, but most willingly by us In earth as it In earth as it
is heaven.
is in Heaven, where Angels and Cherubins do thy will, flying with all
cheerfullnesse and alacrytie, where the Sun is ready either to stay his
course, or to go back again, even against nature, at thy commandment.

Make us then, as the sheep of thy hands, both to obey thy voice willingly,
and patiently to suffer thy good pleasure. Then will thou be our Shepherd
and defender, and we shall want nothing: then shall the petition of nature be
acceptable unto thee Our daily Give us this day, etc.
bread, and all necessaries for this present life shall by thy fatherly
providence be ministered unto us.

Give unto us we pray Bread.
thee, in this time of weakness and visitation, the staff of bread to
strengthen our bodies, and strength of body to digest our bread.

We pray for no dainties (good father) but for bread, desiring neither riches
nor poverty; but a sufficient mean of our Our bread.
own that we may not be chargeable but rather helpefull unto others.

Enlarge our bowels of compassion toward our poor brethren which perish for
want of succor, that our bread in these distressed times may be made common
as our prayers are common. And so long as it pleases thee to extend our
mortal lives, so long make a supplye of daily electuaries for the
preservation or the D^^^^ bread.
same.

Let our ordinary pittance, and daily portion be ministered in due season unto
us. Teach us sobriety in the daily use of thy creatures, that we glutte not
our selves at once, and want another time.

Teach us wisdom, that we may know how to abound and how to want, how to
humble our selves in fasting, and how to rejoice in prosperity; that we never
forget the affliction of Joseph.

We beg not for years, or months, or many days: only give us this This day.
day our daily bred: because we mean to come again to morrow, and be
daily beggars at thy gate of mercy.

We know it is thy fatherly goodness, that we should ask a little and
often, to the end we may grow familier with thee in prayer: and that thou
may open the windows of heaven wider, and replenish our bodies with all
plentiousnesse; we be seech thee to shut the mouth of hell likewise, which
gapeth so wide upon us. Remove from us all these evils which deprive us of thy
forenamed blessings: but especially our sins, Forgive us our trespasses, for
Forgive us our trespasses.
they have made this separation between thee and us: they have dishonored thy
name, blemished thy Kingdom, disanulled thy will, depryued us of many
blessings, and brought thy heavy judgments upon us.

Forgive, and forget good father: we confess they be our debtes, we are not
able to answer one of a thousand, we have forfeited our bond, nothing
remains to us but perpetual imprisonment in utter darkness.

Only let it suffice that the hand writing against us for this debt, is
nailed to the Cross by thy son and our Savior.

Release us therefore of As we forgive them that trespass against us
all that is past, and mollify our hearts with thy grace, that we may meite
the same measure to our brethren as thou have done unto us. But of all love
leave us not thus neither, for Satan will be sure to assault us afresh with
his temptations, Lead us not into temptation.
to spy where we be weakest that he may reenter with greater force, and
more malice then before.

Then shall the end of us be worse then the beginning: Then shall Plague and
Pestilence, War and Famine, be but the beginnings of sorrow.

Therefore second us by the assistance of thy gracious spirit, that we be
never ouer-taken with any dangerous relapse into our former vile
transgressions: but freed, and delivered from all evil, Deliver us from evil.
both spiritual and temporal, that we may serve thee not as servants, but
with that freedom of spirit which becomes thy adopted children.

But especially deliver us from that great evil the Devil, the archeenimie
to thee and thy Church, in whose kingdom and power all evil is included.

These things grant unto us, (O gracious Savior) not for ought in us, but
for thy own For thine is thy kingdom, etc.
names sake, for hereby thy kingdom shall be enlarged, thy power manifested
and thy name gloryfied, whereunto with heart and voice we most willingly
subscribe saying, Amen.

A Prayer to be said by those whose houses be infected.
Gracious God, who in Christ Jesus art the Father of mercies, and God of all
consolation: We thy poor creatures, now humbled under thy mighty hand in
soul and body, entirelye desire thy Fatherlye goodness, to pardon and
forgive us all our sins, which have so poisoned and infected our souls, as
the contagion thereof has even zeased upon the outward man.

Cleanse and wash us we beseech thee in the blood of the Lamb, that the
sting of death never have power over us unto a second death. Confirm and
strengthen us in the faith of thy son against all the temptations of Satan,
comfort us in thy promises against the force of death: perfect our repentance
in the due examination of our selves, and assure our consciences, by the
testimony of thy spirit, that whether we live or dye we shall be thine. As
it is thy property always to have mercy, so have thy mercies euer-more then
shined most gloriouslye, when we stand in greatest need of them, which thing
of all others has been the greatest comfort to thy children in their greatest
distress, that though they have walked through the vallyes of the shadow of
death, yet they have feared no evil, because thou have ever been with them,
yea thy rod and thy staff has then been most ready for to comfort them.

Dear Father, now is the time, yea the time is come wherein we long for
mercy: death is at the door, in the house, it compasses us round: we walk
in the vallie of the shaddowe of death. Give us grace that we fear no evil:
for death is but a shaddowe, the strength and substance of it is taken away in
the death of thy Son, the sting is lost in the wounds of our blessed Savior,
it may scare us a little, but cannot hurt us.

And though we be compassed in, that we come not forth, though we be
shut up from our neighbors, and deprived of all earthly comfort: yet be
thou present with us by thy blessed spirit, and we shall not be desolate: for
thou Lord alone shall make us dwell in safety.

Open therefore our eyes of faith, that we may discern a greater force of
spiritual soldiers with us then against us. Let thine Angels guarde us in
this miserable life from all evil, until they carry our souls into thy
fatherlye bosom.

Heavenly Father, who have made us preserve us: for thou art a faithful
Creator, who delightest not in destroying the work of thine own hands.

Sweet JESUS thou son of the Father, who have redeemed us, keep us: for
thou have dearly bought us.

Holy spirit of comfort, that have taken such pains with us, dwell in us
unto the end, and in the end.

Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who have created, redeemed
and preserved us thus far, leave us not at the last gasp, but hear our
cries, receive our prayers, either to the restoring of us in this life to the
glorifying of thy name amongst men: or, if it be thy pleasure, to the
receiving of us into thy everlasting habitations.

These things and whatso-euer else may stand with thy good pleasure and our
comfort, we beg them at thy hands (O eternal Deity) not only in the
name and mediation of JESUS CHRIST, because we are unworthy to offer any
thing in our own names: but also because our prayers are imperfect and
earthly, we come in his very words and prescript form of Prayer, who is
best acquainted with the style of heaven, and with whose name and prayer, and
words thou must needs be well pleased.

Our Father which art in heaven: Hallowed be thy name, etc.
FINIS.

