The Supplicacion: That the nobles and commons of Osteryke made lately by their
messaungers, unto king Ferdinandus, in the cause of the Christen Religion.

Item. The kings answer to the same.

Vvherpon follows the words that the messaungers spoke unto the king again
at their departing.

Miles.C. to the Reader.
THis last month of march (most dear Reader) was delivered unto me in the
hye Almaynes la^guaige a copy of this present supplicacio^ in prynt, whereof
truly I was right glad: Not only to hear of so many noble men and so great a
multitude of comen people thus fervently hongring and thirsting after Gods holy
word, but also it did me good at my heart, to read of the most humble and
gentle fashions, that they use toward the same. For first they ru^ne not rashly
together on head, nether take they their clubbes in their hands, to bring in
Gods truth by violence, but lowly and with due subjection seek they such
convenient means, as are of Gods ordinance: knowinge, that the common
refourmacyon of every realm country, or city, ought to be mynistred by the
office of the king, prince, or ruler of the same, and not by any private
person. Secondly, wha^ they have their answer, though they can not obtain
their just suit, yet make they no murmuringe ner grudginge, but commit their
cause unto God, and remain in their supplicacio^. Thirdly, though the king be
of another mind, and wills them to be as popysh in their believe as their
fathers were before the^, yet in that behalf they prefer the word of God
above all the precepts of men, allbeyt they cease not from prayeng for their
prince, ner from ioperding their bodies and goods with him and for him.

Such holy and virtues ensamples (gentle reader) does god set forth for our
instruccion, and all to gyde us in his right way, to move our hertes unto
ernest repentance, to make us honger and thirst after righteousness, to
pla^te in us all loving obedience, and peaceable behaueour toward our heads
and rulers, and to shame those wicked Babilonians and sedicious Coraites, that
disturb all ordinances of God, eue^ those murmurers and complayners, that had
rather sit in Egypt by the flesh pottes, and to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, then to be reformed and fed of God in the wilderness. O
unthankful and flow bellyes. O where is now among us such feruentnesse
toward Gods glory, such ernest repentance and ame^dment of life, as the
prophet Jonas describes in the Ninevites and as this present supplcacion
declares planely to be in this people? which though thy ca^ not be suffered to
have Gods truth syncerely preached among the^ (except it be by stealth) yet
are they fervent toward his glory, thirsty after the water of life, wash their
chekes with tears for lack thereof, unfeigned in their request, true and
faithful unto God and their country, and even ready with ten hands (as they
say) to receive a right Christian refourmacio^, and that in all unite and
peaceable behaueour. Lord what shall worth of us then, that having such delight
in our old wicked co^uersacio^, shame not to refuse all honest ame^dme^t of
lyuinge? Full little remebre we, that the goodness of God does call us to
repe^tau^ce. And what else do me^ procure and heap up unto the^ selves by such
obstinate hertes, then the wrath of God against the great day of his
appearinge?

Now (gentle reader) that thou may take some edifie^g by this present
supplicacio^, consider thou these points therein: First, that for all the
multitude of dogs which go again to their vomit the lord ceasseth not yet
from raising up some to call upon his holy name, as thou may se here in this
people, whom the lord has turned (as he daily does many other moo) unto his
truth. Secondly, learn at their ensample not only to desire and wish for
ame^dme^t of all abuses, but also take some pains and labor thy self in
helping thereto, and be content to bestow thy body and goods for the same.
Thirdly, make thy first complaynte and suit to Almighty God, and then
remember, that in seking this precious perle and jewel of refourmacion at the
office of the hyer powers, thou forget not the fruits of humanite and love.
Fourthly though thou can not have thy laufull request, yet leave not thy
dewtie undone, make no disturbaunce* be peaceable, commit the cause to God,
and considre, that our sinful lives have deserved no better, and that it is
even the heavy indignacion of God, that so many Princes and rulers had rather be
disceaued with ypocrites (as Achab was with his four hundredth chaple^s) then
to have pity on their own souls, the^ to have compassion on their poor
subjects, the^ to have Gods glory and his holy word to flourish in their
countrees, the^ to be learned be times, and to embrace the dear son of God:
whose wrath wha^ it is kyndled (as the.ij. Psalm says) then blessed are all
they, that put their trust in him. Ame^

The supplicacyon, which the lower countres and cities of Osteryke, made by
their messaungers unto the Kings Ma. of the Romans, Ferdinandus, in the
cause of the Christen Relygyon.
MOst noble and mighty Prince, our most gracyous sovereign Lord, ^n most
humble wise beseech your royal Ma. the messau^gers of your true and faithful
country, to tender gracyously their unfeigned and hearty meaning, Supplication
and request which they and their affynyte that have sent them, do with inward
sighynge hertes and Christian stomakes make continually unto Allmyghtye God, To
the intent that he may be praised of his people through true repentance,
through assured undoubted hope, and through the steadfast faith of his godly
word: To the intent also that he may gracyously and fatherly grant your
Royal Ma. a prosperous victory against the sorest enemy of his Christendom,
and that he may lend your grace and your faithful countrees a perpetual
peace, according to the hartye request of your said faithful subjects. This
they most humbly beseech your Royal Ma. to tender and considre, and in most
gracyous and fatherly wise to accept it, according to the ernest expectacyon
of your said subjects.

First, the messau^gers of your said faithful countries do signyfye to your
grace with hartye lamentacyon, that (for all their faithful and contynuall
iopardyng of their bodies, goods and blood) the destruction of your said
countrees is ones so manifest, that (if amendment should not follow through the
mercy of god) there is nothing more certain, then the pyteous waystyng and
fynall desolacion thereof. And even so must it ensue, if we all from our whole
hertes, do not turn unto him by true penance and unfeigned receauynge of his
godly word.

Now for as much as your graces said faithful subjects (of the very
natural love that they bear toward your Royal Ma.) are greatly desirous and
well wylling, to ioperde and bestow all their power, that the country may
remain to your noble Grace and to your issue, in good understanding, and in
all duties of obedience inseperable, and that your graces lo^des and people
may be helped to their wealth and maintenau^ce: Seeing also that of love which of
dewtie we bear toward God and your grace with most humble and faithful
hertes, we co^sidere not only the vow that we first made unto God in baptyme
touching our sinful life but also our bownden dewtie which we owe unto your
royal Ma. as to our superiorite ordained of God: And pondrynge likewise our
eternal and temporal life together, we knowledge it our duty to sygnyfye
unto your highness, our faithful and true meaning, how this intolerable
burden and destruction of the country (which is ye very scourge of god) may be
taken away, and every thing restored again unto true understanding, and as
it ought to be. And consideringe that all our intent, counsel and ha^dling
is dyrecte only to your graces worship and increace of honor, and to the
wealth and prosperity of the land, we trust your highness will most gracyously
accept the true and faithful dealing of your said countries, and so tender
the same, that now, in this extreme necessyte, all such things may be taken in
hand, as make for the comen peace, and the countries welfare: And again, that
all such things may be put down, as give occasion to dysturbaunce and
destruction of the publyke weal. Which yet can not so come to pass, unless
your Royal Ma. show it self in most gracyous wise toward your said
country. And also except your highness do fatherly accept and tender this
matter, which they have proved necessary to be a good mean or beginning o^
good things to come, and may turn to the prosperity both of your highness
and also of the land.

For and if the origenall cause of the destruction of the country, and the
occasion of the manifest scourge of God be well wayed, it may easily be
perceived, that it comes for owre unrepentant sinful lives: and that it
follows, first because we despise Gods commandments and his holy word: and
secondly because that in all estates there is in manner no good politic or
cyuile fashion, but too wilful a kind of lyui^ge against all good manners,
order and right: and by reason that in private houskepinge there is
unmeasurable waistynge and mispendynge, and no good nurtoure. But the most
principal occasion and greatest offense is, the despysinge of God and his
wholesome word: for the which God lays this scourge upon us. For thorowout
all the stories of the Bible and of the Heythen it is euydent, that Almighty
God punished all Monarchies or empyres and kingdoms, not so much for the daily
sins of the people (to the which our flesh is natural given) as for
ydolatrye and despysing of his godly word. Of this is testimonye sufficient
the captyuyte of Babylon among the Jews, which came because they received not
the Prophets, and because they set up a new seruyng of God contrary to his
word. This was testified also at the last in their fynall destruction at
Jerusalem which followed, because they crucified the son of God, and despised
his doctrine.

The same is euydent likewise by the mighty Monarchies (or empyres) or the
Assyrians and Greeks, which all were suppressed by the Turks (being first but a
small simple people) and set from all their Gods seruyces, laws. dominions,
and so utterly destroyed, that there is now in a manner no demonstracion of
their Empire, such worthy punyshme^t have they received. For saying they would
not embrace almighty god and his word, but fell from him after they had
known him, they were therefore constrained by force to fall in to this
deuelysshe darcknesse and captivity of the Turk. Which bondage yet
nevertheless, Allmyghtye God did not suddenly send among them. For six
hundredth years had the Turcke enough to do with the empire of the Greeks, with
continual war, or ever he conquered it. But seeing that God Almighty did
thus allure them unto true repentance and to his wholesome word, and they would
receive none of his fatherly monycyons, he therefore suffered them to be finally
destroyed. Wherefore if we consider well the power and riches of the said
Monarchies or Empyres (and the famous prudent men that were among them) and
compare the same to the beestlye regyment of the Turks, we shall perceive,
that sens the great floude, there came never a sorer plage upon the world. All
which things ought indifferently to be wayed of every Christian heart.

Consyderinge then that the power and riches of those Monarchies or Empyres,
and the excellent wise men which were in them, might not wythstand so small a
people as were then the Turks, only because they despised Gods word: For
as much also as the Almighty power of God has now laid this evident plage
upon your graces Realm and land, in so much that for our like tansgression
and vnrepentau^t living, he has vysyted your realm of Vngarye, with the
enemies Tyra^nye in sundry terrible manner, as namely in spoylinge your Royal
seat Buda, (other wise called Offen) and with cruel burning in this kingdom
of Behem, with horrible infections also, death and honger in the lower
countries of Osterike (whence your graces most noble progenye did spring)
beside all other adventures, how many thousand Christen men's blood has been
shed now more the^ sixtene years, and brought in to beestly bondage: These
things considred, what will happen to the third and last Monarchye or empire,
namely of ye Romans, which over and beside this great decay, is also in
like tra^sgression toward God? For the Turk with the other Monarchies or
Empyres, has exalted and increaced his might above all Christen heads. And
out of his prosperous success and victories which he has had against the
Christen, he may conjecture that he is the scourge of God, and that noma^ can
wythstande his punishment. When this sore sin then lies upon us, alas
therefore that we will not receive Gods word offered unto us* ner enter in to
true Christen repentance, how is it possible for us resistyng al good
reformacio^, to escape this plage, or to defend our selves with the power of all
Chrystendome?

But saying that the mercy of God has no end, and considering that he
requires no thing more of us, then a sure hartye trust in his wholesome word:
For as much also as all kingdoms and regyme^tes are made and preserved by him,
and that to set up a people or head or to destroy it, is his only doing: And
seeing he has always offered his godly word unto the people from whom he
thought to turn his plage and preserve them, so that if they gave crede^ce
unto it, he delivered them from all evil, as witness the Ninevites, which
believed the Prophet Jonas: and as testyfyeth also the king of Assiria at the
preaching of the Prophet Daniel, which he received without following of any new
or strange Gods service, conuertyng unto God, and applyeng himself unto
repentance of life, and so was preserved thereby: your graces said faithful
country therefore pondryng these things, know none other mean for the
delyueraunce of their souls and bodies, then this, that Gods word after
Christen understanding be preached every where, whereby the people may be moved
unto Christen repentance, and so encouraged to withstonde the Turk.

The matter then consysteth only in this, that men's minds be kept in right
understanding to almyghtye God and their rulers, in true nourtoure and ordynate
living, and yet nevertheless, the more pity, an exceadinge error is crepte
in touching the right true understanding of Gods holy word, wherein your
highness (as a Christen king) has been put to sondrye great pains now these
many years, to bring the same Scysme to an unity: The matter also being
finally so far reset forth in the last assemble, that sondrie articles were
discussed, and a general peace in the cause of Religion concluded upon, until
the time of farther agreement, which doutlesse follows here of, eue^ because
that many articles (yea and that the principal) are come to the right Christen
understanding: and also because that as touching outward behaueoure and
abuses crepte in among the spiritualte, they must in a time appointed, be
brought to reformacion, and that by them selves.

But if this general peace in in the articles (which ought as Christen points
to be kept) do not concern your graces said faithful subjects, or if a man
must sto^de in ioperdy of losing body and goods, when he keeps the same
articles, your Royal Ma. may most graciously considre, how tedyous a thing it
is, and to what inconvenience it will grow. Wherefore the country in most
hartye and humble wise prays and besecheth your highness, to bring so to
pass by the ordynaries and all sprituall officers, that the holy Gospel in
true Christen understanding may be preached, and likewise the highest article
of our salvation: namely, that we have forgiveness of sins through ye only
merits and death of Jesus Christ: and also that the love of the neighbor and
all good works may be taught as fruits and sure declaracyons of the inward
faith, with the commandments of God, for a contynuall true ame^dement, as
for the resystynge of evil sinful affeccions or inclynacions, and to give
thanks for this excellent grace, in that we through the only merytes of
Christ, are delivered from death and hell, and become children of eternal
salvation: And also by occasion thereof, to render all duties of faithful
obedience to your Royal Ma. as to the hyer power ordained of God, and to show
unto our neghboures all love likewise: And so to opteyne the reward that
necessarely follows out of this faith and out of the fruits thereof, And that
the worthy Sacrament of the Altar may be ministered unto them that Christenly
desire it, acordinge as it was observed certain hundred years in the
beginning of Christendom. Item that the Ordynaries or spirituality (acordinge
to the determinacion of the last Perliament) do put down all other abuses in
the churches, and bring the^ in to good Christen order, prouidinge the
parishes with good honest soul shepardes, and not persecutinge them which
preach Gods word in other places, as they have done hitherto. And though the
same abuses be so sore rooted, that we suppose verily it will be hard to
refourme them in a short season, yet the said mynistracion of the sacrament
and preachinge of the word (wherein consists our salvation, and that ought
to be purely done, and vnperuerted) may not therefore cease, yea necessary is
it, that all this be most ernestly prynted in to the people, that they may so
be brought from their rude sinful lyuinge and instructed unto right true
repe^tau^ce in the faith of Christ. For now (the more pity it is) they are
come from all knowledge of God: And many curates there be, which are nothing
less the^ curates or true shepherdes wherbye the comen people are become so
ungodly and rude, that it is in manner impossible to bridle them: And thus
comes it to pass, that they dye like brute beestes without any Christen
instruction or Sacrament.

Wherefore the messaungers of your Graces said countries, with whole Christen
minds, and with sighing he hertes, most humbly beseech your Royal Ma: to
tender these things in most gracious wise, and as a Christen king to consent
unto this waightye article, acordinge to their expectation in your highness:
whom they also most humbly require, in no wise to think, that your Graces
said land would herebye seek the more occasion of disobedience or of any
carnal liberty. For they know, that we have forgiveness of sins in the
true unfeigned faith, only through the passion and merits of Jesus Christ: and
that we than in thankfulness for such excellent grace, are detbou^d with our
whole hertes to cease from all sinful living, to bring forth all good
works in true repentance, and also with our bodies and goods to declare all
wyllinge obedience toward your Royal Magestie.

Considering now, that for our delyueraunce there can be none other mean, then
to take such a Christen life in hand: And seeing it is not possible for any
man with good heart and fre conscience to go against this enemy (which is the
scourge of God and punishment of us all) unless he first be reconciled to God,
and sure through the certayntie of faith and confidence in his godly promise,
that he shall be delivered from such plage, and that they shall escape in this
host, which are in danger either the^ selves or their wifes, childern, or
other friends, through your graces general proclamacio^ lately made and
commanded, The messaungers therefore of your Graces said land and the
parties that sent them, most ernestly with sighinge hertes and in most humble
wise, beseech your highness for the love of God, to accept this their
Christen and reasonable suit most graciously, and to promise a general peace
unto all such as behave them selves acordinge to our forsayde supplicacion and
suit. And then doutlesse will it come to pass, that (if such a Christen life
be embraced) Allmightye God shall mercifully cause this present plage to
cease: and so shall it follow also, that many well learned and virtuous men
shall take upon them the worthy office of presthode, which then with Christ's
doctrine shall bring the people unto true repentance, to the fear of God,
and to all obedice: And thus shall every man with faithful heart toward your
royal Ma: do his best against this enemy, and declare all loving obedience
with body and goods in this and all other things.

Where as the said articles then being much more excellently wayed, are
comprehended in the conclusion of the last Perliament, and seeing it has
pleased God to make us your Graces subjects (which therefore do knowledge your
highness next Almighty God to be our own dear Sovereign lord, having
all expectation of felicite and goodness in the same) for these causes are we
in no manner of doubt, but iour royal Ma: in most gracious and fatherly wise
carynge for your said faithful countrees, will suffer them to come in to the
same estate (appointed in the said conclusion of the Perliament) and consent
unto us here in: Acordinge to our most humble supplication, which we make unto
your highness (with continual sighinge and tears even from our hertes) for
the love of God and for his worship sake. And here with most humblye commit
we us unto your royal Ma: in all dewtie of loving obedience, wherbye (to the
thankful recompencinge of such a gracious benefit in your highness) we will
bestow our selves with our bodies, goods, and blood. Given, At Prage
the.xiij. day of Decembre. Anno. M.D.xli.

Your Graces most humble subjects, The messaungers of the lower countrees of
Osterike. Piligram lord of Bucheym chief debyte in Osteryke. Christofer, Baron
of Eytzinge. Sigismu^d Ludwig, lord of Bolham. Erasmus, lord of Starhe^berg.
Johan Vngnad, Baron of Suneck, chief captain of Steir. Reinprecht lord of
Ebersdorf, chief chamberlayne of Osteryke. Otto, lord of Lychtensteyn, chief
marshall of Kernten. John, Baron of Vveysprach. George, Baron of Herbsteyn.
George, of Vvolmirstorf, knight Sigismund Vvexelberger, knight. Christofer
Rembschussel, knight Abel of Kolneck, knight. Erasmus Scheyrer, knight.
Balthazar Gleyntzer, knight. Bonauenture of Ecke^, knight. George of Berckham.
Martyn of Vestreych. William of Bibrach. Erenreich of Rynsperg. Erasmus
Hochelperger. George Memmynger. Achatz Hohenfelder. Vvolfgang Hohenfelder.
The names of the cities.
Vienna. Gretz. Lyntz. S. Vitus. Steyn. Steir. Rochelspurg Kornnawenburgh.
Lawbach. Ems, Osterike beneth and above the water Anisus. Kernten. Krain, and
the pryncely Erledome of Gortz.


The answer of the kings Ma: Of the Romans Ferdynandus, to the messaungers
of the lower parts and cities of Osterike.
WHereas the appointed messau^gers of the kings Graces countrees of lower
Osterike have presented unto him a wrytinge (concerning causes of religion)
shewinge and declaringe at large, how Almighty God has doubtless now this
long season suffered all these plages to come upon his Christen people, as well
through the Tyra^nye of the Turcke, as with death and burning, because
subjects do live in no repentance, despisinge Gods word and not receauyng
it, and how that this is the cause why there could hitherto no victory be had
against the said archenemi of Christendom, with other moo articles: All the
same has the kings royal Ma. of the Romans our most gracious Seueraigne
lord, considred, with their humble suit and supplicacyon* which is, that it
would please his highness to suffer them and their affinyte for to come in to
the general peace, which (at the last Perlyament) was made in causes of
religion. And his Ma: has a gracious and hearty compassyon of his said
obedient and faithful subjects (and that no less then is expressed by the
messaungers in their wrytinge) because of the said grievous plages. His
highness also consydreth likewise, that the same punishme^tes do follow
because of the manifold sins and vices, wherewith Christen people are defiled.

Wherefore his Ma: sens the beginning of his reign hither to, desired never
thing more effectously (nether yet does) then the abolishinge of such
manifold vices and blasphemies, as are crepte in (the more pity) among many
men of hye and low estate, yea the longer ye more, wherbye almighty God
doutlesse is moved unto wrath against his Christen people. And therefore (as it
is openly known) his Royal Ma. in his graces own country has sent forth
ernest co^maundmentes and proclamacions, and given ernest injunctions upon the
same (specially unto all preachers and curates) that they in most effectuous
and diligent wise, shall exhort the people to turn from such sins and
vices, unto a Christen and repe^taunt life pleasynge unto God. Now where as
such his Ma: gracious and fatherly monicyon has not brought forth fruit
acording to the Christian request of his highness, his Royal Ma. is the more
sorye, and the same was the cause that moved his grace (now lately at Lintz
before his departinge) to renew the said proclamacio^s, as the messaungers the^
selves do know right well. Again his Royal Ma. has never denied hitherto
(nether will do hereafter) but that the word of God should be published
acording to the Christen understanding thereof, and preached as it was of the
Apostles and doctors, which are approved and received of the holy Christen
church.

His Royal Ma. also can not remember, that his highness has ever caused
ought to be taken in hand against any man that ordreth him self after the
preachinge before said. Morouer his Ma: offreth himself in most gracious wise
to give ernest injunctions unto the Ordinaries of such spiritual jurisdiction
as extends through out his graces lands, to make reformacion among the
clergy (acordinge to the conclusion of the last Perliament) to put down
abuses, and to provide the desolate parishes with good and learned curates and
soul shepherdes: to the intent that his subjects may be instruct with the
true word of God, and in all other Christian ordinance beside. Likewise the
appointed messau^gers do know well enough, that for the puttinge away of
conte^cio^s in the causes of religion, and to bring the same to an unity, the
kings Ma: has taken special diligent and ernest pains, and that he has
spared no travail ner labor at any time: like as his Royal Ma: will
likewise with all benignite dispose himself hencefurth (and is already of a
gracious hope) that acordynge to the conclusion of the said Perlyament of
Regenspurgh, this Scysme may be brought to an unity and agreement, by one of
these three ways, that is to say, by a general counsel, by a counsel
provincial, or else by another comen Perlyament. Wherefore the kings highness
does right graciously trust and doubts not, but his faithful comens and
subjects of his lo^des of lower Osterike (and these appointed messaungers of
the same) will tarry and wait obediently for the said lyklyode of unity in
the old Christian religion, and in the mean season not to seek ner meddle with
any alteration or change but in Religion and in all other things toward his
Royal Ma. to behave and order the^ selves. as their awncient fore fathers have
done toward God and to his Graces noble progenitors in all obedience, and in
no wise to stop from so doing, ner to take occasion of hinderaunce at that
peace made at the Perliament of Regenspurgh: consideringe that the same peace
was ordained only between both the estates of religion the one toward the
other, and not between the estates and their subjects: so that until the
next counsel general, nacionall, or comen Perlyament (which within the
space of eyghtene months after the date of that conclusion made at the
Perlyament of Regensburgh, shall in the cause of Religion be proclaimed) the
catholic sort must keep the old religion: and the estates of the
protestants must hold them unto it, wherein they were found at the making of
the said peace. Which peace the kings Ma: does knowledge him self bound to
manteyne, and therefore will his highness in no wise permytte his subjects to
make any new alteracyon against the same. This has it pleased the kings Ma:
of a gracious mind, to signify unto the said messau^gers. Given at Prage the
xiij. day of Ianuarij. Anno. M.CCCCC. xlij.

The Conclusion and last sentence of words, that the messaungers of the
countrees and cities of lower Osterike, made unto the answer of king
Ferdinandus
MOst noble and mighty Prince, our most gracious Sovereign lord: Where as
your royal Ma: (upon our most humble and ernest supplicacyon) has graciously
given us a wrytinge touching the cause of Religion we have in most humble wise
considred the same, and pondred it with Christen, loving and fervent minds.
And allthough we before, in our wrytinge have knowleged (as the glory of God
requires) that we every one of us, have deserved this present plage, yet is it
mentioned there also, that Almighty God (which is the infinite wisdom) does
send these sharp punishments, not so much for daily and corporal sins
(which we trust are not so rife in your Graces lands, as in other countrees
and Prouincies) as for the head sin of ydolatrie, and because the true
commandments of God are turned to the honor and filthy lucre of men, and
for that the word of God is not preached, as God has taught and commanded it:
For hereof sprange the origenall of all such scourge and plage of God, as it is
euydent out of sundry hystories. And for as much then as there has been here
now this long season (the more pity) great aduersite and loss of victory, and
so follows on more and more, our most humble supplicacion is (acordinge as we
have be sought your Royal Ma: upon our knees) that your highness will for
the love of God have respect unto this most weighty matter, and ernestly to
manteine the way of God (as he has ordained and commanded it) and to give
injunctions therein. For else verily may we look for no prosperity, but be sure
of decay. Nether do we doubt any thing at all, but your Ma. does graciously
accept our Christen suit in the cause of Religion, as the articles therein are
Christenly recyted, and acordinge unto Gods word. And yet nevertheless in our
countrees are not the preachers permitted to show the word of God, purely and
syncerely, but exyled for it, and specially for preachinge the most weighty
article of justification or righteous making, namely, that the remission of
sins comes through the only merytes and passion of Jesus Christ: and that
we (only of tha^kfullnesse for this vnout speakeable grace) are dett bound to
live in true Christen repentance as eschuyng of sin, and exercysynge of
brotherly love and other good works.

Vverfore our most humble and ernest supplicacion is, that your Royal Ma:
(acordinge to your hye and suppreme office) will have gracious respect here
unto, that the preachers which do sincerly set forth these articles and the word
of God likewise in other things, may be suffered. For if the preachers should
by the rulers be banished, or otherwise vexed by the means hereof (as they be
in certain countrees) and if your Graces faithful come^s and subjects
should be excluded from the peace of the Empire, and from the articles
contained in our wrytinge, or stand in danger by the reason thereof, your
highness may graciously and fatherly consider, how tedious it will be to the
same your Graces faithful subjects. For we proteste before God in the
truth, that this our most humble supplicacion which we make, is of no
curiosyte, ner for any other intent, the^ only for the honor of God, and
salvation of our souls, and that with all subjection. Here with (in hope of a
right loving answer here after) we commit our selves in most humble wise
unto your Royal Majesty, as to our most gracious doare sovereign Lord.


