A Second PARALLEL Together with A WRIT OF ERROR SVED AGAINST THE APPEALER.

(...).

LONDON Printed for ROBERT MILBOVRNE. M.DC.XXVI.

TO THE CATHOLIQVE Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader:
A Few days since a friend of mine showed me a Book entitled a Parallel,
which I gladly received from him, and perused it the more readily, because I
well hoped, that some of the Parallel lines would suit to our Meridian. But
taking an exact view of them, and applying them to our Horizon, I found they
were somewhat short of our Elevation: yet I discovered some thing drawn in
those Parallels, which I conceived to be of some use, to wit, the Lineal
descent of Arminius by the half blood at least, from Pelagius; for if it be
confessed, that Arminius his pedigree is lineally to be derived from Pelagius,
and that Pelagius is the great Apenninus, from which the divided streams of
corrupt doctrine flow; then undoubtedly the assertions of Arminius were prius
damnatae, quam natae were condemned by the Catholic Christian Church, before
they were brought forth by Arminius: And we have the Prescription of the
Christian world, for more than 1200. years, against the new encroachments of
these Sectaries. But me thinks I hear thee ring in mine care the peale of the
Poet, Ole quid ad te? what is this to thee, or me? or to the matter now on
foot? It is not Arminius, but an Appealer that troubles our Israel; Aemilius
fecit, plectetur Rutilius? Aemilius has done wrong, shall Rutilius bear the
blame? Because Arminius browseth upon some branches of Pelagianisme, (a plant
which our heavenly Father never planted, and therefore in time must be rooted
out) is it reason, the Appealer should be muzled, or any man's teeth whet
against him? Verily, the Appealer disclaimes all kindred or affinity with
Arminius; nay he protests, he knows not the man; and if peradventure some
Longinus or skillful Genealogist may be able to disprove him, yet certainly the
vulgar reader is not. I have therefore thought it worth the pains, to take the
line of Pelagius which is already brought down to Arminius, and from Arminius
to draw it out even to the Appealer, to the end, all, that are not forestalled
with prejudice, may see, that both the Appealer, and Arminius hold their errors
in capite from Pelagius; And that at the first the Netherlands, and other parts
received the infection of pestilent doctrine from Britain by Pelagius; and now
at last, that Britain has received it from the Netherlands by Arminius: Matter
me genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me. But before I open the leaves of my Tablet,
representing on the one side the Arminian, and on the other, the Appealers
Demi-Pelagianisme, I entreat the Reader emunctae naris to follow the sent of
Arminianisme in the Appealers writings by these four steps.

1. His slight and dilute purgation from the aspersion of Arminianisme. 2. His
direct and professed defense of the Arminians. 3. His casting a blur upon the
Synod of Dort that blasted them. 4. His disparaging the Articles of Lambhith,
which are e diametro opposite to the tenets of Baro then, and since Arminius.
To begin with his Purgation. Although in other Criminations it may be an
argument of Innocence not to be moved or any way sensible of them; yet in the
suspicion of heresy, Tacit. Maledicta si irascaris, agnita videntur* spreta
exolescunt.
no man (as says Saint Hierom) ought to be silent. Silence in such an
accusation is a crying sin, Et patientia digna omni impatientia, and patience
it self is insufferable. Every man is bound to profess his faith, and
consequently openly to discharge himself from all imputation, especially of
heresy, which is so foul a crime, that the water of penitent tears alone
has not bin thought enough to wash it away. Scelus hoc exuritur igne; it has
bin usually burnt out with fire. It leaves such a spot in the conscience, that
S. Cyprian conceiueth, The blood of Martyrdom cannot fetch it out. Macula haec
nec sanguine eluitur. Cyprian. epist.
Now whether Pelagianisme be heresy, I think it is a question without
question, unless we will take upon us to censure the censures of the ancient
Church, and most eminent Doctors thereof. S. Austin in his book de bono
Perseuerantiae, is not content to call it perniciosissimus error, c. 17. but c.
21. he calls it twice, Antequam Pelagiana haeresis appareret. and recolant
aduersus haeresin Pelagianam.
Pelagiana haeresis. And that Arminianisme is Pelagianisme, either in whole or
in part, I take the Parallel, till I see it not slightly glanced at, but
substantially refuted to be an ocular demo^stratio^. Council. Carth. sub
Aurelio. Nefarius and ab omnibus anathematizandus error. Council. Mileuit.
Perniciosissimi erroris auctores perhibentur Caelestius and Pelagius.
But if this be yet (...), a point not yet gained, yet that Arminianisme
(wherewith the Appealer is charged, not only by two Presbyters of his own
rank, but a reverend Prelate his Diocesan) is formally heresy, Appello
Caesarem, I appeal to that Caesar whom he first appealed unto, August. p. 94.
ad Hilariu^: Omnes qui spem habemus in Christo huic pestiferae impietati
resistere debemus. Prosper. in Crom. Per totum mundum haeresis Pelagiana
damnata est.
King JAMES, of blessed memory, who in his declaration against Vorstius has
these words, concerning Arminius, He was the first in our age that infected
Leyden with heresy. And concerning Bertius he writes thus; Bertius a scholar
of Arminius, at this present remaining in your town of Leyden, August. ep. 47.
Pelagiana haeresis venena. August. lib. 1. de pe^c. orig. Doctrina illa
pestifera. Ad Bonis. l. 2. c. 5. N^num and execrabil^ dogma Pelagianum vel
Caelestianum. Et post, Exitiosissima prauitas.
has not only presumed to publish of late a blasphemous book of the
apostasy of Saints; but has besides bin so impudent, as to send the other day
a copy thereof, as a goodly present, to our Archbishop of Canterbury, together
with a Letter, wherein he is not ashamed, as also in his book, to lie so
grossly, as to auow, that his heresies contained in the said book, are
agreeable with the Religion and profession of the Church of England.

To clear then himself from the foul spot of this heresy, what course does
the Appealer take? Does he call God, and his Angels to witness, that he
renounceth from his heart all Arminius his unwarrantable and dangerous
assertions? Does he (...), fairly and openly make this, or the like
protestation? Arminius teaches none, but respective Predestination: I am for
absolute. Universal grace and redemption is an Article of Arminius faith: It
is none of mine. The cooperation of man's freewill with grace in the first
conversion, and the power it has to hinder, and frustrate the work of
regenerating grace, is current doctrine with Arminius. But I take it for a
leaden Leyden error. Arminius maintains a total and final falling away from
the grace of Justification: I detest and abhominate that assertion, and will
have no Confarreation with the apostate defender of such Apostasy.

This had been indeed to unclasp the right hands of fellowship with Arminius,
and if he had ever walked in his path, to shake the dust from his feet: but in
stead hereof, the Appealer casts dust in the Readers eyes, by making a deep
protestation, idque in verbo Sacerdotis, of not reading any word in Arminius. I
protest (says he) before God and his Angels, Appeal. to Caesar page 21.
the time is yet to come, that ever I read word in Arminius. Before I read this
Protestation, I confess, that my self with many others imagined, that, as
Osorius writes, that some in the Indies by often smelling to Brasell, had
Scorpions bred in their brains; so the Appealer by frequent reading of
Arminius his books, and smelling to his exotecall positions, had hatched this
Serpents brood in his brain. But because he denies it, in verbo Sacerdotis,
I rest satisfied, that he never read Arminius: but for ought he says to the
contrary, he may have heard all Arminius read over to him. Admit he never read,
or heard of Arminius, this will be no good plea, if his doctrine be the
doctrine of Arminius; Legate that was burned in Smithfield, for an Arrian, might
protest truly, that he never read word in Arrius his books, as indeed he could
not, because Arrius his books, with himself, were many hundred years ago
eradicated, will the Appealer from thence conclude that Legate was no Arrian?
How many thousand Nestorians are there in the Greek Church at this day, who
yet never read word in Nestorius his writings; not now extant (I take it) any
where? I dare say, Arminius himself never read word in any of Pelagius his
works, or the works of the Semipelagians, or Massilians, yet he cannot free
himself from the brand of Pelagianisme; neither does much desire to be
acquitted from the note of Semipelagianisme. We read in the Civil Law,
Malitia supplet aetatem: Malice oftentimes supplies the defect of age. In like
manner it is most certain, that where there is a propension in any man's mind
to any old heresy, the malice of the Devil easily supplyeth the want of
reading: Zabarel having coined, as he thought, a new distinction unheard of
before, was as proud of it, as ever Pelius was of his new sword, saying, Ego
hanc solutionem primus inueni: In comment. in poster. Analyt.
yet afterward he ingeniously confesses, that perusing Gandauensis his
writings upon the same argument, there he found the selfsame distinction; and
it much rejoiced his heart, that so acute a Philosopher as Gandauensis, should
hit upon the same conceit with him. Might it not be so with the Appealer? might
he not first project the new plot of Predestination in his own head, and yet
afterward light upon the same in Arminius, or some of his scholars, and
exceedingly applaud either their conceit in himself, or his in theirs? For
mine own part I will not undertake to prove that the Appealer was ever an
apprentice to James Harmin; but by setting up both of their loomes, I will make
it appear that they are both (...), of the same trade or craft.

Thou see, Christian Reader, that his purgation of himself needs a
defense, but his direct defense of the Arminians much more needs a purgation.
No doubt the Appealer read often in the Heathen Orator, Cic. pro Sylla.
that it taints a man deeply once to open his lips in the defense of such a
man, whom he suspecteth to be an enemy to the State: Quaedam contagio est
sceleris si eum defendas quem patriae obstrictum esse suspiceris. How much more
does it blurre a man's reputation to frame an apology for him, whom King James
of blessed memory, upon just and religious considerations, Declar. aduers.
Vorstium.
proclaims to be an enemy of God? Either the Appealers charity, or his
conscience must needs be very large, wherein such an offender finds a
Sanctuary, King James, ibidem.
against whom all the Churches of Germany made complaint to our then dread
Sovereign: Nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt: Plin. Panegyr.
Never one man deceived all men, never all men deceived one man: yet the
Appealer is not only content, some way to blanch Arminius, and his scholars
errors (whereof diverse by the Arminian way, as a convenient bridge, have
fairly walked over to Popery:) but he, to the infinite wrong of the Primitive
Saints and Martyrs, compares these Comets to those Stars, and would make these
as innocent and unguilty of the late troubles in the Nether-lands, as they were
altogether free from the aspersions, which the Gentiles odiously and impiously
cast upon them, scil: Appeal page 41. were these late offspring of the
Semipelagians so harmless and free altogether from sowing seed of dissension
in the Church, as the ancient Christians were from moving sedition in the
State? Why did then the wise and Christian States general in the
Low Countries, by the advice of our then Solomon, call a national Synod, and
so long continue it at their great charge, to suppress these, not venomous
vipers, tearing the bowels of her mother, (in the Appealers esteem) but silly
and harmless worms? Why did our gracious Sovereign King Charles,
Balchanquall Concio ad cleru^.
by his Ambassador, the Duke of Buckingham his Grace, deal effectually with
the States to root up the weed of Arminian Liberty, so far spreading among
them? Appeal ibid.
Yea, but (says he) did no crafty Interloper put in his stock among these
brawling Bankers? Did no wiser man work upon exasperated minds? What of that?
No question, as it was there, so it will be here, Dum pastores odia exercent,
lupus intrat ouile: While the shepherds are at strife, the Wolf enters the
sheepfold. Does this prove, the brawling Bankers to be innocent? Or, disprove
the speech of our Savior, Matthew. 18. 7.
Woe be to him by whom offenses come? But it should seem there is such a near
tie between the Appealer, and the Arminians, that they are entered into a
league defensive, and offensive, for as he holds his buckler over them: so he
mainly foiles at their opposites: He slighteth, vilifieth, Page 70. and Page
108.
and falsely traduceth the Synod of Dort; for what reason, but because they
touch the apple of his eye, the Arminian theology? He stirs the Articles
concluded at Lambhith, he carpeth at the most reverend Metropolitans, reverend
Bishops, and renowned Doctors, Appeal. page 71. 72.
the flower of both Universities, who subscribed them, and published them.
Neither can he yield any reason hereof, but because those eminent and every
way accomplished Divines at Lambhith, crushed the addle egg now smelling in the
Appealers writings, when it was new laid in Cambridge, before Baro could hatch
it. If these proofs be not pregnant, that the Appealer is deeply engaged in
the Arminian pact, I entreat the Reader to trust his own eyes, in comparing
the ensuing doctrines and arguments, set one against the other by way of
Parallel, where he shall find, that as in the water, face answers face: so
in the humor of renewing Pelagianisme, the Appealer does Arminius. If Arminius
or Bertius be the Voice, the Appealer is the Echo; if the Appealer be the
Voice, Arminius or Bertius is the Echo. Behold them both in the ensuing
tablet, like those two of whom the Poet speaks, Alter in alterius iactantes
lumina vultus: One looking, as it were, babies in another eyes.

The Second Parallel.
Of absolute Predestination.
ARMINIANS.
ARMINIVS in his a Declarat. to the States of Holland and West-Frisland, from
page 22. to page 42. endeavors to prove by twenty arguments, that God has
not decreed absolutely and precisely to save certain singular men by his grace
or mercy.

Bertius of the Apostasy of Saints, Edit. Lugduni, Anno 1615. page 12. Demand
the first. There is no absolute Election, and b page 25. Absolute
Predestination granted, it was necessary to remove the whole Scripture, to
settle that head or doctrine.

Arminius in the forecited Declaration, page 33. Out of this doctrine (to wit,
of absolute solute Predestination) it c follows, that God is the Author of
sin. And this may be proved by a fourfold Argument.

1. Because this Doctrine lays it down, that God precisely has decr^ed to
demonstrate his glory by punishing or punitiue justice, and mercy, saving some
men, and damning others; which but by d Sin entering into the world neither
was, nor could be done, etc.

Arminius respons ad Artic. 10. It would be easy for me to convince the
opinion of some of the brethren of Manich^isme and Stoicisme.

We protest to the whole world, that by our adversaries e Manicheisme, and f
Stoicisme, or fatal necessity is ^rought into the Church. The Emblem of
their book of the Acts of the Synod of Dort has this triumphant title
[Destructo fato] or the (...) of Fate* Ex Act. Syn. Dordrac. in Peror.

Bert. epist. Dedic. before his book of the Apostasy of the Saints: There are
who fly Pelagianisme, not seeing that they plainly side with the Manichees.
[Hee cites these words as out of an Epistle of Cas^ubon, but forged by
himself.]

Hag Conference set out by Bert. page 90. This absolute Decree opens a gate
on this side to a g dissolute life, on that side to h desperation.

APPEALER.
APPEAL to Caesar, page 58. In all which passage (to wit, of the seventeenth
Article there rehearsed) both concerning Gods decree and execution of that
decree, is not one word, syllable, or apex touching your absolute, necessary,
determined, irresistible, irrespectiue decree of God to call, save, and
glorify, Saint Peter, for instance, infallibly without any consideration had
of, or regard to his faith, obedience, and repentance.

Appeal to Caesar, pa. 54. Nothing is by me ascribed to your side, and to
your Doctors, but an absolute and irrespectiue decree concerning man, in
vtramque partem. I brought no inferences to press you withal, such as are
commonly, and odiously made against you by opposites, whose virulent
inuectiues, though too true imputations, I used not. I did not charge you with
making God the Author of sin; That the reprobate are i^cited on, and provoked
to sin by God; That God was the Author of Judas treason, and the like.

Appeal, page 68. I never yet read of any prime, preuious determining decree,
by which men were irrespectiuely denied grace, and excluded from glory: unless
from damned e Heretics, or f Sto^call Philosophers.

Appeal, page 30. Against that absolute, irrespectiue, necessitating, and
fatal decree of your new Predestination.

Appeal, page 60. I must confess my dissent through and sincere from the
faction of No^^lising Puritans, etc. but in no one point more, than in this
their h desperate doctrine of Predestination, in which as they delight to
trouble themselves and others in nothing more, so, I profess, I do love to
meddle nothing less. I have not, I did not desire, nor intend to declare my
opinion in that point.

a Edit. Lugduni Batau. ex officina Tho. Basson, 1512.

b Posita Praedestinatione illa absoluta, necessarium fuit totam scripturam
loco mouere vt illud caput adsereretur.

c It no way follows: See Caluines Preface of his book of Divine Predestin.
and first book of Institut. 17. Chap. Beza against Castellio Peter Martyr in
his Comment. on the 1. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans. Zuinglius in his
Sermon of Providence. Abbot Prelect. of the Author of sin. Paraeus Answer to
Bella^mine second book of the state of sin, and loss of grace, chap. 4. and
diverse others.

d God decreed the permission and disposing of sin, which he foresaw upon
his permission would be, he did not decree the effecting, or existence of it,
that it should be. Saint Augustine fully answers these and the like Arguments
in his book de Corrept. and Great. cap. 10. We freely confess that, which we
most rightly believe, that the God and Lord of all things, who made all things
exceeding good, and foresaw, that evil things would arise out of good, and
knew, that it more appertained to his most omnipotent goodness, to draw good
out of evil, than not to suffer evils to be, has so ordered the life of men and
Angels, that in it first he might show the power of their own free will, and
then the benefit of his grace, and judgment of his justice. And in his
Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap. 11. God, being most exceeding good, would not
by any means suffer any evil to be in his works, but that he is also so
omnipotent and good, that he can and does work good even out of evil.

e As Julian the Pelagian often in his books vpbraided Saint Augustine with
Manicheisme; so does Arminius and the Appealer (following the Pelagians step by
step) lay the same imputation upon the orthodox defenders of Predestination.
But the imputation is most false; for the Manichees held two souls in a man,
one good, another bad, and ascribed good and evil not to the free will of man,
but to those two souls: We, with the holy Fathers, teach but one soul in man,
and refer good and evil to Free Will, but so that the will of it self is
free to evil, but is not, neither can, sithence the fall of Adam, be free unto
good, till God has freed it by his grace, according to the words of our
Savior in Saint John's Gospel, Chap. 8. 36. But if the Son make you free,
you shall be free indeed. And of Saint Paul, Romans 6. 18. Made free from sin,
etc.

f A stale objection long sithence answered by Saint Augustine, in his second
book, cap. 5. ad Bonifac. We maintain not Fate, or fatal necessity under
the name of grace; but if it please some men to call the omnipotent will of God
under the name of Fate, we seek indeed to avoid profane nouelty of word, but
we will not contend about words. To which answer of Saint Augustine we may
further add, that the belief of Christians, touching the falling out of all
things according to the determinate counsel of God, Act. 2. differs from the
Stoicke Fate, or Fatality, in four things.

1. The Stoics subjected God himself to Fate: Jupiter, though he most
desired, could not free Sarpedon; we subject Fate, that is, the necessity of
things, to Gods most free will. 2. They under the name of (Fate) understood an
eternal flux and necessary connection of natural causes, and effects: we
teach that all natural and second causes had their beginning in the Creation;
neither is there such a necessary and absolute depe^dance of effects from their
natural causes, but that God can, and often does suspend those effects, and
miraculously work beside, above, nay against nature. 3. The Stoics by their
Fatality took away all contingencie, we admit contingencie in future events,
in respect of their second causes which work contingently, though whatsoever
comes to pass falls within the certain presience of God, and is ordered
by his providence. 4. The Stoics taught, that men were impelled to sin by a
fatal motion, and that man's will was forced by Destiny. We detest and abhor
any such assertion. See more hereof in Melancthon his Common places. Gratianus
Ciuilis in Semipelagianismo. Lipsius lib. 1. de Constantia cap. 18. and
sequent.
g It Is true, as we read in the seventeenth Article, that for curious and
carnal persons lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their
eyes the sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the Devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into
retchlesnesse of most unclean living, no less perilous than desperation. The
sweetest meat in a corrupt stomach turns to choler, but the fault is in the
stomach, not in the meat; in like manner the word of God, and in particular
this doctrine of the Word is in it self a savor of life unto life, but to
some proves no better than a savor of death unto death, because as Saint Peter
2. 3. 16. tells us, They pervert the doctrine of holy Scriptures to their
destruction. For the doctrine it self of Predestination, it opens no gate to
a dissolute life, but shuts and barreth all such unlawful posternes; Shall
we continue in sin because grace abounds? God forbid, Romans 6. 1. On the
contrary, it opens a fair gate, and directs a certain ready way to
holiness of life; For God has predestined us, that we might be conformable
to the Image of his Son, Rom 8. 29. And God has chosen us before the
foundation of the world, that we might be holy and blameless before him in
love, Ephesians. 1. 4.

h In this objection from Desperation, the Arminians and Appealer, as likewise
in the former, furbush up the old Pelagians harness, which Saint Augustine
has beat in pieces in his book of the gift of Perseverance, chap. 17. I will
not amplify with mine own words, but I leave it rather to them seriously to
consider, what a strange thing it is, that they should persuade themselves the
doctrine of Predestination does bring to the hearers, rather matter of
desperation, than exhortation, (or consolation:) for this is in effect to say,
that then a man is to despair of his salvation, when he is taught to repose
his hope and confidence not in himself, but in God; whereas the Prophet cries
out, Cursed is he that puts his trust in man. Some indeed make a desperate
use of this doctrine, but the doctrine it self is no desperate doctrine, or
doctrine of desperation, but of heavenly consolation, as we read in the
seventeenth Article, [which ought for ever to stop the mouth of the Appealer,
from slandering as he does, the truth of God.] The godly consideration of
Predestination and our Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant, and
unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the
working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh and their
earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and heavenly things, as
well because it does greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal
salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does fervently kindle
their love toward God.] On the contrary, the doctrine of the Arminians and the
Appealer, which makes Gods Election to depend upon the will of man, which, as
they say, may totally and finally fall away from grace, is in truth a most
desperate doctrine, taking away all solid and firm ground of comfort both in
life and death, as shall appear hereafter.

Of Election upon foreseen faith.
ARMINIVS.
ARMIN. Oration to the States, page 49. * The Decree whereby God has decreed
to save certain and singular persons, does depend upon his prescience, by
which he fore-knew from eternity, who according to the dispensation of
sufficient means for their conversion and faith, would by preventing grace i
believe, and subsequent persevere. And he is so hot in this point, and
proceeds so far, Argument 19. as to affirm, That the opinion of precise
Election, without respect of foreseen faith in the elect, overthrows the
foundation of all Religion.

Hag. Conference set out by Bert. page 62. The absolute decree, whereby it is
said, that God in choosing men, did not respect any man's good qualities
foreseen, cannot stand with the nature of God, nor with Scriptures. The like
is affirmed by Arnoldus against Tilenus. And Greuinchouius against Amese and
the Arminians generally, who thus take that question in the Conference at Hage,
page 123. Faith in Gods decree of election does in order go before, not follow
election; it is not a fruit of election, but an antecedent conditon to it.

APPEALER.
APPEAL, page 58. The irrespectiue decree of God to call, save, and glorify
Saint Peter without any consideration had of, or regard unto his i faith,
obedience, and repentance etc. I say there, and I say truly, is the private
fancy of some particular man.

Pa. 64. There must needs be first a k disproportion before there can be
conceived an election, or dereliction. This disproportion he afterward declares
to be in the different wills of men, whereof some took hold of merey, others
would not. His words are, When all alike being plunged, etc. God out of his
mercy stretched out to them deliverance in a Mediator, the Man Jesus Christ,
and drew them out that took hold of mercy, leaving them there that would none
of him. Which is all one, as if he had said, he decreed to save them from the
common destruction which he foresaw would believe, and reject those whom he
foresaw would not believe, for by faith they take hold of mercy, and through
incredulity reject it: nay in this point the Appealer speaks not so warily
as the Arminians, for they require faith in a person to be elected and
justified, as an antecedent condition, they do not say as a cause or motive in
God to elect, justify, and save: But the Appealer, Answer to the Gag, page
143. and Appeal, page 194. says, that God was drawn by our faith to justify
us.

* Decretum, quo decreuit Deus singulares and certas quasdam personas saluare,
praescientia nititur, qua ab aeterno sciuit, quinam iuxta administrationem
mediorum ad conuersionem and fidem idoneorum ex praeueniente gratia credituri
erant, and subsequente perseueraturi.

i When the Arminians, and the Appealer make Election to depend upon foreseen
faith, either they mean that this faith is a mere gift of God, received only
by man's free will, or not so, but in part, or in whole a work of man's will. If
they hold faith to be a mere gift of God, their opinion of election upon
foreseen faith implies a contradiction; for it makes the former grace and
gift of Predestination to glory to depend upon a latter gift of faith. Beside,
if faith be the mere gift of God, it can be no reason of difference between
the Elect and Reprobate, on the part of the Elect and Reprobate, why the one
should be chosen, and the other refused, for the Elect have it not of
themselves, and the Reprobate have it not at all, because it is not given. To
refer election in this sense to faith, as it is Gods mere gift, is to make
election to depend upon Gods mere will, who gives faith to some, and not to
others, which quite overthrows the foundation of Arminianisme. If they mean
that foreseen faith is in part, or in whole, a Work of man's free will by
nature, and not merely a gift of God, then their opinion dasheth directly on
the rock of Pelagius, [that Grace is given according to some merit of man]
that is, as Saint Augustine expounds it, De bono persevere. c. 19. Some good
thought, word, or deed, or the good will it self, to receive grace and faith,
when otherwise man might have rejected or repelled it: whereas the Apostle
teaches, that it is God which Or make one man differ from another,
discerns one man from another, and that no man has any good thing different
from another, which he has not received, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Whereupon Saint
Augustine concludes in his Epistle to Sixtus, and in his book of
Predestination of Saints, Chap. 5. And in his Enchiridion ad Laurent. cap. 99.
That which puts a difference between a believer and unbeliever, making him
to believe, and not the other, is a special grace given by God to the one, and
not the other; and consequently, that the separation of some men, and taking
them out of the mass of perdition, is of Gods mere grace, and not in regard
of any different qualities in men. A proud man might have said, says that holy
Father, of Predestination of Saints, chap. 5. against another man, my faith
makes me to differ from thee, my righteousness, or the like; [which insolent
words of a proud man rehearsed by Saint Augustine, Greuinchouius is so
impudent, as to take upon, and pattern in himself, saying, Ego me discerno, I
discern my self.] The good Doctor meeting with such thoughts, and checking
them, says, What have thou that thou have not received? from whom, but from
him, who made thee differ from another? to whom he has not given, that he has
given to thee: and if thou have received it [namely, that wherein thou
differest from another] Why do thou boast, as if thou had not received it?
Nothing is so contrary to the meaning of the Apostle, as that any man should so
glory of his own merits, or good works, as if he had wrought them to
himself, and not the grace of God; to wit, that grace of God which discerns
good men from bad, not that, which is common to good men and bad. The maine
conclusion of Saint Augustine in his Enchiridion, is most direct to our
purpose, Sola gratia redemptos discernit a perditis, Grace alone discerns or
differenceth the redeemed from the lost, whom a common cause derived from the
beginning or root, had united in one mass of perdition.

k This argument from disproportion deceived sometime Saint Augustine, till he
better considered of the words of the Apostle, Romans 11. 5. So then there
remains a remnant according to the election of grace. It is impossible indeed
to conceive an election according to desert of some, rather than others, in a
mere paritie; there must needs be a disproportion in such an election, but in
an election of free grace there needs none, there can be no such disproportion,
for if election be of works, then it is not of grace. Here if the Appealer, or
any his friend, shall difference his opinion from the Arminians, by
distinguishing the decree of election, in which there is no respect had to
faith from the execution, in which, all sides confess, respect is had to faith
and perseverance; I answer that the Appealer has shut the door of this
Sanctuary against himself, and debarred himself from this defense, page 61.
saying, I shall as I can briefly and plainly, without scholasticall
obscurities, set down what I conceive of this Act of God, or decree of
Predestination, setting by all execution of purpose. After which Preface,
without any interruption of other discourse, he delivers his opinion of
election, as is above rehearsed.

Of Free Will.
ARMINIANS.
THe Arminians differ from Orthodoxal Divines about Free Will in two points:

1. They teach, Hag. Confer. page 502. and sequent. That the will of man has
some operation of it self in the first act of our conversion, and does
cooperate with grace. God gives grace sufficient to convert, but does not so
determine the will, but that it may out of it is freedom admit grace, or not.

Their main reason is, God does not believe, but we; therefore l we work even
in our first conversion, otherwise the assent should be Gods, not ours.

2. They teach, that the will of man has power to hinder and resist the work
of grace in his regeneration and conversion. Arminius in his Orat. to the
States, page 53. I believe according to the Scriptures, that grace is not (vis
irresistibilis) an irresistible force or power, but that many do m resist the
holy Spirit. Hag. Confer. page 502. The question is, whether grace, which
works in man faith and conversion, cannot be hindered, but is an irresistible
operation, such as God uses in raising the dead. They allege to prove, that
man may resist grace, Act. 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised
hearts and ears, ye have always n resisted the holy Ghost. And Matthew. 23.
37. How often would I have gathered your Children, as a Hen gathers her Chicken
under her wings, and ye o would not.

APPEALER.
APpeal. p. 84. It is supposed by some that the difference between the
Pontificians and us consists in this, that the will of man concurreth and
cooperateth with divine grace in the first very instant, and point of
conversion: we teach that the will of man does not cooperate in the first
point, but in progress of our justification, so Keckerman in his Systeme, a
better Logician, than Divine. This Assertion of Keckerman he refelleth from
page 85. to 89. and page 92. he insisteth upon the same reason with the
Arminians. If this were not so, then faith and repentance were no the actions
of man, neither could man be said to believe and repent, but the holy Spirit.

Appeal, page 89. The Council of Trent adds, that a man may resist the
grace of God; admit: then, first man has m free will against God; Saint
Steven, in terminis, has the very word, (...), you n resist, nay fall cross
with the holy Ghost, not suffering him to work the work of grace in you. And
what said our Savior, How often would I, and thou would o not? If the
Council meant of stirring, preventing, and p operating grace, I think, no man
will deny it: if of adiuuant, subsequent, and cooperating grace, there is,
without question, in the natural will of a regenerate man so much of Adam
remaining, and carnal concupiscence, as may make him resist, and rebel
against the Law of God.

l We answer with Saint Augustine in his first book De gratia and libero
arbit. cap. 16. It is certain, that we will when we will; but he makes us to
will that is good, of whom it is said, Pro. 8. The will is prepared by God; and
God works in us to will, Philip. 2. It is certain that we work when we
work, but he works in us to work, by giving most efficacious power to the
will, who says, I will make you to walk in my ways, Ezekiel. 36. Faith and
repentance are our works, because in us, though not of us: actions and
passions denominate the subject, not the cause; God is the efficient cause of
faith and repentance; but the subject, in which these virtues are wrought, is
man, who therefore is said to believe and repent, because these things are
wrought in him, but not by the power of his own will, but by the effectual
work of grace, stirring the will, and making it freely to assent unto, and
believe the Gospel. Bernard. de lib. Arbit. What does free will? I answer, in
one word it is saved, or cured; this work cannot be done without two; one by
whom, the other in whom it is wrought. God is the Author of it, (the health or
cure of the will) free will is only capable of it.

m Grace is twofold,
Outward. Inward.
Outward,
Offered in the ministry of the Word.
Inward,
Enlightening and inciting only. Renewing and regenerating.
Men can, and do resist outward, and inward, only enlightening grace; but not
renewing, and regenerating grace, so far as to hinder their conversion; or,
after they are converted, utterly to cast away the spirit of sanctification,
and thereby fall away totally, and finally. If God should give no other grace,
but such as man at his pleasure might reject, or repel, he should have no
kingdom within us: and if he could not by his grace absolutely subdue, and
conquer the stubbornness of man's will, he should not be omnipotent. If grace
does not determine man's will, but man's will the influxe and effect of it, the
peace and grace of God should not rule in our hearts, but every man should be
ruled to righteousness, as well as to sin, by his own free will; which was
the express heresy of Pelagius, and Caelestius, as Prosper in precise terms
sets it down in his Chronicle, in the year of our Lord, 414.

n To the place in the Acts I answer: First, That Saint Steven speaks of the
Jews resisting the Spirit of Prophecy, not the Spirit of regeneration: the
Jews gainsaid, withstood, and opposed the Word of the holy Ghost, uttered by
the Prophets, not the secret working of the holy Ghost by grace in the hearts
of such, whom he would, and did convert. Secondly, We confess, that men
uncircumcised in heart, (such as were these Jews, whom Saint Steven
vpbraideth) not only can resist, but can do no other then resist the holy
Ghost; but regenerating grace by circumcising the heart, remoueth that
hardness whereby it resists grace, and then it cannot resist, because that,
which makes it resist, is taken away; as Saint Augustine infers upon that of
Ezechiel the eleventh, I will take away your stony-hearts, and give you an
heart of flesh. His inference is, Chap. 8. of Predestination of Saints, This
grace which is secretly conueighed into the hearts of men, is not refused or
repelled by any hard heart, for it is therefore given, that the hardness of
the heart may first be taken away.

o Not to insist upon the distinction of the double will of God [well known to
the learned by the notions of signi, and beneplaciti, his commanding, or
declaratiue will, which is not always fulfilled; and his powerfully working,
and absolute good will and pleasure, which is always fulfilled:] I further
answer, that this place of Scripture rightly interpreted, as it is by Saint
Augustine, makes against, and no way for the Arminians, and Appealer; for
Christ says not, How often would I have gathered you Scribes and Pharisees, and
those Rulers and Governors of Jerusalem, which killed my Prophets, and you
would not; but how often would I have gathered your Children, that is, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I did also though you would not, but did what you
could to hinder their gathering under my wings, that is, their assembling to
the true Church, and sheltring themselves under the shade thereof. Quos volui,
te nolente congregaui, Whom I would gather I gathered, though thou would not.
So Saint Augustine upon these words.

p If by operating grace, he means that grace whereby God circumciseth the
heart, Deuteronomy. 30. opens the heart, Acts 16. conuerteth the heart, Ierem. 31.
takes away a stony heart, Ezekiel. 36. writes his Law in the heart, Ierem. 31.
works faith in the heart by the mightiness of his power, Ephesians. 1. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. (...); no man, I suppose, [who is well catechized in the
principles of Religion] will maintain, that such grace may be resisted: For
this were to make the impotencie of man's will to prevail against the
omnipotency of God, and to disappoint his purpose, and frustrate his work.
Saint Augustine [that Delian diuer into the depth of this mystery] resolves
the contrary in many places in his book of Predestination of Saints, Chap. 8.
Why does he complain, sithence no man does, or can resist his will? Does the
Apostle answer, O man, it is false, that thou say? No he says no such
thing: But, who art thou, O man, that answerest God? And de Corrept. and
Gratia, cap. 12. The weakness of man's will is helped in such sort, that it is
led by divine grace indeclinably and vnconquerably [insuperabiliter ageretur:]
and what is [vnconquerably] less then [irresistibly!] if grace vnconquerably
lead the will, the will cannot conquer grace in striving against it. And Chap.
14. ibidem. No will of man resists God, when God will save. And he
confirms his Assertion with a reason, proving that the will of man neither
does, nor can resist the will of God; for, says he, To will and to nill are so
in the power of him that wills or nilleth, that it can neither hinder Gods
will, nor conquer his power. And in his first book of questions to Symplician,
2. Quest. The effect of Gods mercy cannot be in man's power to frustrate it, if
he list; or that God should have mercy in vain [if man would not take hold of
it] because if God would have mercy on those who are reluctant, and withstand
it, he could so call them, as it might befit them, that is, be effectual unto
them. Saint Bernard in his book of Free Will follows Saint Augustine close;
There is made a creation of the will by Christ into liberty, and that without
us; if into, then not out of liberty, or freedom of will: if without us, then
it is not in our Power to hinder this work of God.

Of falling away from Grace.
ARMINIANS.
HAGE Conference, page 355. The Doctrine of our Adversaries, [who teach, that a
man cannot fall away from grace totally, nor finally] is an q hinderance to
godliness, and also to good manners.

Theses exhibited to the Synod of Dort concerning the fifth Article, All things
being fore-laid, which are necessary, and sufficient for perseverance, it
remains still in the power of man, to persevere, or not persevere.

Bertius in his book of Apostasy of Saints, endeavors to prove that his
blasphemous Assertion by diverse texts of Scripture, Authorities of Fathers, and
Reasons; from whose Armory the Appealer furnished himself; as will appear by
comparing their allegations together.

Bertius Iidit. Lugduni Batauorum apud Lodouicum Elzeuirium, in the year of
our Lord 1615. page 169. You could not be ignorant, that the Confession of the
Church of England, was cited by me truly in the Acts at Hampton Court. page
107. The English Confession set out in the year of our Lord 1562. Article 16.
After we have received the holy Ghost we may r depart from grace.

Bertius in his Dedicatory Epistle. Doctor Bancroft at the Conference at
Hampton Court, withstood Doctor Rainolds, who to that Article of the English
Confession, concerning departing from grace, would have those words added [but
not totally, nor finally.]

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag. page 157. That [faith once had may be lost] may be interpreted,
and is, more ways, than one: whether not lost at all; whether totally, and
finally lost. Men are divided in this tenent; Some suppose neither totally, nor
finally; some totally, but not finally; some both totally, and finally, which
is indeed the assertion of antiquity. Ibid. The learned of the Church of
England assent to antiquity in their tenent, which the Protestants of Germany
maintain at this day, having assented therein to the Church of Rome. Appeal,
page 36. In my judgment, this is the doctrine of the Church of England, not
delivered according to private opinions in ordinary Tracts and Lectures, but
delivered publicly, positiuely, and declaratiuely in Authentic records.

Appeal, page 28. They were the learned in the Church of England, that drew,
composed, and agreed the Articles in 52. and* 62. that ratified them in 71.
that confirmed them in 604. that justified, and maintained them against the
Puritans at Hampton Court: but all such do assent to antiquity in this tenent.
Ibid. p. 29. The Minor I make good particularly, and will prove it obsignatis
tabulis. In the 16. Article we read, and subscribe this; After we have
received the holy Ghost, we may r depart away from grace, and fall into sin.

Appeal, page 30. This Article was s challenged as unsound at the Conference
at Hampton Court, by those that were Petitioners against the Doctrine and
Disciplie established in the Church of England: and being so challenged before
his Sacred Majesty, was there defended and maintained, etc. namely by Doctor
Ouerall, page 31.

q See this objection answered in the first question of absolute Predestination.

r The Article has not the word [Alway] that is the Appealers addition. The
words are not, [After we have received the holy Ghost, we may fall into sin,
and so fall away from grace; but we may depart from grace given, and fall into
sin:] that is, so far depart from grace, that a man may fall into sin,
after grace received; which is confessed on all parts. The Article speaks not
of a total falling away from grace, much less, final; for the words
immediately following are [and by the grace of God, to wit, (before given) we
may rise again.] He that falls finally, cannot rise again: he that falls
totally from grace, cannot rise again by the grace he had received, because he
is supposed to have lost all the grace he received; and the Article speaks not
of new grace, but only of grace before received, and given. Besides, the words
of the Apostle to the Hebrews 6. 6. bear strongly that way; that a man, who
was once partaker of the holy Ghost, if he fall away, that is, totally cast
away the Spirit of grace, cannot possibly be renewed again by repentance.
Whence we thus argue;

None who may after their fall rise again by repentance, fall totally, or
finally, Heb. 6. 6.

But all those, of whom the Article speaks, may after their fall, rise again
by repentance.

Therefore none of whom the Article speaks fall totally, or finally.

s The Appealer utters two manifest untruths in this allegation out of the
Conference at Hampton Court. The first is, That he faith the sense of the
Article was there challenged as unsound; for Doctor Rainolds [who in the name
of the rest desired a fuller explication of the meaning of the Article, to
prevent that mistaking, which is sithence fallen out in M. Montague, and
others] began with this Preface [Though the meaning of the Article be sound,
and good etc.] The second is, That he affirms, that this tenent, [a justified
man may fall away from grace, and become, ipso facto, in the state of
damnation, etc. now styled Arminianisme by these Informers] was resolved, and
auowed for true by Doctor Ouerall, and that honorable and learned Synod. For
Doctor Ouerall, after he had affirmed, That a justified man committing any
grievous sin (as adultery, murder, or treason) became, ipso facto, subject
to Gods wrath, and was in the state of damnation (quoad praesentem statum)
adds, yet those that are called, and justified according to the purpose of
Gods election did never fall, either totally from all the graces of God, to be
utterly destitute of all the parts, and seeds thereof, or finally, from
justification; but were in time renewed by Gods Spirit unto a lively faith, and
repentance, and so justified from those sins, and the wrath, curse, and guilt
annexed thereunto, whereinto they were fallen, and wherein they lay so long, as
they were without true repentance for the same.

Of Falling away from Grace.
ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS page 25. De Apostas. Sanct. That which we have proposed we prove,
first, by those forms of Scripture, by which Apostasy is diversely described;
for this the Scripture calls to turn away from righteousness, Ezekiel. 33. 13.
If the righteous commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall be no more
remembered, but for his ^niquitie, that he has committed, he shall die for the
same.

Ibid. page 27. He, who can turn away from his righteousness, can forsake his
former righteousness; but a righteous man can turn away from his
righteousness, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Therefore the righteous can forsake his former
righteousness.

Bert. page 41. He, out of whom the Devil is cast, may become secure, and
made a Temple in which the former Devil taking seven other spirits with him,
may be lodged; and so the latter condition of that man made worse than the
former, Mat. 12. 43. Demonstrat. He, out of whom the Devil is cast, is truly
justified; but such a one may by security, and negligence fall into an estate
worse then the former: therefore he, that is once truly justified, may fall
into an estate worse than the former.

Bert. page 36. Among the causes of Apostasy, one is, the fear of
persecution; He that received the seed in stony places, the same is he, that
hears the Word, and anon with joy receives it: yet has he not root in
himself, but dureth for a while, for when tribulation arises because of the
Word, he is offended.

APPEALER.
Appeal, pa. 159. Ezekiel. 18. 24, 26. If the righteous t turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do according unto all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness,
that he has done, shall not be remembered: but in his transgression that he
has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.

Ibid. Ezekiel. 33. 13. If he commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall be no
more remembered: but for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall die for
the same. Therefore the righteous may lose his righteousness, abandon his
faith, die in his sin, etc.

Ibid. page 159. The unclean spirit eiected, returns unto his former
residence, enters, possedeth his former state, and the case of that man is
worse than the beginning, Matthew. 12. 44. u Satan is not eiected, but where the
party is in the state of grace with God, being regenerate by faith.
Reposseding is not but by relapse into sin: nor a worse state, but where a
man dies in sin.

Ibid. page 159. Luke 8. 13. * They on the rock are they, who, when they hear,
receive the Word with joy, who for a while believe, and in time of temptation
fall away.

t Because this place of Ezekiel is set in the forefront both by the Appealer,
and by Bertius, as a testimony, on which they most rely, and are most confident
of; I will endeavor both fully to answer, and retort it against them. Besides
those Answers, by which others have rebated the edge of this Objection: As *
first, that this speech is conditional; suppositiue, and not positive; and
therefore no more infers that a righteous man may fall from his
righteousness, then those words of Saint Paul [If an Angel from heaven shall
preach unto you another Gospel, than that you received, let him be accursed]
conclude, that an Angel from heaven can preach another Gospel. Or the like of
our Savior, [They shall do signs and wonders to seduce, if it were possible,
the Elect] therefore it is possible to seduce the elect; whereas indeed the
contrary may be inferred, even from those words. Secondly, That the Prophet
speaks of him, that is righteous in his own opinion, and before men; but not
in the sight of God, such a man may fall away from his righteousness; but the
question is, of a man regenerate, and truly righteous; and such a one cannot
turn away from his righteousness. Of this mind is Saint Gregory Moral. in
Job. lib. 34. cap. 13. They, who may be seduced in such sort, that they never
return again, may seem to lose the habit of sanctity before the eyes of
men, [sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt] but indeed they never had any
holiness in the sight of God. Thirdly, that the Prophet speaks here of
actual righteousness, which may be lost, and is lost, by the committing of
any wilful and grievous sin against conscience; not of habitual, which
cannot be lost [if he do that which is lawful and right, Ezekiel. 18. 21. and
24. If he does according to all the abominations the wicked man does, all the
righteousness that he has done shall not be remembred] here is not a word
that imports habitual righteousness, but merely actual; which, all sides
confess, may be lost. Besides these answers, I say further, that this
Scripture no way tends to Bertius, or the Appealers purpose. For they should
prove, that a justified man may lose Evangelical righteousness, or the
righteousness of Faith; not Legal righteousness. Now it is evident, that the
Prophet speaks of Legal righteousness; First, by the pronoune (his) [if the
righteous turn away from (his) righteousnesse] that is, the righteousness of
his own works, or his inherent righteousness: not the imputed righteousness
of Christ, for that is not his own, Philip. 3. 9. That I may be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law; but the
righteousness, which is of God by faith. Secondly, by the enumeration of
particulars, verse. 6, 7, 8. 15, 16, 17. all which appertain to Legal
righteousness: If he has not eaten upon the mountains, nor lift up his eyes
to the Idols of the house of Israel, nor come near to a menstruous woman, and
has spoiled none by violence, and has not given his money upon usury, etc.
Lastly, this argument may be retorted against the Adversaries two ways. First
thus, If the difference of the Covenant between the Law and the Gospel,
consists especially in this, [that the righteousness required by the one may
be lost, but the righteousness promised by the other cannot be lost] then the
argument from the loss of Legal righteousness to Evangelical, is of no
force, but to disprove our Adversaries tenent: for that, which in this place of
Ezekiel, is affirmed of the one, may not be affirmed of the other: but the
difference of the Covenant between the Law and the Gospel consists
especially in this, [that the righteousness required by the one may be lost,
but the righteousness promised by the other cannot be lost.] Ierem. 31. 31.
33. 34. Heb. 8. 8. Behold the days come that I will make a new Covenant with
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the Covenant
that I made with their Fathers, etc. but this shall be my Covenant, which I
will make with the house of Israel; I will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, I will forgive their iniquity, and remember
their sin no more. And Ierem. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Secondly
thus: If these words are spoken generally to the children of God, and belong to
the elect as well as others, they cannot imply a total, and final falling
away from righteousness, no not in the judgment of the Arminians, and
Jesuits themselves, with whose Heifer the Appealer plowes: [For as the
Jesuits, so Arminius himself teaches, [that a man that is elect, and
predestined to eternal life, cannot fall finally, nor perish for ever:] But
the words of the Prophet Ezekiel are spoken generally unto all, and belong to
the very Elect; therefore I conclude, in the words of the great Champion of
Popery in general, and of this particular touching the Apostasy of Saints,
Card. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 12. It is true that the predestined or
elected are in no danger of losing eternal life, and that the terrifying
threats used by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, are to this end, to stir up
the elect to watchfulness and diligence; motives they are to, and means of
perseverance, not arguments at all to prove the Saints Apostasy.

u To the place of Matthew. 12. 44. we answer; First, we ought not to ground any
doctrine of faith upon a mere parable, or allegory: because [as Saint
Augustine, in his book, de Doctrina Christiana, delivers it] All those
points which belong to faith and manners, are plainly delivered in the
Scriptures. Secondly, we cannot a^gue strongly from corporal possession, or
dispossession, to spiritual: as a Lunaticke man, so a man possessed with the
Devil in body, may be yet in the state of grace in his soul; and in like
manner, as a man that is cured of his frenzy or lunacie, may be yet an
unsanctified man; so a man, out of whom the Devil is cast, from tormenting or
possessing the body, may be yet an unregenerate man, (although, I grant, our
Savior seldom, or never cured any man's body, but first he healed the soul,
as some Interpreters have observed) yet no necessary consequence can be drawn
from the health or sickness of the body, to the health or sickness of the
soul. Neither is it said here, that the unclean spirit was cast out by
Christ, nor by any other; but that he went out of himself, and returned
again; and therefore this possessed person can be no fit emblem of a truly
regenerated, and justified man, out of whom the Devil is powerfully cast out:
and the party is no way under him, or in his power, but led by the spirit of
God, Romans 8. and wholly delivered from the power of Satan. Thirdly, the meaning
of the Parable is (as appears by our Saviors application) that as the latter
state of that man, [out of whom the Devil first departed, and afterward
returned with seven worse than himselfe] was worse than the former, so it
should be with the wicked Jews, out of whom the unclean spirit had gone out,
for fear of the Law, but now was returned again unto them through their
refusal of the Gospel, and despiting the Spirit of Grace. Thus Saint Hilary,
Jerome, and Bid expound the Parable; and their Exposition is evidently
grounded upon our Saviors words, verse. 45. Even so shall it be also unto this
wicked generation. As it is particularly applied by our Savior to the Jews,
so it may be to any Nation, out of which the unclean spirit departs for a
while, or is driven away by the preaching of the Gospel, if it be empty of
good works, and given to the pleasures of this world; like the lodging of the
unclean spirit, which he found empty, swept, and garnished. The unclean
spirit will enter with seven worse, that is, the Gospel shall be taken away
from them, and the Kingdom of Grace, for the abuse of it; and they shall be
brought into worse bondage of the Devil, then before: according to Saint Peter
2 Epist. 2. 20. If after they have escaped the pollution of the world, through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end shall be worse with them than the
beginning: for it had been better for them, not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn away from the holy
commandment delivered unto them. This was the case of the Kingdom of Congo,
which for a time embraced the Gospel, but afterward perceiving that it
restrained their carnal liberty, and no way permitted plurality of wives,
they cast off the yoke of Christ, and enthralled themselves again to Satan.
But it is not so with those that are truly regenerate, for to them his yoke is
easy, and his burden light. Lastly, this objection may be retorted against
the Adversaries thus;

This Parable is meant of a wicked generation, Matthew. 12. 45. an evil, and
adulterous generation, verse. 39. a generation of vipers, verse. 34. such as the
Scribes and Pharisees were, who in this Parable are reproved by our Savior.

But the regenerate children of God are not a wicked, adulterous, or viperous
generation, but a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Therefore this Parable is not meant of the regenerate children of God.

* To the place of Saint Luke 8. 13. and Mat. 13. 20. we answer; First, the
heart of a man truly regenerated is not compared to a stony ground: for God by
regenerating grace takes away our stony heart, and gives us an heart of flesh,
Ezekiel. 36. 26. Secondly, a temporary faith is not of the same nature with a
justifying faith; a temporary faith has no root, Matthew. 13. 22. and Luke 8.
13. a justifying faith has: a temporary faith bears no fruit, but a
justifying faith bears fruit, Matthew. 13. 23. and Luke 8. 15. Those, who
believe the Gospel, merely out of temporary hopes, [because godliness has
the promise of this life] they receive the word with joy, while they thrive and
gain by it; but when there arises trouble and persecution for the Word, they
are offended, and fall away: but those who ground their faith upon the promises
of a better life, their faith like gold, (1 Pet. 1. 7.) being tried in the
fire, is made much more precious, and found unto praise, and honor, and glory,
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, believing with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory, receiving the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, verse.
8. Their faith differs from the faith of Hypocrites, and Temporizers, in the
cause and kind; their joy in the degree; and both in the continuance. Lastly,
this objection may be retorted against the Adversary: First thus;

They, who are compared unto the good ground, are not meant here by stony
ground:

But truly regenerate Christians and believers, Luke 8. 15. and Matthew. 13. 23.
are compared to good ground;

Therefore they are not here meant by stony ground.

Secondly, thus;

That faith, which is distinguished from a justifying faith in this Parable,
cannot be taken for the faith of a true regenerate Christian;

But the temporary faith is distinguished in this Parable from a justifying
faith;

Therefore the temporary faith cannot be taken for the faith of a true
regenerate Christian, and consequently, the Appealer, and Arminians are in this
their allegation mistaken.

Of Falling away from Grace.
ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS of the Apostasy of Saints, page 26. Apostasy is described by the
phrase [to wax cold] Mat. 24. 12. And because iniquity shall abound, the love
of many shall x wax cold.

Bertius, page 34. The Apostle foreseeing, that the converted Gentiles might
be bewitched with that opinion, [That they could not be cut off from the
Church] warns them, that they wax not proud against the Jews, but that they
learn by their example, that it may come to pass, that they also may be cast
away, Romans 11. 19. They were broken off, that I might be graft in; through
infidelity they were broken off, and, thou stand by faith: be not high
minded, but y fear.

Bert. page 33. I frame the fourth demonstration from the fear of the Saints,
John 15. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast z forth as a branch, and
withers, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire.

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag. page 160. Matthew. 24. 12. Because iniquity shall abound, the
charity of many shall grow cold. Surely it was hot, that grows cold: and
charity enlarged, is not but the fruit of a living faith; which if it
continued in statu quo, the charity of many could not x wax cold; therefore
once had may be lost.

Again, Romans 11. 20. 21. Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but
yfeare: and fear is not but where change may be. Here change may be: or why
does it follow? Take heed lest he also spare not thee.

Ibid. page 160. Ioh. 15.2. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he
takes z away.

x To the place of Matthew. 24. 12. we answer; First, that the love of many may
wax cold; yet will it not thereupon follow, that the love of the regenerate and
true believers waxes cold: for the regenerate, and true believers, are not
meant by those Many. True charity is a fruit of faith, and such as the faith
is, such is the charity. If it be a temporary faith, the charity proceeding
from it, is but temporary, and being so, may not only wax cold, but also be
utterly extinguished. The root being rotten, the fruit falls of it self. But
if the root of faith be sound, charity will never decay; but abound more and
more, till the child of God be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
Philip. 1. 9, 11. Secondly, the consequence is not good, from a remission of
some degree of charity, to the amission of the habit of it: The Apostles
themselves, as they were not so strong in their faith, so neither so hot in
their love toward our Savior at his Passion, as before. Their faith was shaken
in that fearful storm of temptation; their confidence was small, or none in
appearance, in their own sense: for in saying [we trusted, it had been he
that should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.] they imply, that his death had
loosned the Anchor of their hope, and that both their heart and faith failed
them for the time, their love also waxed cold, if not freezed, when they fled
from him, and forsook him. Yet no learned Divine ever affirmed, that their
love to our Savior was quite lost; for as he loved them, so they loved him to
the end. Thirdly, this argument may be retorted against the Adversaries thus:

If Christ does here put a difference between those that are truly faithful,
and hypocrites, in this; that the one (Hypocrites to wit) should in the latter
days and perilous times be offended, deceived, wax cold in charity, but the
other (the truly faithful) should continue to the end, then this place makes
not for, but against the total or final falling away of true believers.

But Christ in this place puts a difference between those that are truly
faithful, and hypocrites, in this; that the one (Hypocrites to wit) should in
the latter days and perilous times be offended, deceived, and wax cold in
charity, verse. 10, 11, 12. but the other (the truly faithful) should continue
to the end, verse. 13.

Therefore this place makes not for, but against the total or final falling
away of true believers.

y To the place alleged, Romans 11. 19, 20. we answer: First, that it is not
meant of particular believers, and their danger of falling away from justifying
faith; but of the people of the Gentiles in general, and their danger of being
cut off from the true Olive, into which they were ingrafted, that is, from the
outward profession of faith, and communion of the Catholic Church, into which
they were admitted upon the reiection of the Jews. The Gentiles therefore
ought not to be high-minded against the Jews, but fear, lest God, who spared
not the natural branches, should not spare them, but cut them off also, as he
did the natural branches, if they should grow proud, and presumptuously
secure. Now there is no question, but that a Visible Church, which at this time
professes the truth, and is a member of the Catholic Church, may fall away
from the outward and public profession of faith, and cease to be a part of the
Catholic visible Church; as the most famous, and sometimes flourishing
Churches of Greece and Asia, planted by the Apostles themselves, now ouer-run
with Mahometanisme, Idolatry, and Heresy, prove by their lamentable Apostasy,
and deplorate, if not desperate estate. But Bertius and the Appealer should
have had their eyes upon the mark, and point in question; which is not of the
doctrine of faith, but the habit of faith; not de fide, quam credimus, but de
fide, qua credimus; not of the public profession of a Church, but of a
particular affiance of every true believer in Christ. A member of the visible
Church may be cut off, but no member of the invisible; for Christ cannot have,
damnata membra, any members, who shall not be saved, as the Approuer of the
Appealers book rightly gathers out of Saint Augustine, in his Reply to
Fisher. A Church, or Kingdom generally may depart from the Christian faith, or
renounce the pure profession thereof in public, and yet no true believer,
either totally or finally, lose his faith; but either secretly in that State or
Kingdom, or elsewhere openly, he may retain both faith it self, and the
profession thereof. Secondly, Gods threatenings have their use, both in the
Elect, and Reprobate; to make the one inexcusable, or to keep them within some
bounds of moderation; and to keep the other in an awful reverence, filial
fear, and spiritual watchfulness, which are means of Perseverance, no
arguments of Apostasy. Fear is not, but where a change may be; to wit, fear
of a change; but there may be a fear of offending God through
high-mindednesse, and presumption, as was in the Apostles, and is in all the
Elect, and yet no change of their estate of grace could or can be, by the
confession of Arminius himself, and the learned of all our Adversaries.
Thirdly, as the faithful ought to fear, so they also might, and de facto would
fall away, not only totally, but finally, if they were left to themselves; and
therefore, in regard of the frailty of their nature, and mutabilitie of their
own will, they have just cause to fear, and do still fear in themselves,
yet are still confident in God, who is faithful, and will establish them, and
keep them from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. and shall confirm them unto the end,
that they may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 8.
Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the Adversary thus:

That fear, which God promises to put into the hearts of true believers, to
this end, that they may not fall away from him, is a certain means to
preserve true believers in the faith, (else God should fail in his end.)

But the fear here enjoined, is that fear, which God promises to put into
the hearts of true believers, to this end, that they may not fall away from
him, Ierem. 22. 40.

Therefore the fear, here enjoined, is a certain means to preserve true
believers in the faith: and consequently a strong argument for the perseverance
of Saints in faith and grace; as it is urged by Saint Augustine in his book de
Persevere. Sanctorum, cap. 2. [I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me) What is it else, then to say? the fear shall be
such, and so great, that they shall for ever cleave unto me.

z To the places alleged, John 15. 2, 5. we answer: First, there is a double
insition or ingraffing into Christ; external, when a man is made a member of
the visible Church by the hearing of the Word, and participation of the
Sacraments; internal, when a man by sanctifying grace, and saving faith, is
made a member of the invisible Church. They, who have the outward insition only
into the true Vine Christ Jesus, may be cut off: but they, which have the
inward as well as the outward insition, cannot be cut off, and wither as a
branch; for Non est corpus Christi reuera, quod non er it in aeternum; That is
not Christ's true body, which shall not abide for ever, [neither, by the like
reason, is that a true branch, which abides not for ever in the Vine] August.
de Doct. Chri. lib. 3. cap. 32. Which reason of S. Augustine is confirmed by
Saint Gregory, in his description of the Church in his Comment on the
Canticles, Christus sanctam Ecclesiam de sanctis in aeternum permansuris
extruxit; Christ has built his Church of Saints which shall for ever
persevere. Secondly, as there is a double insition into Christ, so there is a
double profession of faith; a naked and bare profession without practice of a
holy life, or fruit of good works; or a profession joined with practice, a
faith working through love, and bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit. By the
barren branches cut off, and withered, Theophylact on these words alleged,
understands those, who make a naked and bare profession: Saint Cyril, in his
tenth book upon John, Those who have faith without love, and good works; such
a faith S. James in his second Chap. calls a dead faith, but the faith by which
the just man lives, is a living faith working by love, Galat. 5. 6. and
bringing forth fruit with patience, Luke 8. 15. Thirdly, the words [in me] Job.
15. 2. may be either referred to the word [Vine] and the meaning is, every
branch existent or ingraffed in me, that bears no fruit, but leaves only of a
bare profession, shall be taken away; or the words [in me] may be referred to
bearing of fruit, and the meaning is, every professor of Religion, or member
of any Congregation that believes not (in me, and bears not fruit in me, to
wit, the fruits of the Gospel by my grace, shall be cast forth as a dead
branch, and wither) for, as it is in the fifth verse, He that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth fruit: for without me ye can do
nothing. If the words be taken in the former sense, they are meant of
Hypocrites within the Church; if in the latter, of Jews, or Pagans, without
the Church; who bear fruit, that is, do morally good works, or, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. but because they do not
these things in faith, their good works are no better, than splendida peccata,
sins having a luster, or show of virtue, as Saint Augustine. Take the words in
either sense, they belong not to regenerate persons, and true believers, who
are so ingraffed into Christ, that they abide in him by faith, and bear fruit
in him through faith. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the
Adversary, thus:

No branch, that bears fruit in Christ, shall be taken away, but purged, that
it may bring forth more fruit (as it follows in the second verse urged by the
Adversary.)

But every true believer is a branch that bears fruit in Christ, Matthew. 13.
23. Rom 6. 22.

Therefore no true believer shall be taken away, but purged, that he may bring
forth more fruit.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 26. Believers may make shipwrake of faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. some
having put away a good conscience, concerning a faith, have made shipwreck.

Ibid. 1 Timothy 4. 1. In the latter times some shall depart from the a faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits.

APPEALER.
APPEAL, page 160. 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which
some having put away, concerning a faith, have made shipwreck.

Ibid. Nor was it only for those times, but foretold of succeeding ages, 1 Timothy 4. 1. In the latter days some shall depart from the a faith.

a To the places alleged out of Timothy, we answer: First, that they are
fully answered by the distinction above mentioned (ad literamy) namely of a
twofold signification of the word (faith) which is sometimes taken for the
says which we believe, that is, the word of faith, or doctrine of the Gospel,
as Galath. 1. 23. Now preaches the faith, which once he destroyed, Romans 10. 8.
This is the word of faith, which we preach: the hearing of faith, Galat. 3. 2.
A great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith, Act. 6. 7. And in
this sense Oecumenius takes the word (faith) in the first place above
alleged, (...): by faith, I understand faith in doctrine; by conscience, a
godly conversation, or a good life. And that it is to be so taken in the latter
place, it is evident by the words following, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils. Faith opposed to error, and doctrine
of devils, is the true doctrine of faith, which we believe and preach.
Sometimes the word (faith) is taken in Scripture for the faith by which we
believe; that is, the inward grace, or habit of faith: as Romans 3. 28. Justified
by faith, without the deeds of the Law. And Romans 4. 5. His faith is counted for
righteousness, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.
This distinction is not new coined by nouelizing Puritans, but stamped by the
ancient Fathers, and goes for current among the Schoolmen. Saint Augustine in
his thirteenth book of the Trinity, chap. 2. delivers it in these very terms,
There is a difference between the faith, quae creditur, and qua creditur: And
Lombard, lib. 3. distinct. 23. takes the same from Saint Augustine, saying,
Fides est interdumid, quod credimus, interdum estid, quo credimus. Secondly, we
answer, that as there is a temporary faith, so there may be a good conscience
for a time, which a man putting away, soon after makes shipwreck concerning
faith: that is, either concerning the doctrine of faith, by maintaining errors,
(as both Bertius, and the Appealer have done:) or concerning the act of a
temporary faith, by ceasing to believe, and profess the faith. Thirdly, it is
to be noted, that the Apostle says not [losing] but [putting away a good
conscience] which words may be most properly meant of such, who hold faith, and
notwithstanding put away a good conscience; that is, gladly embrace the promise
of the Gospel, and remission of their sins by faith, but reject the
condition upon, and end for which grace is offered, Tit. 2. 12. (To deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world) such are all carnal Gospellers, who believe well, but live
not accordingly. Fourthly, the phrase (making shipwreck) does not import the
utter loss of faith; for many things, that fall out of the ship by wrack, are
recovered again, and saved; and therefore Tertullian, in his book de
Poenitentia, elegantly calls repentance Tabulam post naufragium, A board, or
broken piece of the ship, on which after ship wrack a man may, as they did
Act. 27. 44. Escape safe to land: Plerique naufragio liberati, exinde repudium
and naui and mari dicunt, and Dei beneficium, salutem suam scil: memoria
periculi honorant; Most men, that have escaped in shipwreck, renounce both ship
and sea, and, by remembrance of their former danger, more highly prize Gods
benefit, and their salvation, Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against
the Adversary, thus.

If those, who are here said to make shipwreck of faith, are not to be
thought, to have fallen away finally from grace and salvation, but rather the
contrary, then this place makes nothing for the final Apostasy of true
believers:

But those, who are here said to make shipwreck of faith, are not to be
thought, to have fallen away finally from grace and salvation, but rather the
contrary;

Therefore, this place makes nothing for the final Apostasy of true
believers.

The first Proposition is evident; the Assumption is thus confirmed:

Those who were delivered to Satan by the Apostle for their amendment, and that
their spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, are not to be thought
to have fallen finally from grace and salvation.

But those, who are here said to make shipwreck of faith, (to wit, Hymeneus
and Alexander) were delivered to Satan by the Apostle, for their amendment, 1 Timothy 1. 20. and that their spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus,
1 Cor. 5. 5.

Therefore those, who are here said to make shipwreck of faith, are not to be
thought, to have fallen finally from grace, and salvation.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 25. Apostasy is proved by this phrase of Scripture to fall away
from grace, Galath. 5. 4. Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are
fallen b from grace.

Bertius, page 29. 2 Pet. 2. 20. For if, after they have escaped the pollutions
of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they
are again c entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them,
than the beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them. But it is happened unto them according to the true
proverb: The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Bert. page 12. To Saints irrecouerable destruction is threatened, Heb. 6. 4. It
is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they d fall away, to
renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

APPEALER.
APPEAL, page 160. Galat. 5. 4. Saint Paul spoke not upon supposition of
impossibility, ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from b grace.

Ibidem, page 160. 161. Nor in point of only Heresy wa^ faith by them lost,
but also of good living and conversation, 2 Pet. 2. 20. where those that had
escaped the filthiness of the world; therefore washed, and made clean,
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; therefore justified
truly by says: are yet c entangled again therein, and overcome. Therefore
lapsed from faith, as is expressed, verse. 21, and 22. ensuing.

Ibid. page 164. Beside, if faith had cannot be lost, the dog cannot be said to
return unto his vomit, nor the swine to wallowing in the mire.

Idem, page 161. I add but one of them, Heb. 6. 4. It is impossible, that they
which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the power of the world to come, (if these were not justified, they know not who
were: if these had no faith, where was it to be found) if they d fall away,
should be renewed again by repentance: seeing they crucify again the Son of
God unto themselves, and make a mock of him.

b To the place Galath. 5. 4. we answer: First, the maine scope and drift of
the Apostle, is to confute those among the Galathians, who went about to join
Iudaisme with Christianisme, Legal righteousness with Evangelical: these the
Apostle shows cannot stand together. For the one consists in the perfect
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 10. 5. the other in forgiveness of sins, Romans 4.
7. The proper meaning therefore of the words is, that whosoever seeks for
justification by the Law, that is, the works of the Law, is fallen from grace,
that is, has lost his claim by the covenant of grace, or is excluded from all
hope of obtaining mercy and grace; for such a one is become a debtor to the
whole Law, that is, cannot be justified, to wit, by the covenant of works,
unless he fulfill the whole Law, which no man is able to do. Secondly, Grace
is sometime taken for a reward of free gift, and so it is opposed to merit;
sometime it is taken for supernatural habits infused, putting a man in grace
and favor with God, or making him gracious, and so it is opposed to nature;
sometime it is taken for the doctrine of free remission of sins by Christ, or
covenant of grace, and so it is opposed to the Law, or covenant of works: and
that it is taken in the last sense in this place, is evident by the
antecedents, and consequents, and the very opposition to the Law in this fourth
verse, Gal. 5. Thirdly, admit the word (Grace) were here taken for the grace of
regeneration, or justification, as the Adversaries would have it, yet the Text
makes nothing for them; for it is not said, that the Galathians fell from
grace totally, or finally; although in that particular error of theirs, in
retaining the Legal ceremonies, and urging Circumcision, they in effect, and
by consequent overthrew a maine doctrine of the Gospel, touching justification
by faith in Christ. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the
Adversary, thus:

Whosoever teach, and believe justification on by the Law, or inherent
righteousness, are fallen from grace, and refuted by this text of the Apostle.

The Adversary teaches and believes justification by the Law, or inherent
righteousness; see the precedent tablet, Art. of justification.

Therefore the Adversary is fallen from grace, and refuted by this text of the
Apostle.

c To the place alleged out of Saint Peter 2. Epist. 2. Chap. 20. We answer:
First, Saint Peter speaks not of true believers, but of false teachers, who
privily brought in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them,
verse 1. These [though they had escaped the filthiness of the world through
the knowledge of Christ, that is, the practice of gross idolatry, called in
Scripture Spiritual fornication and uncleanness; and had kept themselves from
other foul, and enormous sins of the flesh even against nature, wherein the
blind idolaters of the world were intangled] yet were never inwardly, and
thoroughly washed and cleansed, especially from the pollutions of the heart. The
Apostle compares them to swine, which after they are washed, (that is,
outwardly) wallow again in the mire, because they retain still their swinish
nature: so these, after they had received the knowledge of Christ, and
outwardly conformed themselves to the Gospel, and cleansed themselves from
gross actual sins, return to their former filthiness, as natural bruit
beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, verse. 12. Secondly, a man may be
entangled again in the pollutions of the world, and relapsed into foul sins
(as some of Gods Saints have been) yea as enormous as any he committed before
his conversion, and yet not fall totally or finally from grace, as shall be
showed hereafter. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the Adversary,
thus:

None, that are, or were true believers, are wells without water, [For he that
believes, out of his belly flow rivers of living water, Job. 7. 38.]

Those spoken of by S. Peter are wels without water, verse. 17.

Therefore those spoken of by Saint Peter, are not, nor were true believers.

Or thus:

None of the regenerate are dogs, or swine; [For holy things, and pearls are
given to them, which may not be given to dogs, or cast before swine, Matthew. 7.
6.]

Those, whom Saint Peter speaks of, are dogs and swine, verse. 22.

Therefore those, whom S. Peter speaks of, are not regenerate.

And so this text of Scripture is nihil ad rhombum; and the Adversaries argue
worse and worse, (It being happened unto them, according to the true proverb,
(ab equis ad asinum) mentioned verse. 16. which beast, and the Rider, whether
they are not a perfect impresse and emblem of the Bertius a pension in France,
(...) sooke the truth, and ^ at this present a Popish Apos^ata.
Adversary, I refer it to the intelligent Reader of that Motto, ver. 15. [HAVE
FORSAKEN THE RIGHT WAY, FOLLOWING THE WAY OF BALAAM, THE SON OF BOSOR, WHO
LOVED THE WAGES OF VNRIGHTEOVSNES.

d To the place alleged, Heb. 6. 4. weanswer: First, It is not affirmed (as
Whitaker learnedly observes in Cygnea Cantio:) that those, who were enlightened
etc. do fall away, but, if they fall away, they cannot be renewed by
repentance. Which note of that Swan sweetly accords with the words of the
Apostle himself in this Chapter, verse. 9. But beloved, we are persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak. May
not I justly apply the words of Saint Cyprian, against Nouatus, to the
Adversary Bertius, (Scindis, sicut ipse scissus es,) As thou art cut off, and
have made a rent in the Church, so thou cuttest, and would make a rent in
the Scripture, by taking a part by it self to serve thy turn, contrary to the
coherence and scope of the whole? Secondly, inlightning grace does not
necessarily import renewing and sanctifying grace; nor tasting the heavenly
gift, eating the bread of life, Ioh. 6. and being filled therewith, Matthew. 5.
6. nor partaking of the holy Ghost, being led by the holy Ghost, Romans 8. much
less sealed with it, Ephesians. 1. 13. as all true regenerate Christians are. The
Adversaries might have learned out of Gratian. de poenit. did. 2. It is one
thing to taste the gift, and powers of the world to come; another, to have them
rooted in the heart: Aliud affici pro tempore, aliud perfici, and obsignari in
vitam aeternam: One thing, to be moved, or affected for a time, as Herod was at
the hearing of John the Bap^ist; another thing, to be perfectly sanctified, and
sealed to eternal life, as are all true believers, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephess. 4.
30. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the Adversary, thus:

No regenerate child of God can commit the sin unto death, 1 Ioh. 5. 17. 18.

The Apostle here speaks of those that commit (or at least may commit) the
sin unto death.

Therefore the Apostle speaks not here of any regenerate child of God.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 114. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he e fall.

Idem, page 116. Philip. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and f
trembling, for it is God which works in you both to will, and to do, of his
good pleasure.

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag. page 164. If righteousness had, cannot be lost, why should he
admonish as he does, He that stands, let him take heed lest he e fall?

Ibidem. And work out your salvation with fear and f trembling.

e To the place alleged, 1 Cor. 10. 12. we answer: First, though the
regenerate, and justified man's estate be certain, yet is it certain by the
use of such means as God has appointed; whereof spiritual watchfulness and
care, to which the Apostle here exhorts, is a principal. The Apostles estate
was certain, for Christ says, Luke 10. 20. Rejoice, because your names are
written in heaven. And John 17. 12. Those that thou gave me, I have kept, and
none of them is lost, but the son of perdition. Yet he commands them to
watch and pray, that they enter not into temptation, Matthew. 26. 41. And he
prescribes a form of prayer to be used by them, and us, continually, [Lead us
not into temptation] Mat. 6. 13. The soldiers, and passengers estate, who were
in the ship with Paul, Act. 27. 24. was safe, and sure, because God had given
Saint Paul all them that sailed with him: Yet were they to use the help of the
shipmen to save their lives, and unless they had so done, they had perished,
verse. 31. Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. Secondly, the
Apostles words are to be noted, who says not, Let him that stands, but, let
him that thinks he stands. A man may think he stands, though indeed he
stands not; as those that killed the Apostles, did think that they did God
good service, John 16. 2. The Pharisie thought that he was rather justified,
than the Publican, yet he was not. Saint Paul thought he had done a work
acceptable to God, and aduantagious to the true Church, when he persecuted the
Saints, and made havoc of the Church. The heart of man is deceitful above
all things, as it deceives others, so sometimes our selves also. We may
conceive that we are highly in Gods favor, and a great way toward heaven, when
yet indeed we are cast back, or stand at a stay. It is therefore a special
point of wisdom, to examine our spiritual estate, and prove whether we are in
the faith, or no; that is, whether we stand indeed, or think only that we
stand: for he that thinks only that he stands, and has no sure footing,
nor ground of his persuasion, may fall, and that irrecouerably. Thirdly, He
that stands may fall, yet not totally, or finally. A man may fall, and yet
not be hurt by his fall; a man may be hurt, and that dangerously, by a fall,
and yet not die of that hurt; Though he fall, he shall not be vtterl^ cast
down: for the Lord vpholdeth hi^ with his hand Psalm. 37. 24.
Iustus cadit, non tamen excidit. The righteous falls seven times a day; Si
cadit, quomodo iustus? si iustus, quomodo cadit? If he fall, how is he
righteous? if righteous, how does he fall? Saint Jerome answers, sed iusti
vocabulum non amittit, qui semper per poenitentiam resurgit; He loses not the
name of righteous, who, as often as he falls by sin, rises again by
repentance, Epist. 44. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the
Adversary, thus:

None of those, whom God preserues from being overcome, in temptation, can fall
totally, or finally.

Those whom Saint Paul advises to take heed lest they fall, are such, whom God
preserues from being overcome in temptation; in the next verse, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

Therefore, those whom Saint Paul advises to take heed lest they fall, cannot
fall totally, or finally.

f To the place alleged Phil. 2. 12. we answer: First, that the argument
drawn from the fear of Gods Saints, has been before refuted, and retorted,
in the handling that text of the Apostle [Be not high-minded, but fear.]
Secondly, we answer, Fear is not here opposed to religious confidence, but to
carnal security, and presumption. The trembling here commanded, is an awful
reverence, and filial trembling, not a servile affrighting: this fear and
trembling, is not only joined with assured hope, that God will work both the
will and the deed in them that so fear, verse. 13. but also with joy, Psalm. 2.
11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Fear cannot be here
taken for a distrustful fear, or a fear of being damned, but of a
sollicitous and watchful fear; for this were no good consequence, God works
in you the will and the deed, therefore fear, that is, doubt and distrust your
salvation; but use all diligence to make your election sure, and be careful to
stir up God his grace in you, and to call on him continually in all
humbleness of mind, for the assistance of his Spirit, without which you can
neither do, nor will any good. This grace and assistance of his Spirit God
promises to none, but to the humble, and such as tremble at his word, Esaias 66.
2. Why does the Apostle say, Aug. (...) turd and (...), cont. Pel^g. cap. 27.
says Saint Augustine, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and
not rather with security, if God work it? unless because in regard of our
will, without which we cannot well work, it may soon come into man's heart, to
esteem that which he does well, to be his own work, and say, I shall never
be removed? therefore he, who gave power to his will, turned his face for a
while from him, that he which said so might be troubled; quoniam ipsis est ille
tumor sanandus doloribus: Because that swelling pride is to be healed with very
sorrows of a troubled mind. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against
the Adversary, thus:

None, in whom God works both the will to persevere and deed, can fall
totally, or finally.

In those, whom Saint Paul here advises to work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, God works both the will to persevere, and deed, Philip.
2. 13.

Therefore those, (...)
whom Saint Paul here advises to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, cannot fall totally, or finally.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 28. The Scriptures relate this to have come to pass in the
Angels, Jude 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness,
unto the judgment of the great day.

Ibid. In our first Parents: for Adam being holy and created after Gods own
image, yet was by his wife drawn to fall: yea and the craftic serpent dece^ued
his holy wife, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

Idem, page 30. That which befell the blessed Angels, and Adam and Eve in the
state of innocence, that may befall any Saint now; but it is certain the holy
Angels fell, and our first Parents: therefore any Saint may forsake his own
righteousness.

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag, page 161. Thus Scripture speaks plain. Their reasons from
Scripture are evident. Man is not likely in state of grace to be of an higher g
alloy than Angels were in state of Glory, than Adam Was in state of Innocence:
For Grace is but a conformity thereto, and no conformity exceeds the
Architype: At most it is but an equality thereto: and equals are of the same
proportion. Now if Adam in Paradise, and Lucifer in Heaven, did fall and lose
their Original estate, the one totally, the other eternally, what greater
assurance has any man in state of Proficiencie, not of Consummation?

g To the instance in Lucifer and Adam, we answer: First, that though man in
the state of Proficiency be not simply in an happier estate, and better then
Adam in Paradise, much less then Lucifer in Heaven, yet he may have, and has
a greater assurance of his estate then they had. Aug. de Cor. rep. and Gra^.
cap. 11.
Saint Augustine confidently affirms, That the grace which was given by the
second Adam, exceeds that which was given to the first Adam, in that it was
more powerful; Haec potentior est in secundo Adam, prima est enim qua sit ^t
habeat homo iustitiam, si velit; secunda plus potest, qua sit vt velit,
tantumque velit, and tanto ardore diligat, vt carnis voluntatem contraria
concupiscentem voluntate Spiritus vincat. And again, Primo homini, Aug. ibid.
cap. 12.
qui in eo bono, quo factus fuerat rectus, acceperat posse non peccare, posse
non mori, posse ipsum bonum non deserere, datum est adiutorium persevere antiae,
non quo fieret vt perseueraret, sed sine quo per liberum arbitrium perseuerare
non posset. Nunc vero sanctis in regnum Dei per gratiam praedestinatis non
tantum tale adiutorium perseuerantie datur, sed tale, vt ijs perseuerantia ipsa
donetur; non solum vt sine isto dono perseuerantes esse non possint, verumetiam
vt per hoc donum non nisi perseuerantes sint. Secondly, from Gods dealing with
the Angels that kept not their first estate, but etc. to his dealing with man
after his fall, no good president can be taken; for it is certain, God
provided a Redeemer for man, but none for them. (As the Angels sin was greater,
so their judgment was more heavy, and loss irreparable.) Neither is the
consequence good from Adams loss of his estate of Innocence to the like
possibility of the regenerates loss of their estate of Grace; because God
made no everlasting * Esaias ^4* 8.
covenant of peace with Adam before his fall, as he did since with the
regenerate in Christ the Peacemaker. He made no such promise to Adam before
his fall, as he has made to his Church since, that Hell gates should not
prevail against her. Adam had no Mediator before his fall to pray for his
perseverance in the state of Innocence; but the faithful and truly regenerate
have the effectual prayers of Christ the Mediator for their perseverance in
faith and grace; * (...). 22. 32.
I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not: And, * John 17. 1^, 20.
I pray that thou should keep them from the evil: neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word. Thirdly,
Adam in Paradise stood by the power of his own free will, and natural
integrity; but the regenerate are now kept by supernatural grace, and the *
(...)
power of God through faith unto salvation; and therefore, albeit Lucifer in
Heaven, and Adam in Paradise, who stood merely of themselves, fell from their
first estate, it is no consequent that the regenerate may in like manner fall
from their estate, who stand not by themselves, but by Christ, and are
supported by God. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the Adversary,
thus:

If the state of Creation and Redemption differ especially in this, that men
and Angels in the state of creation had power to persevere, if they would, but
not will; and men in the state of redemption have not only power, but also will
given them to persevere, and grace by which they cannot but persevere; then the
argument, drawn from the total fall of Adam, and final of Lucifer, to the
total and final falling away of the regenerate, makes nothing for, but
strongly against the Adversary:

But the state of Creation and Redemption differ especially in this, that men
and Angels in the state of Creation had power to persevere, if they would, but
not will; and men in the state of Redemption have not only power, but also will
given them to persevere, and grace by which they cannot but persevere, as has
been proved.

Therefore the Argument, drawn from the total fall of Adam, and final of
Lucifer, to the total and final falling away of the regenerate, makes
nothing for, but strongly against the Adversary.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 28. Of Saul what says the Scripture? 1 Samuel 9. 2. The son of
Kish, whose name was h Saul, an elect and good man, and there was not of the
sons of Israel a good man beyond him. Yet of him chap. 15. 11. we read; It
repents me that I have made Saul King: for he is turned back from following
me.

Bert. ibid. ex Cypriano Epist. 7. i Solomon, Saul, and many others, while they
walked in the ways of the Lord, could have held the grace given to them: but
departing from the ordinance of God, grace departed from them.

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag, page 162. h Saul was at the first the child of God, called
according to the election of grace; not only temporal for the kingdom of
Israel, but also eternal for the heavenly kingdom. In opinion of Antiquity
thus he was: and yet afterward he fell, it is confessed; totally all say:
eternally these say, that maintain justifying faith cannot be lost.

Ibidem. But if Saul were not of Gods children in grace, endued with faith, and
the holy Spirit: yet i Solomon was there is no question with them, because he
was a writer of holy Writ, and wrote as he was inspired by God. If they did not
grant it, the Scripture would euict it, 2 Samuel 7. 12. yet Solomon fell, as
Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom are clear for it, at least temporally
and totally too, when he served other gods.

h To the first instance in Saul, we answer* First with * Cap. de (...)
Melancthon, that Saul seemed to be a faithful man, but the event shows that
he was an hypocrite. He was indeed chosen to the Kingdom of Israel, but not to
the Kingdom of Heaven, by the Appealers leave: there is no syllable in
Scripture imports so much; he was indeed endued with the Spirit of
Government, and the Spirit of Prophecy, but not with the Spirit of
Regeneration for ought appears in Scripture: he might be, and, as most
think, he was, among those to whom that speech of our Savior might be
applied, Mat. 7. 22, 23.
Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name? etc. and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from
me, ye that work iniquity. Secondly, we answer, The words alleged by
Bertius, 1 Samuel 9. 2. speak of the lineaments of his body, and proper
personage, not of the inward virtues of his mind, or graces of his soul
[There was not a goodlyer, the text says not a godlyer, person than he; from
the shoulders, and upward, he was higher than any of the people] To argue from
stature to grace, from the body to the soul, from proceritie to sincerity,
from a corruptible crown, to an incorruptible, is scopam dissolutam facere, to
make a besome without a band, or to make a rope of sands. Lastly, this
Objection may be retorted against the Adversary, thus:

The gifts and calling by God of the regenerate are without repentance, Romans
11. 29.

Saul's gifts and calling by God were not without repentance; for the text
says, 1 Samuel 15. 11. God repented him, that he had made Saul King, etc.

Therefore Saul's gifts and calling were not the calling and gifts of the
regenerate.

i To the second instance in Solomon we answer: That Solomon was indeed a
child of God, and is called the beloved of the Lord, because the Lord loved
him indeed, 2 Samuel 7. 12. But we deny, that he fell from grace either totally,
or finally. He was a type of Christ, a penman of the holy Ghost; God
threatened grievously to scourge him for his sins, yet promised withal never
quite to cast him off. His fall, I confess, was grievous, but his repentance
in his book of the Preacher shows that the seed of God still remained in
him, as it does in all the children of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. This seed, because it
is immortal, 1 Pet. 1. 23. preserves every child of God, in whom it
remains, from eternal death. Lastly, this Argument may be retorted against
the Adversary, thus:

If God withdrew not his loving kindness utterly from Solomon, Solomon fell
not from grace totally, nor finally.

God withdrew not his loving kindness utterly from Solomon:

Therefore Solomon fell not from Grace totally, nor finally.

The first proposition is manifest; for utterly and totally are terms
equivalent, and it is certain, that whosoever falls not totally, cannot fall
finally. The second proposition may be deduced out of Psa. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34,
35.

ARMINIANS.
BERTIVS, page 96. cites Tertullian, Praescrip. c. 3. Estne hoc mirum, vt k
probatus aliquis retro postea excidat? Saul bonus prae caeteris liuore postea
euertitur. Solomon omni gratia and sapientia donatus a domino ad idololatriam a
mulieribus inducitur, etc.

Bert. page 98. alleges l Cyprian. Epist. 7. Adhuc in saeculo sumus etc. As
yet we are in the world etc. Parum est adipisci aliquid potuisse; plus est quod
adeptus es posse seruare: sicut and fides ipsa, and natiuitas salutaris, non
accepta, sed custodita vi^ificat. Nec statim consecutio, sed consummatio
homine^ Deo seruat, etc. Solomon denique and Saul and caeteri multi quamdiu in
vijs domini ambulauerunt datam sibi gratiam tenere potuerunt; recedente ab ijs
disciplina Dominica recessit and gratia etc.

Bert. page 99. 100. produces Nazianzen: m Deus his quide^ lumen est, illis
autem ignis, etc. God is a light to some, but to others a fire, etc. Quid vero
deprehendimus in Saul? Vnctus erat, and spiritum recepera^, ^ratque tune
spiritalis etc. Postea vero non totum se praebuit spiritui, neque pure, sed in
alium conuersus est virum, etc. What find we in Saul? He was anointed, and
made partaker of the holy Spirit: yet for all that afterward he suffered not
himself to be wholly and entirely directed by the Spirit, nor became
perfectly and sincerely another man.

Ber. page 101. cites Augustine lib. 11. de Ciuitat. Dei, ^ 12. n The Saints
though they are certain of the reward of their perseverance, yet are found to
be uncertain of their perseverance.

Bert. page 102. August. de Correp. and Great. cap. 5. o Si iam regeneratus and
iustificatus in malam vitam sua voluntate relabitur, certe non potest dicere,
Non accepi: quia acceptam gratiam Dei suo in malum libero amisit arbitrio. If a
regenerate and justified man does willingly relapse into an evil life, he
cannot say, I have not received; because he has lost the grace of God, which
he received by his own will free to evil.

Bert. page 102. Prosper. Respons. 7. ad capit. Gallorum. p It is proved by
many lamentable examples, That some of the regenerate in Christ Jesus forsaking
faith and good manners, did fall away from God, and ended their wicked life in
this their Auersion from him.

APPEALER.
ANswer to Gag. p. 166. cites Tertullian, Praescript. c. 3. Et hoc mirum
opinor? etc. As if it were a thing so strange, that any man k approved by God
should afterward relapse from grace. Saul a man better than the rest was
ouer-taken, and undone at length through envy. David was a good man, and
according unto the Lords heart, yet afterward guilty of murder and adultery.
Solomon endued with all grace and wisdom from the Lord, was by women brought
over unto idolatry. For why? It was reserved unto the Son of God alone to be
without sin.

Answer to Gag, page 167. says, l Cyprian is through for this point, Epist. 7.
Parum est adipisci potuisse aliquid, etc. It is a small matter to obtain any
thing, it is a greater to keep that which thou have obtained, even as faith it
self, and that healthful birth not received, but retained, does quicken.
Neither does attaining, but consummation keep a man for God etc. Solomon, and
Saul, and many other, so long as they walked in the ways of the Lord, could
retain the grace given them, but when the discipline or fear of the Lord
departed from them, grace also departed.

Answer to Gag. page 168. says thus; And in Nazianzen too, Apolog. ad Patrem,
p. 37. who writes thus of Saul, etc. m Anointed he was, and made partaker of
the holy Spirit, and then at that time was spiritual, etc. yet for all that,
because he suffered not himself to be wholly and entirely directed by the
Spirit, nor became perfectly, and sincerely another man; what need I relate the
Tragical end which he underwent?

Appeal, page 27. Augustine of the City of God, book the eleventh, chap. 12.
n Licet sancti de suae perseuerantiae praemio certi funt, de ipsa tamen
perseuerantia sua reperiuntur incerti, etc.

Appeal page 27. For the Tenet of Antiquity I cannot be challenged. Saint
Augustine, and after him Saint Prosper, affirm more than M. Montague hitherto
has done. Saint August. lib. 1. de Bon. Persevere. cap. 6. Si autem regeneratus
and iustificatus in malam vitam sua voluntate relabitur, non potest dicere non
accepi; quia acceptam Gratiam Dei suo in malum libero amisit arbitrio.

Appeal p. 27. Prosper Resp. 7. ad ca. Gallorum. p Ex Regeneratis in Christo
Jesus, quosdam Relicta Fide, and pijs moribus, APOSTATARE A DEO, and impiam
vitam in sua AVERSIONE ^inire, multis (quod dolendum est) probatur exemplis.

k To the place alleged out of Tertullian, we answer: First, The Appealer
falsely translates the words of Tertullian, whose words are not (probatus (a
Deo) a man approved (by God:) but simply (probatus) that is, a man approved, or
well thought of; as probatus Author, an approved Author, or generally well
esteemed. And that by (probatus) he meant not approved by God, his words
following in the same Chapter seem to me to make evident, his words are about
seven lines after, Tu vt homo extrinsecus vnumquemque nosti; putas quod vides,
vides autem quousque oculos habes, sed oculi sunt Domini alti; Homo in faciem,
Deus in praecordia contemplatur; ideo cognoscit Dominus qui sint eius. Thou as
man know every man by the outside, thou think that to be which thou
see; thou see as far as thou have eyes, but the Lords eyes are high: man
looks on the face, God beholds the heart; therefore the Lord knows who
are his. Secondly, the instances of Tertullian are of a different kind. Saul
and Solomon were not alike: Solomon a glorious type of Christ; Saul rather of
Antichrist. Solomon is called by the holy Ghost Iedidiah, beloved of God. Saul
never was so called: Saul therefore might fall totally, and finally; but for
Solomon we resolve with the Reverend and excellently learned Bishop of
Sarisbury in the words of Tertullian himself; ^obert Abbot in Diatribam
Tho^sand. Tertullian. de fugd.
Solomon in lapsu gratiam fidei remisit, actum intermisit, habitum non amisit;
motumque fuit in co spiritualis vitae robur, non amotum; concussum, non
excussum: There was in Salomons fall a remission or abatement of the grace of
faith, an intermission of the act, not an amission of the habit; the strength
and vigor of his spiritual life was moved in him, not removed: shaken, but
not shaken out, or quite lost, Tertullian speaks of Peter, but it may be
applied as well to David and Solomon, who are not said here to have lost grace
totally, and finally, but to have fallen into grievous sins, the one into
adultery, the other into idolatry. And, notwithstanding David's fall, that he
retained the Spirit of Grace in him, it is manifest out of that prayer of his
in the 51. Psalm, Renoua spiritum rectum intra me, Renew a right Spirit within
me, verse. 10. Spiritum sanctum ne recipias ame; Take not thy holy Spirit from
me, verse. 11. Establish me with thy free Spirit, verse. 12. These prayers of
that holy Prophet show, that David in his grievous fall lost the comfort of
Gods Spirit, verse. 12. and the free and quickening motions thereof: and
therefore he humbly desires a renouation, and confirmation of the Spirit, but
not a new donation thereof. That, which he prays to God not to take from him,
certainly he had in some degree, when he so prayed, Take not thy Spirit from
me. As for Salomons recovery after his fall, we have the testimonies of Gregory
of Neocaesarea, Cyril of Jerusalem, Hilary, Jerome, Ambrose, Aquinas,
Bonauenture, Hugo Cardinalis, Petrus Comestor, Paulus Burgensis, Carthusian,
Soto, Genebrard, Serarius, Delrius, Lorinus, and many other cited to our hands
by Caleb Dalichampius student in Scedan, in his book entitled Vinditiae
Salomonis. Lastly, this place of Tertullian, de praescript. cap. 3. If it had
been entirely cited by the Appealer, would have utterly ouerthrown that, for
which it is cited. If those words (nemo autem Christianus, alleged by the
Appealer) nisi qui ad finem perseuerauerit; That no man is a Christian, but he
that perseueres to the end) wound not the Appealers Tenet; yet the words
following in the end of this very Chapter cut the very throat thereof: Miramur
de Ecclesijs eius si a quibusdam deseruntur, quum ea nos ostendunt Christianos,
quae patimur ad exemplumipsius Christi: ex nobis, inquit, prodierunt, sed non
fuerunt ex nobis; si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique nobiscum. Marvel
we if some forsake the Churches of Christ, whereas those those things which we
suffer after the example of Christ do manifest us to be Christians: They went
out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would
no doubt have continued with us, says Saint John, 1 Epist. 2. 19. In this
allegation, as many other in his book, the Appealer resembles the Cappuchin
Friars; who, when they have gathered great store of meat at rich men's doors, I
know not out of what blind superstition, they eat the worst, and leave the
best, and daintiest meat, and vain-gloriously put it into the Almes-box, and
give it to beggars at the door.

l To the place of Saint Cyprian Epist. 7. we answer: First, that Saint Cyprian
in that Epistle exhorts Rogatianus, and other Confessors, to persevere in the
profession of their holy faith, and therefore this place is brought obtorto
collo, for Apostasy. His words are, immediately before the words alleged by
the Appealer and Bertius, Danda opera est, vt post haec initia, ad incrementa
quoque veniatur, and consummetur in vobis, quod iam foelicibus rudimentis esse
coepistis; You must use diligence, that after these beginnings you may proceed,
and that may be perfected in you which is happily begun. Secondly, we answer:
Cyprian says, that Saul and Solomon lost the grace which was given them, but
expresses not what grace he meant; whether gratiam gratis datam, or gratiam
gratum facientem; whether the grace of illumination only, or of sanctification;
whether the spirit of Prophecy, or of Government, or of Regeneration. Thirdly,
whether he means grace of wisdom, or grace of holiness, ordinary, or
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; he says not that the Spirit or grace
departed from them totally or finally: and therefore this shaft is not only
blunt in it self, but also falls very short of the mark. Lastly, Saint
Cyprian, as he perseuered himself a constant Martyr to the end, so is he a
great patron of the perseverance of Saints. In his book against Nouatia^ of
the Unity of the Church, he sets a mark upon backsliders, to distinguish them
from good men and true believers: Nemo aestimet bonos de Ecclesia posse
decedere, Let no man imagine that good men can (mark the word Posse) depart
from the true Church: Triticum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice
fundatam procella subuertit; inanes paleae tempestate iactantur, inualidae
arbores turbinis incursione euertuntur: The wind does not blow away corn,
neither does a storm ouerturne a tree deeply and strongly rooted; it is
empty chafe that the wind scatters, and they are weak and rotten trees
that are overthrown in a storm. In this sweet strain Saint Cyprian plays
on his Master Tertullians Key; Tertullian. de praescript. c. 3.
Auolent quantum volent paleae leuis fidei quocunque afflatu tentationum, eo
purior mass a frumenti in horrea domini reponetur. Let the Chafe, that is, men
of light belief, be blown or fly away with every puff of temptation, by
this means Gods floor is purged and cleansed. I marvel none of this Chafe
flew in Bertius eyes, to make him miss his way to Paris; who destitute of
better arguments for Apostasy, became himself an example of Apostafie; but
the best is, before his departure he was known to be no Saint. He went away
from us, because he was not of us, for if he had been of us, he would without
doubt have remained with us, according to the words of Saint John, 1 Epist. 2.
alleged by Tertullian and Saint Cyprian in both passages.

m To the place alleged out of Nazianzen, we answer: Virgil. Aenead. 4.
That it is like Didoes sword wherewith she pierced her own bowels; Non hos
quaesitum munus in vsus. If Bertius, who only tasted Nazianzens waters in a
muddy stream; or the Appealer, who has drunk deeply of them in the pure
fountain, had searched diligently through all the writings of that profound
Divine for a testimony against themselves, they could hardly meet with a more
pregnant. Because Saul, says this holy Father, became not purely and sincerely
another man, nor gave himself wholly and entirely to be directed by the
Spirit, he came to a fearful end. Hypocrites therefore, and such as are not
sincerely converted, and truly regenerate, may fall away: not they, who wholly
and entirely yield themselves to the guidance of Gods Spirit; not they who by
an unfeigned conversion become perfectly and sincerely other men. To the former,
as says this Father, God is a light, to the latter he is a fire: the former he
enlightneth only; the latter he heateth also, melts their heart, purges them
from all their dross. Or, if that eloquent Father take light in the good
sense, and fire in the worse, then his meaning is, that as the word of God is a
savor of life unto life in them that are saved, and a savor of death unto
death in them that perish; so God himself is a Comfortable light to the true
children of light, but a consuming fire to Hypocrites, and Apostatates, and all
such as have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, much more
those who utterly forsake God, and consult with the Devil, as Saul did; and
others of that his desperate resolution: Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta
mouebo. I will make a league with Death, and covenant with Hell.

n To the passages alleged out of Saint Augustine we answer most willingly, we
desire to hear none rather than Saint Augustine speak in this Cause: Never
had the Church of God since the Apostle Saint Paul, a more valiant and resolute
Champion of Grace, than Saint Augustine. As Tully spoke of the ancient
Rhetoritians, Cicero de (...).
Potius ex art quam de art scripserunt, They rather wrote out of art, than of
the art: So may it be truly said of Saint Augustines works against the
Pelagians, non tam de gratia, quam ex gratia scripsisse videtur, That he wrote
rather and spoke from grace, than of grace, so full of grace are his lips, and
pen in this argument of Grace. I could easily point to many places in the
Works of this holy Father, especially those extant in his seventh Tome, (...)
Vbi no^ seclusa aliqua aquula, sed vniuersum flumen erumpit, Where there
runs not a small riuelet, but a maine stream of this water of the grace of
perseverance springing to everlasting life. Verily Saint Augustine so
professedly and strongly opposes both the Pelagian, Demi-pelagian, and now
Arminian errors, that as Pelagius himself in a Synod at Jerusalem being
pressed with Saint Augustines Reasons and Authorities, Or^sius in Apolog. (...)
Pelagius contempt^^ de Augustino esset loqu^ru^s. Cor^inus (...) Tilen^^.
Bertius praefat. ad Lactor^m.
which he was not able to answer, sought to vilify and slighten his Person. So
Arnoldus Coru. and Bertius rather go about to discredit, than satisfy the
Authority of this Prime Father Non est standu^ hac in part Authoritati
Augustini, We are not to stand to y^ Authority of Austin in this point, says
Arnoldus. Quid quod Augustinus ipse alijs per Africa^ Ecclesijs viuus vidensque
sententia^ suam no^ probauit? Quid quod ipse a se dissentit Augustinus, vt
Augustinu^ citanti nihil sit promptius quam Augustinu^ ipsum opponere? Austin,
says Bertius, by his life time made not good his opinion to the Churches of
Africa: He dissents from himself, in so much y^ nothing is more easy than to
oppose Augustine to Augustine. This lesson they both learned from Arminius
their Master, as Coruinus, mali corui malum ouum, D^fens. Se^tent. Armi^^ij de
Pr^dest.
acknowledges, page 205. Puto Arminium non illibenter tibi concessurum fuisse,
hac in part Augustinum vobiscum facere; ita tamen vt varium eum esse dixisset,
and inconstantem in sententia sua enuntianda. Cicer. in (...).
But Plato, Instar millium; Saint Augustine is more worth than a thousand, nay
all the Arminians: whose Works, as they have already devoured all the works
of the Pelagians and Semi-pelagians, so I hope will in time devour also all
the Arminians works, as Aarons Rod did the Magicians. Durum telum necessitas,
ignoscite; Mere necessity drove Arminius and his Scholars to this desperate
answer. Authologia Epigram.
The Fox in the Greek Epigrammatist, when he could not reach the grapes, at
which his mouth watered, comforted himself, saying, (...), It is no great
matter though I cannot reach them, these grapes are but sour fruit. As sour
as they are, Bertius and the Appealer snatch at one, or two; namely, the two
passages before alleged by them. August. de (...). Dei lib. 11. cap. 12. D^
Corrept. and Great. c. 5.
To the first we answer, It touches not the state of the present question; The
state of Saints in Grace may be sure enough, yet they not always assured of
it. There is a certitude of the subject, and a certitude of the object, that
which now is in debate, is not the certitude of the subject, whether the
Regenerate are assured in themselves of their Perseverance; but the certitude
of the object, whether their perseverance in it self be certain. This
distinction is acknowledged generally by those Interpreters who comment on that
of Saint Peter, (...) 1. 10.
Make your election sure: that is, say they, to your selves, and your own
hearts, not in it self, nor in respect of God, For the foundation of God
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
having this Seal, The Lord knows who are his: neither can any thing done by
man add strength to Gods decree. But because our assurance of Election, and
the state of Adoption, and Grace, and perseverance in the same, is partly from
the testimony of the Spirit within us, and partly from the effects of Grace, to
wit, the fruits of righteousness; and because when we grieve the Spirit of
God, he withdraws his Spirit for a time, and thereby both the testimony of
the Spirit is silent for the time, and the effects of Grace cease; Saint
Augustine humbly and truly professes, that the Saints, albeit they are
certain of the reward of their perseverance, yet are found uncertain of their
perseverance it self; Quis cum hominum se in action, profectuque iustitiae
vsque in finem perseueraturum sciet? They are certain, certitudine fidei, by
the assurance of faith, but not certain, certitudine scientiae, and
experientiae, by the certainty of knowledge and experience, as Bucer acutely
distinguishes: Bucer. lib. Concord.
they are certain of perseverance in it self; yet they are found, that is,
you may find them in that state by reason of some fearful temptation, not
certain in themselves; nay sometimes they in themselves receive the sentence
of death, to humble them, and make them pray with sighs and groans which
cannot be expressed, Restore unto me the joy of salvation, and uphold me with
thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. Lastly, there is a double perseverance: 1. A
perseverance in a course of sanctity unto the end, without any interruption or
stop, when a child of God goes still forward, and never is cast back, but
continues, as Saint Augustine speaks, In action profectuque iustitiae;
Still in the action and progress of righteousness: and of such perseverance
the Saints are not certain in this life. 2. A perseverance unto the end, yet
not without some interruption and going back also for a time, but without any
total or final backsliding; and of such perseverance a Saint of God may and
ought to be assured.


o To the place alleged by Bertius out of the fifth Chapter of Saint Augustine
de Corrept. and Gratia, and by the Appealer out of Saint Augustine de bono
Perseuerant. cap. 6. we answer: That the words are not found in the places
quoted. Yet Saint Augustine in other places has such words: But his meaning is
very plain; He speaks of a temporary faith and common grace, Aug. de Corrept.
and Great. cap. ^.
not a justifying faith, and saving grace. His own words are, Let it not move
us that God gives not some of his children perseverance; Absit enim vt ita
esset, si de illi^ praedestinatis essent, and secundum propositum vocatis, qui
vere sunt filij promissionis; God forbid that it should be so, if they were of
the Predestinate, and those which are called according to purpose, which truly
are the children of promise. And a little after, Rursus quidam, qui filij Dei
propter susceptam vel temporaliter gratiam dicuntur a nobis, nec sunt tamen
Deo; de quibus ait Johannes, ex nobis exierunt, sed non erant ex nobis; hoc
est, and quando videbantur in nobis, non erant ex nobis, and tanquam ^i
diceretur vnde id ostendis, quod si fuissent inquit ex nobis, permansissent
nobiscum. Again some, who are called by us the sons of God, in respect of
the temporal grace they have received, are not so unto God: of whom Saint John
says, They went out from us, but were not of us; that is, and when they were
seen amongst us, they were not of us. And as if it were objected to him,
Whence do thou show that? For if they had been, says he, of us, they would
have remained with us. In the same book, De Corrept. and Gratia, Horum fides,
quae per dilectionem operatur, profecto aut omnino non deficit, aut si qui sunt
quorum deficit, reparatur antequam vita ista finiatur; and delet a quae
intercurrerat iniquitate vsque in finem persevere antia deputatur. Qui vero
perseueraturi non sunt, ac sic a fide Christiana and conuersatione lapsuri
sunt, vt tales eos vitae huius finis inueniat proculdubio nec illo tempore quo
been pieque viuunt in isto numero computandi sunt. The faith of these men which
works by love verily either fails not at all, or if it fail in any, it is
repaired again before this life ends; and the wickedness which comes between
being blotted out, it is reputed for perseverance to the end. But those who
persevere not, but so fall from Christian faith and conversation, that the end
of this life finds them such, without doubt they were not to be accounted in
that number, no not then, when they lived well and godly. And Chapter 9. Qui
non habuerunt perseuerantiam, sicut non vere discipuli Christi, ita nec vere
filij Dei fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur, and ita vocabantur: Those who
had not perseverance, as they were not truly disciples of Christ, so neither
were they truly the sons of God, no not when they seemed to be so, and called
so. In producing testimonies of Saint Augustine, Inopem me copia facit, Store
is a sore unto me; I will content my self only with such passages as offer
themselves unto me in that very book and chapter cited by the Appealer for the
contrary. August. de bono Perseuerant. cap. ^.
Thus the Chapter begins, These brethren, as you write, (He speaks of the
Demipelagians, and Massilians, against whom Prosper and Hilary had made a
remonstrance unto him) will not yield that such perseverance should be taught,
which cannot be lost by contumacie; where they do not well observe what they
say; for we speak of perseverance to the end; which if it be given, the party
to whom it is given perseueres to the end. Multi eam possunt habere, nullus
amittere: hoc Dei donum suppliciter emereri potest, sed cum datum fuerit amitti
contumaciter non potest. Quomodo enim potest amitti, per quod fit, vt non
amittatur etiam quod posset amitti? Many may have perseverance, none can lose
it; this gift of God may be gained by humble prayer, but once given cannot be
lost by contumacy. For how can that be lost, which makes, that what otherwise
might be lost cannot be lost? I pity here the Appealers ill hap, who like the
Miser in the Greek Epigram, that going to the place where he thought he laid
up his treasure safe, found there no treasure, but a rope wherewith he stopped
his windpipe.

p To the place alleged out of Prosper, Respons. 7. ad Capit. Gallorum, we
answer: First, that Saint Prosper, Saint Augustines faithful Scholar and
great admirer, in the passage alleged concurreth with him. Both of them in
words seem to affirm, August. de Corrept. and Great. c. ^.
That a regenerate and justified man may fall by his free will into foul and
enormous sins, and die in them: but lest any should stumble at this sentence
unawares, Saint Augustine in the ninth chapter of the same book gives them
warning, and most plainly declares his meaning: Appellamus eos electos Christi
discipulos and Dei filios, quia sic appellandi sunt, quos regeneratos pie
viuere cernimus; sed tunc vere sunt quod appellantur, si manserint in eo
propter quod sic appellantur. Si autem perseuerantiam non habent, id est, in eo
quod caeperunt esse non manent, non vere appellantur, quod appellantur, and non
sunt: apud eum enim hoc non sunt, cui notum est quod futuri sunt. We call all
those chosen disciples of Christ, and sons of God, because those whom we see
live godly, and are regenerate, are to be so called; but then are they truly
that which they are called, if they remain in that, for which they are so
called. But if they have not perseverance, that is, if they remain not in that
which they began to be, they are not truly called that which they are called,
and are not; for they are not so to him, who knows what they will be.
Secondly, Saint Prosper, with Saint Hilary, made a joint relation to Saint
Augustine of the Demipelagian and Massilian errors, and desired Saint
Augustines assistance against them. Of these one was, (as their Epistles to
Saint Augustine make it manifest.) Nulli dari perseuerantiam talem a qua non
permittitur praeuaricari, sed a qua possit sua voluntate deficere, There is no
such perseverance given to any man, from which he is not suffered to revolt;
but such from which a man may by his free will fall away. Against which I
oppose that sentence of Saint Augustine, as a fortress impregnable: Aug. de
Corrept. and Great. cap. ^.
An audebis dicere, etiam rogante Christo ne deficeret fides Petri, defecturam
fuisse, si Petrus eam deficere voluisset? quasi aliud Petrus vllo modo vellet,
quam pro illo Christus rogasset, vt vellet. Nam quis ignorant tunc fuisse
perituram fidem Petri, si ea quae fidelis erat voluntas ipsa deficeret, sed
quia praeparatur voluntas a Domino, ideo pro illo Christi non possit esse
inanis oration. Quando rogauit ergone fides eius deficeret, quid aliud rogauit
nisi vt haberet in fide liberrimam, fortissimam, inuictissimam,
perseuerantissimam voluntatem? Ecce quemadmodum secundum gratiam Dei, non
contra eam libertas defenditur voluntatis: voluntas quippe humana non liberate
consequitur gratiam, sed gratia potius libertatem, and vt perseueret
delectabilem perpetuitatem, and insuperabilem fortitudinem. When Christ prayed
for the faith of Peter that it might not fail, what other thing did he ask,
but that he might have a most free, a most resolute, a most unconquerable, a
most perseuering will in the faith? Behold how the freedom of the will is
defended by us according to Gods grace not against it: for the will of man does
not by her freedom obtain grace, but by grace freedom, and a delightful
perpetuity, and invincible power to persevere.

ARMINIANS.
HAge Conference, Article 5. If those that are regenerate cannot fall away
totally, nor finally; hence it would follow that no q children of the faithful
could be damned, because by Baptism they are put into the state of Grace, and
regenerated.

Bertius page 79. The seventh absurdity which follows upon the Adversaries
doctrine, is, that Baptism does not certainly seal in all the children of the
faithful the grace of God.

Bertius page 35. The fifth demonstration is drawn from the causes of
Apostasy: whereof the first is the committing of sin r against conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. etc.

Hage Conference, Article 5. Those that are truly faithful may commit murder,
adultery, and the like heinous sins, therefore lose faith and Gods favor; for
which things the wrath of God falls upon the children of disobedience,
Coloss. 3. 6.

APPEALER.
APPEAL, page 36. Let this be acknowledged to be the Doctrine of our Church,
that children duly q baptized, are put into the state of Grace and salvation:
(which you see you cannot, you must not deny) and both our and my experience
will show, that many so baptized children, when they come to age, by a wicked
and lewd life do fall away from God, and from that state of Grace and
Salvation, wherein he had set them to a worse state: wherein they shall never
be saved. If you grant not this, you must hold, that all men that are baptized
are saved; which I know you will never do.

Answer to Gag, page 161. 162. Again, Faith must needs be lost where it cannot
consist. It cannot consist where God will not abide. God will not abide where he
is disobeyed: he is disobeyed, where mortal r sin is committed; the most
righteous man living upon the face of the earth, continually does or may in
this sort transgress: who can tell how often he offends? Cleanse thy servant
from presumptuous sins. Thou will have no fellowship at al with the deceitful;
Nor shall any evil dwell with thee.

q To the reason drawn from the Baptism of Children, (...) l. 10. de Great ca.
^. Hag. Conf^r. (...). part. 2. page 10. A^^ (...) Theologo Aug^o. Ar^ic. 5.
Prideaux. Lect. 6. p. 123.
we answer: First, that it is of all other most weak and childish; for it does
not at all touch the state of the question, as is observed by Suarez, the
German Divines at the Hage Conference, the English Divines present at the Synod
of Dort, his Majesty's public Professor of Divinity in Oxford. The question
is of those, who are justified by the Act of faith, conceived by the preaching
of the Gospel, who fall into actual sins wounding their conscience, whether
such thereby lose the habit of Grace, and totally and finally fall away from
the state of justification? Now infants have not the actual use of reason,
neither does their faith, if so they have infused faith, actually apprehend and
apply the promises of the Gospel: neither can they be supposed to commit those
crying actual sins, which the Appealer calls mortal, (I hope not in the
Popish sense) which cannot stand with the Grace of justification, as is
pretended by the Arminians, and Appealer. Secondly, we answer: That although in
a good sense a child may be said to be put into the state of Grace and
Salvation, because thereby the infant is admitted into the Church, and
participateth of the means of salvation; yet, if we speak properly and
precisely, the Sacraments seal, and not confer grace; or, as the Church of
England speaks by her learned Apologist, Iud Artic. ^ diuis. 13. (...) 27.
do not begin, but rather continue and confirm our incorporation, by Christ.
The Sacrament is a seal of the Covenant, the conditions are supposed to be
drawn and assented unto before the seal be put to the instrument. The Seal
without the Covenant is not available; the Covenant may be without the Seal:
we are tied to Gods Ordinances, God is not. The contempt of Baptism is
damnable, the defect in the children of the Elect and seed of the faithful,
comprised in the Covenant with their fathers, is not so: if all possible means
have been used by the Parents and Minister to procure them Baptism before God
call them away, there is no danger to the Parents, much less to the Children.
For the inevitable defect of Baptism may be supplied either by a desire of
Baptism, as in Valentinian; or by profession of faith, as in the Thief upon
the Cross; or by the blood of Martyrdom, as in the Innocents put to death by
Herod. Thirdly, we answer, All that are regenerate Sacramentally are not
necessarily and infallibly regenerated spiritually: A man may be baptized with
water, and yet not with the holy Ghost. Ismael was circumcised as well as
Isaak, Esau as well as Jacob, Simon Magus was baptized as well as Simon Peter.
Our Church in Charity, Book of Common Prayer, Bur^all of the (...).
as it supposes all children baptized to be regenerate by the holy Ghost, so
also in the form of burial it supposes, all that live in the bosom of our
Church to die in the Lord, and to depart in the true faith of Gods holy name.
Yet undoubtedly our Church attributes no more virtue to the Sacraments than
the Ancient Church did. Theoderets observation is well known, Gratia
Sacramentum aliquando praecedit, aliquando sequitur, aliquando nec sequitur:
Grace sometimes goes before the sacrament, sometimes follows it, sometimes it
follows it not at all. Saint Augustines resolution is peremptory Omnes eundem
potum spiritualem biberunt, sed non in omnibus beneplacitum est Deo: and cum
essent omnia communia Sacramenta, non communis erat omnibus gratia, qu^
Sacramentorum virtus est. Sicut and nunc iam reuelata fide quae tunc velabatur,
omnibus in nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus sancti baptiz atis commune
est lauacrum regenerationis, sed ipsa gratia, cuius sunt Sacramenta, qua membra
corporis Christi cum suo capite regenerata sunt, non communis est omnibus. The
lauer of regeneration is common to all that are baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, but the Grace, whereof these are Sacraments,
whereby the members of the body of Christ are regenerate with their Head, is
not common to all. And again Saint Augustine, August. lib. 5. contra Do^^tis
cap. 24.
Christ is put on sometimes, vsqu^ ad Sacramenti perceptionem, as far as to the
receiving of the Sacrament, sometimes also unto sanctification of life; Atque
illud primum bonis and malis potest esse commune, ^oc alterum proprium est
bonorum and piorum, The first is common to good and bad, the other is proper to
the good and godly. Saint Austines hands are supported by Chrysostom and
Jerome, as Moses were by Aaron and Hur. Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Mirtth.
ho^^. 5.
Many are baptized with water, which are not baptized with the holy Ghost; they
seem to be the sons of God in regard of their Baptism, but indeed they are
not the sons of God, because they are not baptized with the holy Ghost. Ierom
(...). in epist ad Gal. cap. 3.
Saint Jerome, Si quis hoc corporeum, quod oculis carnis aspicitur, aquae
tantum accipit lauacrum, non est indutus dominum Iesum. Nam and Simon ille
Magus acceperat lauacrum aquae, verum quia Spiritum sanctum non habebat,
indutus non erat Christum. Et haeretici vel hypocritae, and hi qui sordide
victitant, videntur quidem accipere baptismum, sed nescio an Christi habeant
indumentum. If any man receive only the visible lauer of water, he has not put
on Christ, etc. From these and many other the like testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers, I infer, that the foundation of this argument is sandy and sinking;
Although the inward grace ordinarily accompany the outward sign, and we ought
to believe by the judgment of Charity, that all who are baptized are truly
regenerate: (...)
yet iudicio veritatis, as Iunius distinguishes, that is, by the judgment of
precise and infallible truth all are not so, as the Fathers speak roundly and
plainly. Now as in the judgment of Charity we are to believe, that all that
are baptized are regenerate, so by the same judgment we are to believe, that,
though they fall into grievous sin, and sometime come to a fearful outward
end, God notwithstanding gives them grace to repent at the last gasp, and
consequently they fall not away finally. Inter sacrum and saxum, inter pontem
and fontem misericordia. Lastly, this Objection may be retorted against the
Adversary thus.

If Baptism may not be reiterated, then the grace of regeneration cannot be
totally lost.

But Baptism may not be * As the Church (...) of Se^i^^ure against all
Ana^aptist^.
reiterated. Therefore the grace of regeneration cannot be totally lost.

The consequence of the mayor is thus made evident. A man that has lost the
grace of regeneration totally, is as if he never had been regenerated, and
therefore must be borne again: if borne again, again baptized: because the
sign and the thing signified, or, as they make it, the cause and proper effect
cannot be severed; if then the effect, to wit, regeneration be lost, and must
be reproduced, the proper cause, as they say, the necessary condition and
seal, as we say, must be again put. If regeneration may be had the second
time without Baptism, why not at first? which the Adversaries absolutely deny,
John 3. 5.
pressing far that text, Unless a man be borne again of water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. It is a thing
inconceivable, that the shadow should be more permanent than the substance;
the Baptism of water, than that of the holy Ghost. If then a regenerate man
lose totally his regeneration, and be as if he had never been regenerate, he
is as if he had never been baptized. This reason may be further confirmed;
when this question is propounded, why Baptism is but once to be administered,
and the Lords Supper often? It is most usually answered, because a man is borne
but once, but is fed often. The edge of this argument cannot be turned by the
Adversary, unless he can show more Regenerations in Scripture then Baptismes,
or any new Regeneration without a new lauer, any new Covenant without an
authentical instrument and new seal.

r To the reason drawn from mortal sin in the regenerate, we answer: First,
if mortal sin be taken for such sin as deserves of it self eternal
death, all sin is mortal: if by mortal sin such sin for which a man is
bound over by God, and sentenced to eternal death, no sin in the Elect is
mortal: for how grievous soever they sin, the seed of God remains in them,
which in time will bring forth repentance, and repentance salvation. In the
interim between their sin and the renewed act of their repentance, God
suspendeth, but he reuoketh not his pardon of their sins: he is angry with
them, and they indeed have forfeited their estate in his grace and favor, and
title to the Kingdom of Heaven, but God will not take the forfeit; they lose
the sense and present fruit, but not the state of justification. Habitual
repentance they have always, and shall have the Act, if the sin be such for
which habitual repentance, and the continual asking of a general pardon for
all sin will not suffice. A tender hearted father though his son provoke
him very far, so that he chastise him with many stripes, yet will he hardly
be brought to disinherite him; Romans ^. 17. (...)
yet if a father could, God will not; for if ever sons, then heirs, if ever
justified, then glorified. The Apostle will make good the Consequence, if the
Spirit in our heart make good the Antecedent. Lastly, this Objection may be
retorted thus.

N^ Ordinary and small sins do put the regenerate out of the state of grace;

All ordinary and small sins are in their own nature mortal;

Therefore some sins in their own nature mortal, do not put the regenerate
out of the state of grace.

Or thus:

Peter committed a most grievous and heinous sin;

* See hereof Sebast. Benefield Praelect. de Perseuerantia sanct^rum, cap. 15.
and 16. a page 97. ad 143.
Peter was not thereby utterly excluded from the grace of God:

Therefore a man may commit some most grievous and heinous sin, and not be
utterly excluded from the grace of God.

The like may be said * See hereof Sebast. Benefield Praelect. de Perseuerantia
sanct^rum, cap. 15. and 16. a page 97. ad 143.
of David, of which above. The first proposition is in the Gospel; the second
is in the Homily of Repentance. Sir Thomas Moore having tracked Gallus in the
Ancient Poets, from whom he secretly had borrowed many verses, and bragged much
of the genius and spirit of Ancient Poesy, wittily thus plaieth upon him in
the Epigram, saying, Thou Gallus have the very spirit of the Ancient Poets, for
thou make the selfsame verses that they made before.

Vatibus idem, animusque, and vere spiritus idem,
Qui fuit antiquis, est modo, Galle, tibi.
Carminanamque eadem, versusque frequenter eosdem
Quos fecere illi, tu quoque, Galle, facis.
Doubtless if the Appealer never read Arminius or Bertius, as he seems
deeply to profess; I may say truly of him, as he did of Gallus, that he has
the very spirit and soul of Arminius and Bertius, for he delivers not only
the same ^enents, but he uses the selfsame Authorities, Scriptures, Fathers,
and Reasons, and for the most part in the same words: All which Arguments,
common to them both, have been examined, and proved like the stone that
Achilles flung at a dead skull, which rebounded back and struck out the (...)
eye: -- redijt lapis vltor ab osse
Actorisque sui frontem, oculosque petit.


We (...) do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 2. Cor. 13. 8.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Errors of the Appealer are of three sorts, Popish, Arminian, and of a
third kind, multi-formiter deformes. Of the first sort I have given thee a
taste: Of the second thou shall have a Synopsis in the Tablet ensuing: The
third thou shall find in the Writ of Error. In all kinds I have pretermitted
some, Non amore erroris, sed errore amoris: Not for any love I bear to his
errors, but through an error of love. Partly because I hope they are rather
slips in his pen, than downfalls in his judgment: partly also because they are
discovered by others; whose writings had I seen before my papers were engaged
in the Press: Ajax hic meus in spongiam incubuisset.

A SECOND TABLET, Representing the Appealers consent with the Church of Rome,
and dissent from the Church of England, in diverse remarkable points.
Of the Church.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
CAssander in his Consultation, Article 7. page 50. The present Church of Rome
has ever stood firm in the same foundation of Doctrine and Sacraments
instituted by God, etc. Quamvis praeseas Ecclesia Romana no^ parum in morum et
disciplinae integritate, addo etiam and doctrinae sinceritate, ab antiqua illa
unde orta and derivata est, dissideat; tamen eodem fundamento doctrinae and
Sacramentorum a Deo institutorum firma semper constitit.

Cassander ibid. The present Church of Rome acknowledges and embraces
communion with the ancient and undoubted church of Christ; wherefore she
cannot be other, or diverse from it. Praesens Ecclesia Romana communionem cum
illa antiqua, and indubitata Christi Ecclesia agnoscit and colit: Quare alia,
and diuersa ab illa esse no^ potest.

Council of Trent page 442. in fine. In the Bull of Pius the fourth, upon a
form of oath enjoined to all Professors. I acknowledge the holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church of Rome to be the mother, and Mistress of all Churches.

Cassander, Article 7. page 50. Praesens Ecclesia Romana manet Christi Ecclesia
and sponsa. The present Church of Rome remains Christ his Church and Spouse
[although she have provoked her husband with many errors and vices,] so long
as Christ her Husband has not given her a bill of divorce: although he has
chastised her with many scourges.

Bellarm. de To. Pontif. lib. 4. c. 4. The present Church of Rome cannot err
(namely, in matter of faith, etc.)

Sixtus 4. in Sy^od. Complut. condemns certain Articles of Peter of Oxford,
whereof one was this; That the Church of Rome could err. Martin the fifth, in
his Bull annexed to the Council of Constance, will have them held Heretics,
who hold otherwise of the Sacraments, or Articles of faith, then the Church of
Rome.

Appealer.
ANswer to the Gagg, cap. 5. page 50. Moderate men on both sides confess, that
this Controversy may cease: and although the present Church of Rome has not a
little departed from the ancient Church from which it was derived etc. yet she
has ever stood firm in the same foundation of Doctrine and Sacraments
instituted by God.

Appeal page 113. In essentialls and fundamentalls they agree. Appeal ibid.
Praesens Ecclesia Romana communionem cu^ illa antiqua and indubitata Christi
Ecclesia agnoscit, and colit: Quare alia and diversa ab illa esse non potest.
The present Church of Rome acknowledges and embraces communion with the
ancient and undoubted church of Christ; Wherefore she cannot be other or
diverse from it.

Appeal p. 113. The church of Rome as well since, as before the Council of
Trent, is a part of the Catholic, though not the Catholic Church.

App: Answer to Gagg page 50. Manet Christi Ecclesia and sponsa. The Church of
Rome still remains the spouse and Church of Christ etc.

Appeal page 139. The Church of Rome is, and ever was a true Church since it
was a Church. Appeal page 140. Mistake not my saying, The Church of Rome is a
true Church ratione Essentiae, and being of a Church.

Appeal page 113. I am absolutely persuaded, and shall be still, till I see
cause to the contrary, that the Church of Rome is a true Church.

Answer to Gag, page 14. Plainly delivered in Scriptures are all those points,
which belong to faith, and manners, hope, and charity. I know none of these
controverted inter parts. By parts, he there apparently means, the church
of Rome, and Reformed Churches: Now if the church of Rome differs not from us
in any matter of faith, the^ has she not erred in any matter of Faith. For our
differences are about her errors.

App. page 112. I profess my self none of those furious ones in point of
difference now a days, whose resolution is, that we ought to have no society,
or accordance with Papists in things divine, upon pain of eternal damnation.
Appeal. p. 83. That they (the Papists) raise the foundation, that we must for
ever, upon pain of damnation (strange bugbeares and terriculamenta, dissent
fom them.

Discord.
Church of England.
HOmily for Whitsonday. 2 part. p. 213. The church of Rome (as it is at this
present) is not built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
retaining the sound and pure doctrine of Jesus Christ: Neither yet do they
order the Sacraments in such sort as he did first institute, and ordain them.

Apology of the Church of England cap. 16. divis. 2. part 6. The original and
first foundation of Religion has been utterly corrupted by those men,
(namely) the Popes adherents.

Apology of the Church of England cap. 16. divis. 1. part 6. We have gone from
that Church, which we our selves did evidently see with our eyes, to have gone
from the old holy Fathers, and from the Apostles, and from the Primitive and
Catholic Church of God.

Apol. Church of England. part 6. cap. 22. diuis. 2. We are departed from him,
(namely, the Pope) who, without doubt, is the forerunner and standard bearer of
Antichrist, and has utterly forsaken the Catholic Faith.

Homily for Whitsonday 2 part. p. 213 If we compare this (namely the definition
of the true Church) with the Church of Rome, not as it was in the beginning,
but as it is presently, then shall we perceive, the state thereof to be so far
wide from the nature of the true church, as nothing can be more. Et ibid. page
214. If it be possible, that the Spirit of truth should be there, where the
true church is not, then is it at Rome.

Homily for Whitsonday, p. 213. We may well conclude according to the Rule of
S. Austen, that the Bishops of Rome, and their adherents, are not the true
Church.

Article 19. The Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living, and
manner of ceremonies: But also in matters of faith. Apolog. Church of Engl. c.
16. div. 1. part 6. We have gone from that Church, which Christ, (who cannot
err) told so long* before, it should err. Neither had we ever intended so to do
except both the manifest and assured will of God, opened to us in his holy
scripture, and regard of our own salvation, had even constrained us. Apol.
Chur. of Engl. par. 6 div. 2. c. 20. We are fallen from the Bishop of Rome,
because the case stood so, that unless we left him, we could not come to
Christ Apol. par. 5. c. 15. d. 3. We have renounced that Church, wherein we
could neither have the word of God sincerely taught, nor sacraments rightly
administered, and wherein there was nothing able to stay a wise man, or one that
has consideration of his own safety.

In this head touching the Church of Rome, the Appealer directly contradicts
the Church of England in these particulars:

The Church of England.
1 The church of Rome holds not the same foundation. 2 Has erred in matter
of Faith. 3 Has not the nature of the true Church. 4 Must be left on pain of
damnation. 5 Is departed from the Primitive and Catholic Church.
Appealer.
1 The church of Rome holds the same. foundation. 2 Has not erred in matters
belonging to faith. 3 Has the essence and being of the true Church. 4 Ought
not to be left on pain of damnation. 5 Is not departed, but holds co^muinion
with the Primitive and Catholic Church.
Of General Councels.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
BEllarm. de council. and Eccles. 2 Book* 2 Chap. We are bound by the
Catholic faith, to believe, That General Councels cannot err in faith or
manners. The like is affirmed by Gregory de Valentia, Analys. fidei Cathol.
lib. 18.

Hosius de legit. judicibus reru^ Ecclesiasticarum.

Andradius, Defense of the Council of Trent, in his Chapt. Of the authority
of Councels.

Canus in his common places of Divinity 5 Book: and the Romanists generally.

Campian rat. 4. Concilia.

Duraeus in confut. respons. Whitak. de Conciliis.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gag. page 48. To conclude, The Church cannot err, neither
collectiue, nor representative Thus your Masters distinguish the terms of this
question, that go workmanlike, and not like you clutteringly to work: so
they, so we, in the largest extent, not err at all. Secondly, not err in
points of faith: for in matters of fact, they confess error. Appeal p. 124.
Many things appertain unto God, which are not of necessity unto salvation, both
in practice and speculation: in these happily, General Counsels have erred, in
those other none can err.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARticle 21. General Councels, when they be gathered together, [for as much as
they are an Assembly of men, whereof, all be not governed with the Spirit and
word of GOD] they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things
appertaining to God.

Wherefore, things ordained of them, as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless they may be declared, that they be taken out
of holy Scripture.

In this point (touching the not-erring, or infalli^itie of General Councels)
the Appealer (howsoever by distinguishing of points fundamental, and
accessory) endeavors to difference his opinion from the Church of Rome, and
reconcile it to the Article; yet in truth he fails in both. For first, the
Church of Rome holds all doctrines de fide, determined by the Church, to be
necessary to salvation, and consequently, in the Appealers sense, fundamental
points. In particular, she defines the decisions of the Council of Trent, in
the controuerted points between us, to be part of the Catholic Faith, without
which no man can be saved: Pius 4 in Bulla super forma juram. page 441. If
therefore the Appealer, maintain, as he does, That General Counsels cannot
err in matters fundamental, and necessary to salvation, he holds
consequently, that they cannot err in matter de fide. Secondly, his doctrine
cannot stand with the Article of our Church; for the Article both supposes,
and proves, that General Councels may err, even in points necessary to
salvation: It supposes it, in those words [things ordained of them, as
necessary to salvation, have neither strength, nor authority, unless, etc.]
For if General Councels could not err in things necessary to salvation, we
might in such things safely rely upon their authority without warrant of
Scripture; which the Article expressly denies. If General Councels may judge
those things to be necessary to salvation, which are not, (as the Article
implies,) they may in like manner judge, those things not to be necessary to
salvation, which are; and so err both ways in the judgment of points
necessary, and fundamental. And verily the reason, annexed to the Article,
concludes as strongly, that General Councels may err in fundamentals, as in
Accessory: the reason is, because [Generall Councels are an Assembly of men,
whereof all are not governed by the Spirit, and Word of God: Now they who are
not governed by the Spirit and Word of God, have, and may err even in points
fundamental; in as much as nothing can preserve a man from fundamental error,
but the Spirit, and Word of God, whereby they are not governed, as has the
Article. Notwithstanding all this iarring and discord from the Article, I find
some harmony and concord in the close, Appeal page 147. Ad verbu^. of such a
Council, and the sounder part, and conclusions in says, it is probable.
Detali Concilio, and saniore part, de co^clusionibus in fide, probabile est:
It is probable, that in a General Council lawfully called, the sounder part
cannot err in conclusions of faith. But this strain was not the Appealers,
but a learned Asaffs.

Of Justification.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COunc. of Trent Sess. 6. c. 4. Justification is a translation from the state,
in which a man is borne the son of the first Adam, into the state of Grace,
and adoption of the sons of God by the second Adam.

Counc. of Trent Sess. 6. c. 7. Justification is not only remission of sins,
But also sanctification, and renouation of the inward man, by the voluntary
receiving of grace, and those gifts, whereby a man of unjust is made just.

Counc. of Trent Sess. 6. canon 11. If any man say, that A man is justified
only by remission of sins, excluding grace, and charity, which is shed into
their hearts by the holy Spirit, and is inherent in them; let him be accursed.

Appealer.
ANswer to the Gagg. page 142. A sinner is then justified, when he is made
just, that is, translated from state of Nature to state of Grace.

Answer to Gagg. page 143. Justification consists in forgiveness of sins
primarily, and grace infused secondarily. Both the acts of Gods Spirit in man.

Answer to Gagg. page 140. To justify has a threefold extent. First, to make
just and righteous. Secondly, to make more just and righteous. Thirdly, to
declare and pronounce just.

Page 142. Justification properly is in the first acceptance. A sinner is the^
justified, when he is made just; that is, (page 141.) transformed in mind,
renewed in soul, regenerate by grace.

Discord.
Church of England.
HOmil. of Salvation. page 13. Because all men be sinners, and breakers of Gods
law, therefore can no man by his own acts, words, and deeds, seem they never
so good, be justified. But of necessity every man is constrained to seek for
another righteousness, or justification to be received at Gods own hands:
that is to say, forgiveness of sins: And this justification, or righteousness,
which we so receive of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits, is accepted and allowed
of God for our full and perfect justification. The faith in Christ, which is
within us, does not justify us; for that were to account our selves to be
justified by some act or virtue, which is within our selves.

Art. 11. Of the justification of man. We are accounted righteous before God,
only by the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not our
own works.

Note in this maine point of Justification, That the Appealer differs from
the Church of England, and consents to the Church of Rome, in three
remarkable particulars.

1 In the signification of the word, [To justify,] which the Appealer, and the
Church of Rome take for [making a man righteous.] The Church of England, and
the Protestants generally, for [accounting, declaring, or pronouncing a man
righteous. 2 The Church of England makes Justification to consist only in
forgiveness of sins. The Appealer, and Church of Rome, not only in
forgiveness of sins, but partly in it, and partly in sanctifying graces
infused. 3 The Church of England teaches, That we are not justified by
inherent righteousness, or, by any virtue within us. The church of Rome, and
the Appealer hold, That we are justified by sanctifying and regenerating graces
within us, whereby we are transformed in mind, and renewed in soul. By
renewing grace inherent in us, we are sanctified, but not justified: the
confounding of Sanctification with Justification (as the Appealer and Papists
do) is an error of dangerous consequence, as the learned well know.
Of Merit of Works.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COunc. of Trent Sess. 6. can. 32. If any man say, That the good works of a
man justified do not truly merit increase of grace, and eternal life, let him
be accursed.

Bellar. de iustifi. lib. 5. c. 16. The works of just men proceeding from
charity, are meritorious of eternal life, (ex condigno:) this is the common
opinion of Divines, and it is most true.

Vasques in 1a. 2ae. q. 114. disput. 214. The good works of just men, without
any covenant or acceptance, are worthy of the reward of eternal life, and
have an equal value of worth, to the obtaining of eternal life.

Vasques disput. 222. The works of a righteous man do merit eternal life, as
an equal reward, or wages; they make A man just, and worthy eternal life,
that he may of desert obtain the same.

Appealer.
APpeal. page 233. The wicked go to enduring of torments everlasting: the good
go to enjoying of happiness without end: thus is their estate diuersified to
their deserving.

Answer to Gagg. page 153. Merit of congruity is not commonly meant, as scarce
vouchsafed the name of merit. Good works are therefore said to be
meritorious, are so understood to be ex condigno: which, that a work may so
be, these conditions are required: that it be morally good, freely wrought by
man in this life in the state of grace, and friendship with God, which has
annexed Gods promise of reward: all which conditions, I cannot conceive, that
any protestant does deny to good works.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
HOmily of Salvation. 2. part. page 17. Though I have faith, hope, and charity,
repentance, and do never so many good works, yet we must renounce the merit
of all our said virtues, and good deeds, which we either have done, shall do,
or can do, as things that be far too weak and insufficient to deserve the
remission of our sins.

Artic. 11. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deseruings.

Homil. of good works. To have affiance in our works, as by merit of them to
purchase to our selves remission of sins, and eternal life, is blasphemy.

Observe reader, that the Appealer ignorantly, or fraudulently omitteth the
proper conditions requisite to a meritorious act, which are especially these: 1
That the work be properly our: and not his, of whom we pretend to merit. 2
That it be opus indebitum, a work to which otherwise we are not bound. 3 That
it be some way profitable, and beneficial to him, from whom we expect our
reward. 4 That it have some proportion, and correspondence (of congruity at
least, if not of condignitie) to the reward expected.


All which conditions Protestants deny to be found in our good works. And
thereupon disclaim all merit. These conditions the Appealer pretermitteth, and
from four common conditions, requisite to a good work in general, he
concludes loosely, and weakly, That the Papists and we agree in the doctrine
of merit (ex condigno) of condignitie. In his Appeal Chap. 11. (by the advice,
as it seems, of the Approuer of his book) he disclaimeth merit of
condignity, which in his former book he seemed to approve. But he says little
or nothing which may not well stand with merit of congruity. Indeed he lasheth
Vasques for that, wherein he differs from other Papists: but he retracteth
not any where that his own sentence, namely, The eternal state of men is
diuersified to their deseruings. Wherein he crosses the 11 Article, and the
words of S. Paul, Romans 6. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life.

Of Evangelical Counsels: or, Works of supererogation.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
Bell. de Monach. lib. 2. cap 7. An Evangelical Counsel of Perfection is
called a good work, not enjoined us by Christ, but showed unto us: not
commanded, but commended only.

Ibid. cap. 8. It is the opinion of all Catholics, that there are many
Evangelical Counsels, viz. of things, advised, or counseled unto, but not
prescribed, nor commanded.

Appealer.
ANswer to the Gagg. p. 103. What is meant by works of Supererogation, we may
collect out of the texts of Scripture cited, viz. That man in the state of
grace, and assisted by Gods grace, may do somethings counseled, and not
commanded. I know no doctrine of our English Church against Euangelical
counsels. Appeal page 214. I do believe, there are, and ever were
Evangelical counsels.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARticle 14. Voluntary works, besides, over, and above Gods Commandments, with
they call works of supererogation, cannot be taught with our arrogance, and
impiety: for by them, men do declare, that they do not only render unto God,
as much as they are bound to do, but, that they do more for his sake, then of
bounden duty is required, whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all,
that are commanded unto you, say, we are unprofitable servants.

Though this point touching Euangelical Counsels, may seem to be of no great
consequence, yet to the Romanists it is a point fundamental: for upon it they
build their treasury of superaboundant satisfactions. And Leech after he had
first sucked this thinner and purer blood, afterward greedily swallowed the
most corrupt and rank blood of Popery; but I hope the Appealers manifold
preferments, and better hopes, will be better counselors to him, then to merit
by a total, or supererogate to a final Apostacy from us, to the Pope of Rome.

Of Real presence.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
Counc. of Trent Sess. 13. cap. 1. Of the real presence of our Lord in the
most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, This holy Synod openly and simply
professes, That in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, after the consecration of
Bread and Wine, That our L. Jesus Christ, true God and man, is truly, really,
and substantially contained under the species or form of those sensible things.

Gratian. de consecrat. distinct. 2. cap. Ego. Berengarius is enjoined by Pope
Nicholas to reca^t in this form.

I Berengarius do accurse that heresy, wherewith I have been heretofore
defamed, in maintaining [that the bread and wine, after the consecration, are
only a Sacrament, and not the true body and blood of Christ. And that the true
body and blood of Christ cannot be sensibly handled by the Priests, or broken,
or chewed with the teeth of the faithful, but only in the sign, or sacrament
thereof.] And I give my consent to the holy Church of Rome, and Aposto like
See, and I profess with my tongue and heart, that I hold the same faith,
concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Table, which our Lord, and holy Father
Nicholas, and this holy Synod, by Evangelical and Apostolical authority, has
enjoined to be held, and has confirmed unto me: to wit, that the bread and
wine upon the Altar, after consecration, are not only the sacrament, but also
the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that, not only the
Sacrament, but the body and blood of Christ is in truth sensibly handled, and
broken by the Priests, and eaten with the teeth of the faithful.

Bellarmine de Sacramento Eucharist. lib. 1. c. 2. The Council of Trent, Sess.
13. teaches, That Christ is in the Sacrament truly, and really, against the
fiction of the Calvinists; who will have Christ to be there so present, that he
may be apprehended by faith; that he is present to the contemplation of faith,
though corporally in heaven.

Bellarm. ibid. The Council adds (substantially) against the Calvinists, who
say, that the body of Christ, according to his substance, is only in heaven,
but according to, I know not what, virtue and power, he flows from thence to
us.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gag. page 253. But that the Devil bred you up in a faction, and sent
you abroad to do him service in maintaining a faction: Otherwise acknowledge
there is, there need be no difference in the point of real presence.

Appeal. p. 289. Concerning this point there need be no difference, the
disagreement is only de modo praesentiae.

Answer to Gagg. page 253. There is, there need be no difference in the point
of real presence.

Ibid. page 252. We ingenuously confess, That by this Sacrament Christ gives
us his very body and blood, and really and truly performs in us his promise:
as for the manner how, this inexplicable, that unutterable, trans or con, we
skill not of. Vide supra Appeal page 289. In these passages, the Appealer
differs from the Church of England in these three things: first, that he
says, There is no difference between us about the real presence: whereas
indeed there is a maine difference; and most of our Martyrs dyed rather, then
they would acknowledge the Popish real presence. See the Acts and Monuments.
Secondly, he says, that the manner is unutterable; whereas the Church of
England defines the manner. Thirdly, in that he says, we skill not of, or
make matter, of transubstantiation, or consubstantiatio^: whereas the Church of
England expressly condemns transubstantiation, as a gross and dangerous error.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARticle 28. The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only
after a heavenly and spiritual manner: And the mean whereby the body of Christ
is eaten and received in the Supper, is Faith. Transubstantiation, or the
change of the substance of bread and wine in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be
proved by holy Writ: but is repugnant to the plain word of Scripture,
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to many
superstitions.

Iuel. Artic. 5. of the real presence, page 238. We seek Christ above in
heaven, and imagine not him to be bodily present upon the earth: The body of
Christ is to be eaten by faith only, and no otherwise. And in this last point
appears a notable difference between us and M. Harding, for we place Christ
in the heart, according to the doctrine of Saint Paul: Mr. Harding places him
in the mouth. We say, Christ is eaten only by faith. Master Harding says he
is eaten with the mouth and teeth.

Article 28. The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only
after an heavenly and spiritual manner: and the mean, whereby the body of
Christ is received and eaten in the supper, is faith. Transubstantiation is
repugnant to Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament.

The Appealer seems to be one of the Bonhommes, who, in a jejune
Lent-discourse, durst openly bid defiance to the Article of our Church, saying,
I abhor them that teach, Christ to be in the Sacrament only by faith: for
he is not there, because we believe, but we believe because he is there
present. If this be a good belief and doctrine, (That Christ is otherwise
present in the Sacrament, then to the hearts of believers, and that by faith
only) let the Appealers poor Woodcocke, or Catholic Cockscombe, page 251.
tell us, what he takes to be the meaning of S. Austin in those words, qui
credit, edit: or, if he cannot do that, yield a reason, why Rats and Mice may
not eat the very body of Christ.

Of Images.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COunc. of Trent Sess. 25. p. 290 The Images of Christ, the Virgin mother of
God, and of other Saints, are to be had, and retained in Temples especially,
and due honor and veneration is to be given unto them: Because the honor,
which is to be exhibited to them, is referred to the prototype or sampler, so
that by the images which we kiss, and before which we put off our hats, and
lie down, we adore Christ, and the Saints, whose Images they bear.

Bellarmine of the Images of Saints, lib. 2. c. 21. Images by themselves
properly are to be worshipped.

Ibid. cap. 22. We must not say, That the supreme worship, called Latria, is
due to Images: but on the contrary, we ought to say, that they ought not so to
be adored.

Bellarmin. ibid. cap. 9. lib. 2. Images may be lawfully set up in Churches.

Appealer.
ANswer to the Gagg, p. 318. The pictures of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and
Saints, may be made, had in houses, set up in Churches, respect, and honor may
be given to them: The Protestants do it, and use them for helps of Piety in
rememoration and more effectual representing of the prototype.

Page 319. Let practice and doctrine go together, we agree.

Page 318. You say, they must not have Latria, sowce.

Appeal page 257. In your practice you give them that honor, which you call
Latria, and is a part of divine worship; so not we. Let practice and doctrine
go together, that is, give them no Latria formal nor interpretatiue, and we
agree.

Answer to Gagg. page 318. Images are not unlawful for civil uses, nor
utterly in all manner of religious employment.

Gag. p. 300. Images have three uses assigned by your Schools; Instruction of
the rude, commonefaction of history; and stirring up of devotion: You, and we
also give unto them.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARt. 22. The Romish doctrine concerning worshipping, and adoration, as well of
Images, as of Relics, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warranty of Scripture, But rather repugnant to the word of God.

Homily against the peril of Idolatry. part. 3. page 42. It is unlawful that
it (the image of Christ) should be made, or that the Image of any Saint should
be made, especially to be set up in Temples; to the great and unavoidable
danger of Idolatry. We grant that Images used for no religion, or superstition
rather, [we mean Images of none worshipped, nor in danger to be worshipped of
any] may be suffered: But Images placed publicly in Temples, cannot possibly
be without danger of Idolatry.

Ibid. p. 42. Beware lest thou make to thy self, that is to say, to any use of
Religion, any graven Image.

Ibid. page 43. Images are of more force, to crook an unhappy soul, the^ to
teach, and instruct.

Ibid. page 42. Either Images be no books; or if they be, they be false, and
lying books, the teachers of all error.

In this point of Images the Appealer differs from the Church of England in
four particulars: 1 The Church of England condemns in the Article, the
popish doctrine concerning the worshipping of Images. The Appealer approves
the doctrine, and condemns the practice only. 2 The Church of England
teaches it to be unlawful, to set up Images in Churches, because it cannot be
done without unavoidable peril of Idolatry. The Appealer allows the setting
them up in Churches. 3 The Church of England forbids all religious use of
Images, allowing mere civil, or historical. The Appealer allows Images for
religious employments. 4 The Church of England denies any worship due to
Images. The Appealer grants any worship, save Latria: he sticks not at
Dulia, if it trench not upon Latria.


In all which points of Doctrine he perfectly accords with Bellarmine and
the Church of Rome, only he disclaymeth their practice, as also Polidor
Virgil, and many other ingenuous Papists do.

Of the Cross.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
BEll. Book 2. of the Images of Saints. c. 30. The sign of the Cross works
miracles, not out of a natural virtue that it has, as a figure, But as a sign
instituted of GOD. Note, that there are three wonderful effects of the cross.
1. it terrifieth, and puts devils to flight. 2. It drives away diseases,
and all evils. 3. It sanctifies those things upon which it is imprinted. The
first effect it has from three causes: from the apprehension of the devil,
the devotion of man, and institution of God. For the Devil when he sees the
Cross presently remembers, that by the Cross of Christ, he was conquered,
spoild, bound, and disco^sited. Hence it is, that he flies from the Cross, as
a Dog does from a stone, or staff, with which he has been struck. Again,
the Cross has a force from the work of him, that works with it, or uses
it; after the same manner as prayer has. For the sign of the Cross is a
kind of the calling upon the merits of Christ crucified* expressed by the
sign of the Cross.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gagg page 321. Our church allows the sign of the cross, uses it,
commands it; and I could tell you some experimented effects of it.

App. p. 280. What if I meant some experime^ted effects of my own knowledge?
what then? Can you control, or convince me? What if upon diverse extremities I
have found ease, by using that ciaculatory prayer of our Let any, By thy cross?
And what if to testify my faith, I made the sign of the cross?

Answ. to Gagge. page 320. We use signing with the sign of the Cross, both
in the forehead, and elsewhere, witness that solemn form in our Baptism, for
which we are so quarrelled by our factious. The flesh is signed, that the soul
may be fortified, says Tertullian, and so do we.

Appeal p. 268. What hinders, but that I may sign my self with the sign
of the Cross, in any part of my body, at any time, at night when I go to bed,
in the morning when I rise, etc?

Discord.
Church of England.
BOok of Common Prayer. Then the Priest shall make a Cross upon the Childs
forehead.

Book of Canons Chapter of the sign of the Cross. The Infant baptized is by
virtue of Baptism, before it be signed with the sign of the Cross received
into the Congregation of Christ's flock, and not by any power assigned to the
sign of the Cross. The Church of England has retained the sign of the
Cross, being purged from all Popish Superstition and error, for the
remembrance of the Cross, accounting it a lawful, and outward ceremony, and
honorable badge.

In this point, touching the sign of the Cross, the Appealer differs from
the Church of England in two particulars.

1 He falsely imposes upon the Church of England, That in her form of
Baptism she uses the sign of the Cross upon the forehead, and elsewhere.
That [else-where] is not to be found in the form of Baptism, or els-where in
the constitution, or practice of our Church.

2 He ascribes operative Power, and experimented effects, to the Cross: and
seems to father some such error upon the Church of England, saying, That we
sign the flesh, that the soul may be fortified, so we: whereas the Church of
England in the Canon, will have no power, or efficacy, to be ascribed to the
sign of the Cross; but only a kind of significancy, and honorable
representation of Christ's death upon the Cross. And more then this, I will not
believe touching any efficacy of the sign of the Cross, till I find by
experience, that the Appealers signing his lips with the sign of the Cross,
makes him a faire-spoken, and his signing himself on the breast with the sign
of the Cross, makes him a Good man.

Of Invocation of Saints.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COunc. of Trent Sess. 25. The holy Synod comma^deth all Bishops and others, to
whom the office and charge of teaching is committed, that, according to the use
of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, they diligently instruct their
congregations touching the intercession and invocation of Saints; teaching
them, that it is good, and profitable, humbly to call upon them, to fly unto
their prayers, help, and aid: and that they impiously conceive, who deny that
Saints, inioying eternal happiness with God, are to be called upon, or that
the calling upon them is idolatry; or that it is repugnant to the word of God;
or that it derogateth from the honor of the only Mediator between God and man,
Jesus Christ Bellar. of the blessedness of Saints. book 1. chap. 19. Holy
Angels, and men departed this life, are piously and profitably called upon by
the living.

Appealer.
GAgg page 200 Perhaps there is no such great impiety, in saying, [S. Laurence,
pray for me.]

Ibid. p. 203. Now the case of Angels-keepers, in point of Advocation, and
Invocation, is much different from other Angels, not Guardians; as being
continually attendant, always at hand, though invisibly: and therefore, though
we might say, Saint Angell-keeper, pray for me; it follows not, we may say,
St. Gabriel, pray for me.

Invocation of Saints, page 99. If thus my self resolved do infer; [Holy
Angel keeper pray for me] I see no reason to be taxed with point of Popery, or
superstition, much less of absurdity, or impiety.

Answ. to Gagg. p. 229. Save al other labor in this point; prove but only
this, their knowledge of any thing ordinarily, I promise you, straight, I will
say, Holy Saint* Mary pray for me.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARtic. 22. The Romish doctrine concerning Invocation of saints, is a fond
thing, vainly invented, grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the word of God.

Homily of Prayer 2 part. page 114. Invocation or prayer may not be made
without faith in him, on who^ they call; whereupon we must only and soly pray
to God. For to say, we should believe, either in Angel, or Saint, or any other
living creature, were horrible blasphemy against God, and his word. Ibid. Is
there any Angel, Patriark or Prophet among the dead, can know the meaning of
the heart? etc.

Bishop Andrews Answ. to Bellarmins Apol. page 180. Alleges, The Synod of
Laodicea, did forbid praying to Angels.

Defense of the Church of England against Spalata. c. 60 You ask, why Saints
are not to be called upon? Because you have no command of God to call upon
them. Now in the worship of God, God commands, Deuteronomy. 12. 23. What I command
thee, that only do thou: Because you have no example in Scripture of calling
on them, but that of John, Apoc. 19. 10. See thou do it not, worship God:
Because it is wilworship after the commandments and doctrines of men,
condemned by the Apostle, Col. 2. 22. Of which God said of old, Who required
these things at your hands? Esaias 1. 12 And of which our Savior says, In vain
do they worship me, teaing for doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9.

White. Answ. to Fisher. page 335. Invocation of Saints is injurious to the
only mediatorship of Christ.

In this point touching the Invocation of Saints: the Appealer differs from
the Church of England in two particulars: 1 That he makes a difference
between Angels, (especially Guardians) and other Saints, in respect of
Invocation: whereas the Church of England puts no such difference. But
indifferently forbids the calling upon Saints departed, or Angels:
Guardians, or others. And the reasons they allege are as strong against the
one, as the other. 2 The Appealer denies Invocation of Saints, only upon this
ground; that the Saints departed, ordinarily, know not our affairs: and
consequently, he makes Popish Invocation idle and foolish, but not impious,
blasphemous, injurious to God, and our Savior. Whereas, the Church of England
denies Invocation of Saints upon many other grounds; and makes it idolatrous,
injurious to Christ, yea and blasphemous, as appears in the places above
alleged,


Of Extreme unction.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COun. of Trent Ses. 14. cap. 1. The holy unction of the sick, is instituted by
Christ, as a truly and properly called Sacrament of the new Testament.

Ibid. cap. 2. The effect of this Sacrament is, the wiping away of all those
sins in the sick, which remain to be expiated, and the relieuing and
strengthening his soul.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gagg. chapter 37. p. 267. That Sacramental unction is not to be used to
the sick. Use it if you will. We hinder you not. Nor much care or enquire what
effects ensue upon it. But obtrude it not on us, or unto the Church, as in
censu of the Sacraments of the Time of grace, etc.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARt. 25. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ in the Gospel, that is
to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called
Sacraments, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme unction, are
not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have grown
partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life
allowed in Scriptures. But yet have not like nature of Sacraments with Baptism
and the L. Supper.

In this point touching Extreme unction, though the Appealer do not fully
join hands with the Papists, and shake hands with the Church of England; yet
he makes the using of Extreme unction, or not using it; the attributing of
such effects, as the Church of Rome erroniously (if not impiously) ascribes to
it, or not attributing, a light matter, of no great importance; a thing indeed
not to be obtruded upon the Church, as necessary: yet a thing, for ought that
he says to the contrary, that may be not unlawfully used. Whereas the Church
of England, or at least, the most approved Writers in the Church of England,
make the adding of any new Sacrament, and attributing a divine, and spiritual
effect unto it, without commandment, or warrant of God's word, to be a
grievous sin, and breach of the second Commandment. And if it may have such
an effect, as to wipe away all sins remaining in the sick, our Church should
very much wrong the sick not to administer it to them. It concerns us
therefore to enquire of any such effects, and finding that it has none, to
condemn it, as not only unwarranted by Scripture, but also derogatory to the
efficacy of the the other Sacraments, and Christ's blood.

Of assurance of Salvation.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COnc. of Trent. Ses. 6. canon 13 If any man say, that to obtain remission of
sins, it is necessary, that a man believe certainly, and without any
hesitation, or questioning, in regard of his own infirmity and disposition,
that his sins are remitted him, let him be accursed.

Counc. of Trent Sess. 6. Canon 14. If any say, that a man is absolved from
sin, and justified, because he certainly believes that he is absolved and
justified; and that none is justified, but he that believes, that he is
justified, let him be accursed.

Ibid. Can. 12. If any say, that justifying faith is nothing else, but a
confident relying on Gods mercy, forgiving our sins by Christ, or that this
confidence is the only faith, whereby we are justified, let him be accursed.
Ib. c. 16 If any say, or believe, that he shall certainly have by absolute and
infallible certainty the great gift of perseverance to the end, unless he
know, and have learned it by special revelation, let him be accursed.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gag. page 186. If we consider our own disposition, we assign no
more, then probable and coniecturall assurance. This Bellarmine assigns; this
is enough. Faction may transport a man to wrangle for more, but when once they
join issues, the difference will not be much. Much, or little, great, or
small, thus, or so, the Church of England is not touched, that assigns it
neither.

Appeal page 213. I profess, I am not of that opinion with you: and
whatsoever you may resolve for your crying Abba, Father, secundum praesentem
justitiam, I crave pardon, I cannot think that you are, may, or can be so
persuaded, secundum statum futurum.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
HOmily of the passion. p. 186. What means is that? It is faith: not an
inconstant or wavering faith, but a sure, steadfast, grounded, and unfeigned
faith.

Page 187. The only means and instrument of salvation required of our parts,
is faith: that is to say, a sure trust and confidence in the merits of God,
whereby we persuade our selves, that God both has and will forgive us our
sins, and that he has accepted us again into his favor, and that he has
released us from the bonds of damnation, and received us into the number of his
elect people.

Et post. We must take heed, that we do not halt with GOD, through an
inconstant and wavering faith, but that it be strong and steadfast to our lives
end: We must apprehend the merits of Christ's death and passion by faith,
nothing doubting but that Christ by his own obl^tion, and once offering
himself on the Cross, has taken away our sins, and restored us again into
Gods favor.

The point of Perseverance has such affinity with this point of assurance of
salvation, that what is wanting in this, may be supplied out of the former
Parallel. All that I here observe, is, that the Appealer fully accords with
the Council of Trent, not only in the conclusion, but in the very reason
alleged by the Council for the ground thereof.

Of the Popes Primacy.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
IN the form of oath prescribed in the Bull of Pius 4 annexed to the Counsel of
Trent. I acknowledge the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of Rome, to be
the Mother, and Mistress of all Churches: and I vow and swear true obedience
to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and
Vicar of Jesus Christ.

Bellarmin. de Romano Pontif. lib. 4. c. 1. The Pope is supreme Judge in
controversies of faith and manners.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gag. p. 29. I could interpret S. Anselm well enough; as that if a
controversy were referred by the Church, or an heresy to be corrected in the
Church, which touched the case of the Catholic Church, it could not be put over
more ^itly to any one man, by the Church representative in a Council, then
unto the Pope, first Bishop of Christendom, of greatest, not absolute power,
among Bishops.

Discord.
Church of England.
HOm. for Whitsunday, second part. page 214. 215. First, as touching that they
will be termed universal Bishops, and Heads of all Christian Churches through
the world, we have the judgment of Gregory expressly against them: who,
writing to Mauritius the Emperor, condemned John Bishop of Constantinople in
that behalf, calling him the Prince of pride, Lucifers successor, and the
forerunner of Antichrist. S. Bernard agreeing thereunto, says, What greater
pride can there be, then that one man should prefer his own judgment
before the whole congregation, as if he only had the Spirit of God? And
Chrysostom pronounces a terrible sentence against them, affiriming plainly,
that whosoever seeks to be chief on earth, shall find confusion in heaven:
and he, that strives for the supremacy, shall not be reputed among the
Servants of Christ.

Homily against wilful rebellion, 5 part, page 308. 309. The Bishop of Rome
being by the order of Gods word none other then the Bishop of that one See and
Diocese, and never yet well able to govern the same, did by intolerable
ambition challenge not only to be Head of all the Church dispersed through the
world, but also to be Lord over all Kingdoms of the world.

In this point, touching the Popes Primacy, though the Appealer comes not full
home to the tenent of the Church of Rome, yet he goes too far, and points at
a most dangerous course, of referring the judgment of controversies of faith,
that concern the whole Church, unto the Pope. Which course, if (with Master
Mountagues good approbation) we should take in the great controversy touching
the Head of the Church, the Power of the Sea of Rome, the causes of our
Separation from that Church, and all the controuerted points between us,
conclamatum esset; he, that has but half an eye, might see, what the issue
would be. This resolution of M. Mountagu, if he hold still, it will be
expected, that in the next edition of his book he change the title now
prefixed [Appello Caesarem] into Appello Papam. The marks of the Beast were
come out in the Pope before Anselmes time, and since they are so apparent in
him, that other learned Divines make the Pope whole Antichrist, and the
Appealer himself makes him half the Antichrist, page 149. and an entire
Apostata from Christ and his kingdom: And was there no fitter Bishop in all
Christendom to decide controversies concerning the whole Church of Christ,
then he who is either half or whole Antichrist? but of this point see more in
the Writ of error.

Of Antichrist.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
BEllarmine de Rom^no pontif. lib. 3. c. 13. The seat of Antichrist shall be in
Jerusalem* not Rome; for Enoch and Elias are to fight with Antichrist in
Jerusalem.

Ibid. c. 12. Antichrist shall properly come for the Jews, and shall be
received by them as the Messiah; he shall be circumcised, and keep the Sabbath
for a time.

Ibid. cap. 18. The frensies of Heretics are refelled, by which they do not so
much prove, as impiously affirm, that the Pope is Antichrist.

This conclusion is the scope of his whole third book; and he, and all Papists,
who have written of this argument, apply themselves wholly to prove, that
neither the Pope personally, nor the Popes successively constitute that
Antichrist, described in the Apocalypse.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gagg page 74. 75. I am not of opinion, that the Bishop of Rome
personally, is that Antichrist, nor yet that the Bishops of Rome successively,
are that Antichrist, so spoken of.

App. p. 146. Whether the Pope of Rome, or the Popes of Rome, either are, or
may be accounted, or is that Antichrist, or Antichrists, my irresolution grew,
as I have remembered, from the much insufficiency of their proofs, that tender
it stoutly, strongly, affectionately, and tantum non, as a point of faith. Not
any one of their arguments is, not all their arguments together are, conuincing.

Appeal p. 149. I incline to the more moderate, and temperate tenent, and
rather of the two, embrace, the Turkish and Popish estate, not several, but
conjoined, do constitute That Antichrist, then either of the two states
disioynedly: and of the two states, rather the Turk by much, then the Pope.
Ibid. p. 144. Why should it not be as lawful for me to opine, that the Pope
is not that Antichrist, as for others to write, to preach, to publish, to
tender to proceeders this proposition, The Pope is Antichrist? Ib. p. 154. The
Turk is, and has bin long possessed of Jerusalem, that holy City. The Jews,
when Mahomet first declared himself, came flocking unto him, as to their
Messiah, the sooner, and rather, because he was circumcised.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
HOmily against wilful rebellion, 6. part. p. 316. The Bishop of Rome,
understanding the superstition of Englishmen, and how much they were inclined
to worship the Babylonical Beast of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings, and
causeless cursings, etc.

The Pope is employed to be that Antichrist, in the prayer of thanksgiving for
our deliverance from the powder Treason. [Root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian sect.]

And in the morning prayer appointed for private houses, [Confound Satan,
Antichrist, with all hirelings, etc.]

See K. James in his praemonitory preface, and his Comment upon the Revelation.

Iuel Def. of Apo^. par. 4. c. 9. diuis. 3. B. Abbot and ^. Downam de
Antichristo. B. Andrews resp. ad Car. Bell. Ap. a capite 9. ad 13.

In this point, touching Antichrist, the Appealer agrees with the Church of
Rome, and di^^enteth from the learned Divines in England, and other reformed
Churches, both touching the maine conclusion [The Pope is Antichrist:] and
touching the seat, doctrine, and character of Antichrist; which they apply to
the Pope; he with the Papists to the Turk. As for the Protestant arguments
taken out of the Apocalypse, to prove [the Pope to be the Antichrist,]
Bellarmine calls them deliramenta, dotages, and the Appealer, to show more
zeal to the Popes cause, straineth farther, and terms them Apocalypticall
frensies; which, proceeding from the mouth of a Protestant Antigagger and
Appealer to King James, Non sani esse hominis, no sanus juret Orestes.

Of Limbus Patrum.
Church of Rome.
BEllar. de Anim. Christi, l. 4. c. 11. The souls of the godly were not in
heaven, before Christ's ascensio^. Id. de Sa^ct. beat. lib. 1. c. 20. If they
demand, why prayers of the living were not revealed to the Fathers in Limbo,
and are now revealed to the Saints in heaven? I answer, that the Saints in
Limbo did not take care of our affairs, as the Saints do in heaven, neither
were they then set over the Church, as now they are.

Appealer.
GAgg page 278 Though they were not in heaven in regard of place, yet were they
in happiness, in regard of state. Ib. 281. Let them not have been in heaven
before our Savior, I deny it necessary they were therefore in Hell: that
region I call Abraham's bosom, which though it be not Heaven, yet is it higher
then hell.

Church of England.
HOmily concerning Prayer, page 122. The scripture does acknowledge but two
places after this life; the one proper to the elect and blessed of God; the
other proper to the reprobate and damned souls.

Ibid. page 122. S. Augustine does acknowledge only two places after this
life, to wit, heaven, and hell.

In this point, though the Appealer dissent from the Romanists in a
circumstance on the bye, about the situation of Limbus Patrum, (for they place
it nearer the confines of hell, the Appealer nearer heaven) yet he agrees with
the^ in these 2 main conclusions: 1 That there is, or at least was, a place for
souls after this life distinct from heaven and hell. 2 That the souls of the
Fathers, before Christ's ascension, were not in heaven, but in that third place.


Of Traditions.
Harmony.
Church of Rome.
COuc. of Trent. Ses. 4. decret. 1. The holy Synod of Trent, (finding this
truth and holy discipline to be contained, partly in Scriptures, and partly in
unwritten traditions, which either were taken from Christ's mouth by the
Apostles, or were delivered by the Apostles themselves inspired by the holy
Ghost, and have passed as it were from hand to hand to us, and following the
example of the Orthodoxe Fathers) does with the like religious affection and
reverence receive, and entertain all the books of the old and new Testament;
as also the traditions themselves pertaining to faith and manners.

Appealer.
ANsw. to Gag. page 42. That most learned, religious, and most judicious writer
(he means St. Basil de Spiritu sancto, which Treatise Erasmus, Bishop
Bilson, and other judicious Divines prove to be counterfeit) says no more then
is justifiable touching traditions. For thus says he:

The Doctrine of the Church is two ways delivered unto us: First, by writing;
then by tradition from hand to hand both are of alike force or value unto
piety.

Discord.
Church of Engl.
ARticle 6. Holy scriptures contain all things necessary unto salvation; so
that what soever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man that it should be believed as an article of faith, or be
thought requisite, or necessary to salvation.

Art. 20. Although the Church be a witness and a keeper of holy writ, yet, as
it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so, besides the same ought
it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

Art. 21. Things ordained by General Councels as necessary to salvation, have
neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken
out of holy Scripture.

In this point touching Traditions, the Appealer consents with the Church of
Rome, and differs from us in two particulars: 1 In that he admits of
doctrinall Traditions belonging to faith and manners. We acknowledge traditions
concerning discipline and the rites and ceremonies of the Church, but not
concerning the doctrine, or matter of faith and religion. 2 In that he
equalizeth unwritten traditions to holy Scriptures: such traditions, as we
receive, we hold and esteem far inferior.


A WRIT OF ERROVR SVED AGAINST THE APPEALER.
HOrtensius, A. Gell. ^oct. At.
that spruce Orator, commenced an action against a Citizen of Rome, for
rushing hastily upon him, and thereby disordering, and pressing down the pleats
of his gown. Many such actions have been heretofore entered, and pursued
against such, as have rudely or carelessely crushed a pleat in the Spouse
gown, or ruffled a set in her ruff; I mean, with their pen glanced (though
unwittingly) at a ceremony of order, or ornament of decency. But now, when not
her raiment of needle work, wrought with diverse colors, (that is, much
variety of rites, and ceremonies, or her attire, is some way wronged, or
soyled,) but her body is wounded, and that by her Watchmen; and her veil
(which distinguished her from the Whore of Babylon,) taken away: yet few, or
none dare plead for her against an Appeal to her most tender, and gracious
nursing Father. Nay, (which is more to be admired) they, who out of a love to
the Church, (as is pretended,) have had a jealous eye over the Press, and have
procured other Pamphlets to be called in, (though put forth by lawful
authority,) have yet been most forward to put forth this book, which was
stayed upon just cause, and had certainly miscarried, and never seen the
Sun, had not present help been got by a strong manmid wife; whether is it,
because that some are more sollicitous of the Temporal estate of the Church,
impeached by Puritanisme, then of the Spiritual, in danger of being utterly
overthrown by Popery? Or (because they would have Popery and Puritanisme more
eauen balanced, then they are) that their access to either might be of more
moment? or is it, because (as the Appealer has taught us) that there are
certain in this Kingdom [tantu^ no^ in Episcopatu Puritani,] there are also
some of the Clergy, that are tantum non in vxoratu Papistae: or, as Aristotle
said of Theodorus, that the making of Epithites was (...). Theodorus his whole
art; so the opposition to Puritanisme is all the Religion they seem to
profess? Sulpit. Sever. hist.
Right of Ithacius his stamp, who mightily bending himself against the heresy
of Priscillianists [Heretiques of a strict and seeming-holy life,] the hatred
of which evil was all the virtue he had, became so wise in the end, that every
man careful of virtuous conversation, studious of Scripture, and given to any
abstinence in diet, was set down in his Calendar for a suspected Puritan, I
should say, Priscillianist: for whom the only way to prove the soundness of
faith to this man, was, by a more licentious and loose kind of behavior. But I
am too shallow to enter into the depth of these men's proiects: Sure I am, that
if a Puritan Gnat be caught by them in the Press, they will strain it even
unto death; but for many a Popish Cammel, they swallow down readily, never
sticking so much as at the bunch in the back: which tax of titheing Mint and
Commin, lest I my self might be liable unto, [in noting the smaller and
subtiller errors in the Appealers Book, and passing by the greater,] I
thought fit to point at now in the second place some fouller and grosser
errors in the Appeal; yet but point at; because I am certainly informed that
many sharper sickles then mine, are in this harvest. Arminianisme comes up but
thin, and in many passages scarce discernable; but Popery is euerywhere
thick and rank. Doubtless in many the particulars, set down in the former
Tablet, besides diverse others, ne Athenae quidem ipsae sunt magis Atticae, Rome
her self is not more Romish, then the Appealer. What should I mark out with a
coal diverse errors in his book of a blacker hiew, and deeper taint? whereof
I clear his conscience, but cannot his pen. In his, as in the pen of
Demosthenes, there is a virulent poison; but, I hope, he has not sucked it
out, as Demosthenes did.

In the answer to the Gagge page 68. in express and direct terms he denies
the Princes supremacy: [That a woman may be supreme Gouernesse of the Church
in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, as Queen Elizabeth was.
As Queen Elizabeth was? with lie, and all. No Protestant ever said so of Queen
Elizabeth: No Protestant ever thought so, of any woman. You shameless pens,
and brazen faces.] In the Appeal page 94. he delivers plain Vorstianisme;
[Deum ire per omnes-terras, tractusque maris, coelumque profundum. They meant
it substantially, and so impiously. Christians do hold, and believe it too;
but disposingly, etc. in his providence.] If God be every where but
disposingly, and in his providence, and not substantially; then is he in his
substance confined to certain places; if confined, then not infinite; and what
did, or could, Vorstius dogmatize more impiously? Saint Paul teaches us, that
it is not enough for a man to conceive rightly in matter of faith, but he must
take heed, he hold to a form of wholesome words. Such, I am sure, the former
are not, nor the like, Answer to Gag. page 202. [Is Christ an Angel, and not a
true one? in appearance, not in substance? who ever heard such stuff from a
Priests lips? Nay I may more truly retort this speech, Is Christ a true Angel,
and that in substance? who ever heard such stuff from a Priests lips? For, if
he be an Angel in substance, and that a true one; he must be so either
according to his Divine nature, or humane: if he say, according to his humane,
he dasheth upon Marcions, or Apollinaris his heresy, and denies, by
consequence, the verity of his humane nature: if he make him an Angel, and
that a true one in substance according to his divine nature, he makes
shipwreck of his faith against Arrius his rock, and by consequence, euerteth
his divine nature. For every Angelical substance is finite, the deity infinite.

I have purposely taken all the Gall out of my ink, because I would not dentem
dente mordere, exasperate his exasperating style: yet, I cannot but say, that
the Appealer, in describing the marks of the Beast, acts the Beasts part. For,
Appeal page 154. he makes Circumcision [a sacrament sometime instituted by
God] a mark of the Beast; and [to make all correspondent] he places, or must
place the foreskin to be cut off in the forehead, or the hand: for there was
the mark of the Beast received, Apoc. 14. 9.

If the Appealer did bethink himself, how open he lies to the lash, I
persuade my self he would pluck away many cords from the cruel whip of his
pen. He scourges from the first page to the last, throughout his book, the
novellizing puritans; and in that rank, [take it as they will] not only our
accomplished Doctors, but our reverend Prelates: Tantum non in Episcopatu
Puritani, are disciplined by him, Appeal page 111. A man would think, that,
as it was said of Luther, that covetousness was not incident to his nature,
[he had such a peculiar antipathy to that vice:] So the Appealer (whatsoever
other imputation he might be liable unto) could not be charged, no not by
malice it self, with Puritanisme. Citius crimen honestum, quam turpem Catonem
feceris; There is such an antipathy in his nature to that humor. Yet see a
pang and flash of Amsterdamian zeal, Answer to Gagg page 92. The Corinthian
was restored without a Bishops seal; a Commissaries direction to the Parson.
He paid no rate, no fees for restitution, or standing rectus in Curia. Is not
this a spoone-feather of the Martinists brood, a bitter scoff at the practice
of our Ecclesiastical Courts? Howsoever, if the Appealer had only trod a
little awry, either in the high path of popery, or by-path of puritanisme; I,
for mine own part, would have borne with it; and that in respect of his
otherwise commendable parts, and profitable pains in the Church: but when he
halteth down right between two religions, none, that desires (...) to walk
with a right foot, can endure him.

And does he not limpe? nay does he not halt downright? does he not wear a
Linsie-woolsy garment, Answer to Gagg page. 13. and 14? Truth is of two sorts
amongst men, manifest, and confessed truth; or more obscure, and involved
truth. In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scripturis, inveniuntur illa omnia,
quae continent fidem mores que vivendi, spem scilicet and charitatem. Plainly
delivered in Scripture are all those points, which belong unto Faith, and
Manners, Hope and Charity, to wit. And accordingly I do know no obscurity upon
these: I know none of these controuerted inter parts: The Articles of our
Creed are confessed on both sides, and held plain enough. The controuerted
points are of a larger, and inferior alloy: of them a man may be ignorant,
without any danger of his soul at all. A man may resolve, or oppose this way,
or that way, without peril of perishing for ever. etc.] It is most evident in
this place, that the parties, he speaks of, are the Papists and we: for there
are no other have any trial in this Chapter or matter of debate. By [partes]
in many other places of his book he understands Papists and Protestants: and
here he cannot mean any other, but the Gagger and his accomplices on the one
side; and the Protestant Church on the other side, as the antecedents and
consequents do manifest.

Now if the differences between the papists and us, are of such an inferior
alloye, that little reckoning is to be made of them, because they add nothing
to, or take nothing from the sum of saving knowledge; how much have all the
reformed Churches in Christendom to answer at the dreadful Tribunal of
Christ, for making so great a rent in Christ's seamlesse coat, upon so small
occasion? If the controuerted points be like herb John in the pot, that may be
in, or out, without peril at all; why have all our Prophets, (sithence Luther
at least) cried, Mors in olla, mors in olla, Death in the pot: O blessed
Martyrs, who sithence the beginning of Reformation have watered the seed of the
Gospel with your blood, put off your long white robes, and garlands, and put
on sackcloth, and ashes; for you dyed upon no good ground, you shed not your
blood in zeal, but spilt it in folly: Martyrs you may be of schism, or
obstinacy, or indiscretion, but not of faith; if those points, you suffered
for, belonged not at all to faith. Plin. paneg.
Diffido oculis meis, and identidem interrogo, an legerim, an viderim: I
suspect mine eyes, I question my Copy, I demand of my self again and again;
Is it possible a Divine of no inferior alloy, should utter such an incredible
paradoxe? we dissent from the Church of Rome about Christ and his offices, the
foundation of faith; the Scriptures, the rule of faith; the Church, the subject
of faith; the Sacraments, the seals of faith; justification, the proper effect
of faith; and good works, the fruit of faith: nay we contest about the very
nature, and essence of faith. And are none of these matters of faith? do none
of these belong to faith, or manners? If our debates are, de tribus capellis,
about the fringe, not the Spouse coat; about the bark, and not the body of
Religion; then has not the Church of Rome erred in matter of faith; and if she
has not, then the Church of England has erred, in charging her with error,
not only in matter of ceremony, and discipline, but also in matter of faith,
Art. 19. If the Church of England has erred in this Article, the Appealers
false oaths must needs be answerable to his degrees and preferments, for so
often has he sworn to that Article among the rest. But he yields us a reason,
[The Articles of our Creed are confessed on both sides, and held plain
enough.] on both sides? he might say, on all sides, and hands: For the Arrians
in Polonia, the Antitimitarians in Transiluania, the Nestorians in Greece, the
Anabaptists and Socinians in the Netherlands, do all rehearse the Articles of
the Creed, and hold them plain enough. Let him peruse all the bedrol of
heretics, condemned by the Church of God in all ages, drawn by Irenaeus,
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, Philastrius, Alfonsus a Castro, and others, and he
shall hardly pitch upon any sort of Heretics, that directly either denied, or
articled against the Articles of the Apostles Creed. And will he say none of
these erred in matter of faith? but all were and are in (regia via) the high
way to heaven? If he answer, that the heretics, though they professed the
Articles of the Apostles Creed, totidem verbis, in the very words; yet they
denied, or depraved the sense, and brought in damnable errors, by consequence
overthrowing those foundations of our faith: Our reply is at hand. As the
greater part of ancient heretics, so at this day the Papists, confess the
Articles of the Creed, and hold them plain truth; but they misinterpret them,
and by consequence shake, if not quite overthrow diverse of them. Either they,
or we, misinterpret those three articles especially, concerning the Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins; to which their
great Champion, (...), reduces all the controversies between our Church, and
theirs. And for undermining the articles of our Creed by consequences, and
maintaining repugnances to them, the Romish Pioners are not far behind the
ancient enemies of our faith. Manes and Vorstius do not directly impugn the
article touching God the Almighty Creator; nor Mar^ion, Arrius, Apollinaris,
Eutiches, Nestorius, and Socinus, the article concerning Christ the Redeemer;
nor Macedonius, and the Pneumatomachi, the article concerning the holy Ghost;
but they held such doctrine, which was not comportable with those articles. And
how the Romish doctrine of Invocation of Saints, and Angels, may stand with the
first article rightly expounded [I believe in God]; and their doctrine of
Justification by inherent righteousness, with the second [and in Jesus
Christ]; and of transubstantiation, with the article of Christ his Incarnation,
and Ascension; and of a Catholic visible Romish Church under one visible Head,
with that [I believe the holy Catholic Church]; and of uncertainty of
salvation, with those [I believe the remission of sins, and life euerlasting];
I desire to be informed by the Appealer, which I could never yet be by any
Romanist. Upon this most false and deceivable ground [that the differences
(inter parts) are not in matters de fide] he builds two most dangerous
assertions [that a man may be ignorant of them without any peril of his soul
at all: and, A man may resolve or oppose this way or that way without peril of
perishing.] Tum maxim oppugnaris, si te oppugnari nescis: The greatest danger
of all is, when in place of danger we suspect none. A man that enters into a
plaguey house, if he know not of it, is more subject to infection through his
careless boldness. And they, who speak favorably of the Romish Church,
compare it to a Pesthouse, in which yet through Gods extraordinary mercy a man
may be without mortal infection, but cannot possibly be without danger. If
there be no danger in Romish Schools and Temples; if a man may be at Mass, and
incur no peril of Idolatry, in the adoration of the Host, invocation of
Saints, worshipping of Images, Relics, and the like: blot out all the parts
of the largest and learned Homily in all the book, entitled, Against peril
of Idolatry. Here I appeal to the Appealers conscience; Is it no peril at
all to the soul of man, to be ignorant, which are the true inspired
Scriptures? which is the true Church? which are the Sacraments instituted by
Christ? what is the pure worship of God in spirit, and truth? what are the
prerogatives of Christ, and privileges of his Saints? what is that faith we
are justified, and saved by? All these, and many more, are controuerted points;
and do none of these strengthen, or weaken our title to the Kingdom of
Heaven? I have no commission to enlarge the bowels of my Savior; and most
unwilling am I to straiten them, or close up his side against such ignorant
persons, who never had, nor could have means to come to the full light of the
Gospel: yet I am not ignorant, Aug. de gr^t. and lib. arbi^. c. 3.
what Saint Augustines judgment is even of invincible ignorance in points of
faith; Sed and illa ignorantia, quae non est eoru^, qui scire nolunt, sed
eorum, qui tantum simpliciter scire nesciunt, neminem sic excusat, ut
sempiterno igne non ardeat; si propterea non credidit, quia non audivit omnino,
quod crederet, etc. Not wilful ignorance, no not simple nescience can
privilege any from everlasting fire, although he therefore believed not,
because he never heard, what he should believe. For that of the Psalmist is not
without ground, Power out thy wrath O God on those nations, that know thee not:
nor that of the Apostle, when he shall come in flaming fire, to render
vengeance to them, who know not God. But the Appealer restrains not his
assertion to invincible ignorance, be it affected ignorance, nay be it resolved
error in the controuerted points, it no way, in his judgment, indangereth
eternal salvation; either there is no crimen, or at least discrimen, in
treading in either path, for he says, [A man may resolve or oppose, this way
or that way, without peril of perishing for ever: Answer to Gagg page 14.] A
brave resolution of a Protestant Divine, to resolve, that a resolute Papist, a
professed opposite to the doctrine of the Gospel, may go away clear with it,
and not at all stumble at that stone, on which whosoever falls, he shall be
broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. Matt.
21. 44. I desire to be satisfied, whether does the Appealer believe, that the
Articles of Religion established in our Church by Authority, standing in direct
opposition, as they do, to the Trent decisions, are expressly contained in the
Scriptures, or may be evidently deduced from thence, or not? If not* then,
according to the sixth article of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for
salvation, they are no articles of faith, or religion. If they are expressly
contained in holy Scriptures, or may be evidently deduced from thence, then
they are Gods truth, set down in his own word; And is there no danger in
resolving against God, in opposing his word, in siding against that truth?
which shall stand, and abide when heaven and earth shall pass away. I grant,
every doctrine contained in Scripture is not absolutely necessary to salvation;
yet in the general, this is a doctrine most necessary to salvation, to
believe, that all doctrine of Scripture is undoubtedly true; and that to deny
any part of Scripture, and much more deliberately to oppugn, and wilfully to
oppose, is dangerous, yea damnable. And for the controuerted points in
particular, the denying of the truth in them, Panta^con in his h^storie.
lay so heavy on Latomus, and Franciscus Spira his conscience, on their
deathbeds, that in a fearful conflict of despair, by reason of the
heinousness of that sin, they miserably gave up the ghost. And Minaerius
Gallus, for mainly opposing the doctrine of the Gospel, was so tormented with
a burning in his bowels, that he had, as it were, a sense of the very pains of
Hellfire even in this life. I tremble to rehearse what Aubignius reports in
his history, concerning a late great King beyond the Sea, who, after he had
embraced the Romish faith, and renounced the pure doctrine of the Gospel, was
exceedingly perlexed in mind, and troubled in conscience; and advised with his
bosom friend (adiuring him to deal faithfully with him) whether, or no, in
that his action of deserting the faith of the reformed Church, he had not
committed the impardonable sin against the holy Ghost.

To illustrate this point, (concerning the necessity of departing out of
Babylon, and peril of remaining in her,) let us borrow a ray, Iuel. Apol.
part. 6. c. 6. diuis. 1.
or beam of a true Jewel: We have done nothing in altering Religion upon
either rashness or arrogance; nay nothing, but with good leisure, and mature
deliberation; neither had we ever intended so to do, except both the manifest,
and assured will of God revealed to us in holy Scripture, and regard of our own
salvation, had even constrained us thereunto. This indeed is the luster of a
true Jewel: Answer to Gag. page 50
but the false Diamond glareth on this wise: The present Church of Rome has
always continued firm in the same foundation of doctrine, and sacraments
instituted by God, and acknowledges, and imbraceth communion with the ancient,
and undoubted Church of Christ; wherefore she cannot be other, or diverse from
it, for she remains still Christ's Church and Spouse. As in Ceiland, they say,
A Snake lurketh under every leaf; so we may truly say of this passage of the
Appealer, there is poisonous error, and Satanicall doctrine in every line.

First, 1 Error.
it is an error of dangerous consequence, to affirm, that the present Church
of Rome holds the same foundation with the ancient and primitive Church. For,
the present Church of Rome holds the twelve new Articles, added to the
Apostles Creed; mentioned in Pope Pius his Bull, Adiect. ad Calcem council.
Trident.
as fundamental points, and necessary to salvation. The oath prescribed by the
Pope runs thus: Caetera item omnia a sacris Canonibus, and Oecumenicis
Conciliis, ac praecipue a sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita, and
declarata, indubitanter recipio; atque profiteor, simulque contraria omnia,
atque haereses quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas, and rejectas, and
anathematizatas, ego pariter damno, rejicio, and anathematizo. Hanc veram
Catholicam fidem (extra quam nemo salvus esse potest) quam in praesenti sponte
profiteor, and veraciter teneo, eandem integram and inviolatam usque ad
extremum vitae spiritum constantissime (Deo juvante) retineri, and confiteri,
atque a meis subditis, vel illis, quorum cura ad me in munere meo spectabit,
retineri, doceri, and praedicari, quantum in me erit curabo.

Whence I thus argue: First, In this form of oath the twelve new Articles,
together with the rest of the definitions of the Council of Trent, are made
part of the Catholic faith, (which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved:) but neither these twelve new articles, nor any of them, were held as
true by the ancient Church, much less as points fundamental, and de fide;
therefore the present Church of Rome holds not the same entire foundation of
faith with the ancient.

Secondly, the ancient Church of Rome held the Scriptures to be the only
perfect infallible rule of faith, and foundation of saving doctrine, (as is
plentifully proved by Iuel, Iuel. def. Apol. p. 195 c. 9. diu. 1. Rainolds cont
Heart. c. 8. sect. 1. and these. 1. sect. 3. and Apol. these. sect 2 p. 29. Bilson
of suprem p^rt. 4 page 361. Kemnis Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 1 Morney praes. de
sa cra Euchar. John White in his way to the Church. digres. 3 p. 13. Fr. White
Answ. to F^sh. r. p. 32. Culuin Antidot. Sess 4. p. 370. Saaeel quaest. 1.
Danaeus and Inni^s ^d 1 controuers. Bellar. l 4. c. 3.
Rainolds, Bilson, Kemnisius, Morney, D. Francis White, and diverse others,) but
the present Church of Rome holds otherwise, [making unwritten traditions part
of the foundation of faith, which, they say, is built partly upon the written,
and partly upon the unwritten word of God;] Therefore the present Church of
Rome holds not the same entire foundation of faith, with the ancient.

Thirdly, the articles of the Apostles Creed, rightly expounded, and taken in
the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost, were the foundation of the ancient
Churches faith; But the present Church of Rome holds not the articles of the
Apostles Creed rightly expounded, and taken in the sense and meaning of the
Holy Ghost; therefore the present Church of Rome holds not the same
foundation with the ancient Church.

The proposition, or major, is not denied: the assumption may be evidently
proved, by instancing in some of the prime Articles.

The first article [I believe in God] rightly expounded, teaches us that we
ought to repose our confidence in God, and him only; not upon any Creature,
Saint, or Angel; and therefore not to call upon them; the consequence is the
Apostles, Romans 10. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
this Article thus expounded, the present Church of Rome believes not.

Secondly, Faith in Jesus Christ, rightly understood, signifies affiance in
Christ for salvation, or a relying upon Christ, with an assured persuasion for
remission of sins, through his merits, and satisfaction. This interpretation
of faith in Christ, the present Church of Rome is so far from admitting,
Conc. Trid. Sess 6. can. 12.
that it accurseth all those, who teach, the nature of justifying faith to
consist in this affiance, or confidence.

Thirdly, the Incarnation of Christ, rightly expounded, implies, that Christ
was once, and but once made of a pure Virgin, a true and perfect man like unto
us in all things, sin only excepted, Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15. And the Council
of Calcedon, in the fifth Act against Eutiches, accurseth all those, who deny,
that Christ retains still the properties of his humane nature, (such as the
shape of man, proportion, dimension, circumscription, etc.) This article thus
expounded, is not assented to by the Church of Rome; for the Romanists teach,
that Christ is made in the Sacrament by the Priest. The learneder Jesuits are
not content with the adducing, or bringing of Christ into the Sacrament,
Bellar. retract.
where he was not before; [for that, say they, were only a translocation, not a
transubstantiation; a local motion, not a substantial mutation,] but in
express words maintain a new production of Christ's body made of bread.

Again they teach, that Christ's body in the Sacrament, is whole in the whole,
and wholly in every part of the Host; which is impossible, if, according to the
definition of the Council of Calcedon, he retain the properties of his humane
nature; to wit, extension of parts, proportion of limbs, distinction of
members, etc. Whence I argue, They, who teach that Christ has a body
invisible, indivisible, insensible, impassible, overthrow the verity of his
humane nature, and consequently deny the article of his Incarnation: But the
Church of Rome teaches that Christ (in the Sacrament, to wit,) has a body
invisible, indivisible, insensible, etc. Therefore the Church of Rome
overthrows the verity of Christ his humane nature, and consequently, denies
the article of his Incarnation. Fourthly, the article of Christ his Ascension
rightly understood, imports that Christ is so ascended from the earth, that
he is not now upon earth, but is contained, (according to his bodily presence,
and humane nature) in the heavens, Act. 3. 21. This article is not thus held by
the Church of Rome; for the Romanists teach, that Christ even according to his
humane nature, and bodily presence, is upon earth in every Church, on every
Altar where the sacrifice of the Mass is offered, besides private houses, to
which the Sacrament is carried: so that by this their Doctrine, Christ is more
upon earth since his Ascension, then before. Before his Ascension he was only
in one Country, and at one time, according to his bodily presence, but in one
particular place: but since his Ascension, Counc. Trent Sess. 13 chapter 1.
according to their belief, he is truly, really, and substantially in a
million of places, viz. every where in their offertory, after the words of
Consecration: whence I argue. They who believe and teach, that Christ God and
man, according to his bodily presence, is upon earth since his Ascension into
heaven, deny that he is contained in heaven, and consequently overthrow the
article of his Ascension: But the Romanists believe and teach, that Christ God
and man, according to his bodily presence, is upon earth since his Ascension
into heaven; Therefore the Romanists deny that he is contained in heaven, and
consequently overthrow the article of his Ascension. The first proposition, or
major, is grounded upon the Angels Argument, Mat. 28. 6. (He is not here, for
he is risen:) the testimony of S. Peter, Acts 3. 21. (whom the heavens must
contain:) S. Austins resolution, A^g. lib. 20 contra Faustum Manich, c. 11.
[Christ, according to his bodily presence, cannot be, at the same time, in the
Sun, and Moon, and upon the Cross:] the inference of Vigilius, Lib. 4.
contra Euiychetem.
(when Christ was in the flesh upon earth, he was not in heaven; and now
because he is in heaven, he is not therefore upon earth.) If Christ's body
could at the same time be in more places, the Angels argument were of no
force; for, (his existence in more places then one at the same time being
granted) he might be risen, and in Jerusalem, and yet at the same instant be
there, where the Angel affirms he was not, to wit, in the grave. If Christ
may be upon earth in his body, and in heaven at the same time, then is not he
contained in the Heavens; for it implies a contradiction, that his body should
be contained in, and yet be without the Heavens at the same time. If his body
may be in more places then one at once, then he might have been at the instant
of his passion in the Sun, and Moon, and upon the Cross, which S. Augustine
concludes to be absolutely impossible. And if Christ in his flesh may be both
in heaven and earth at the same instant, Vigilius his reason has no strength
at all, to wit, (because he is in heaven, therefore he is not upon earth.) To
conclude, if it be impossible that Christ his body should be at the same
instant in heaven and upon earth, as the testimonies of the Angel, S. Peter, S.
Augustine, and Vigilius above alleged, declare; and if all Papists teach,
that Christ's body, after words of Consecration, is truly, really, and
substantially upon earth handled with the hands, and eaten with the mouths of
Communicants; they must needs consequently deny his bodily presence, and being
at the right hand of his Father in Heaven. Fifthly, the article of the Catholic
Church, rightly expounded, signifies the whole company of Gods elect; which is
the only Catholic (invisible) Church, we believe, (for the visible Church is
an object of sense, and therefore not properly an article of faith.) This true
interpretation of the article, the Romanists are so far from admitting, that
in the Council of Constance, Cocl. histor. Bohemi. lib. 3.
they condemned John Husse of heresy, for maintaining it. Whence I thus argue:
They who make the visible Church to be the catholic Church which we believe,
misbeleeue the article touching the Catholic Church; But the Romanists make
the visible Church to be the Catholic Church, which we believe; Therefore the
Romanists misbeleeue the article touching the catholic Church.

The first proposition, or major, is proved by the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5. 7. We walk by faith, and not by sight. and Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
evidence of things not seen. The Church therefore, which we believe, cannot be
the visible Church. Campian reason. 3.
The assumption is the assertion of all Papists, who are so far from
believing, that they scoff and laugh at an invisible Church, as a mere
phantasme, or Platonicall Idaea.

Sixthly, the four last articles of the Apostles creed [the communion of
Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the dead, and life
euerlasting] rightly expounded, import not only, that there is a communion of
Saints, and remission of sins in the Church, and a resurrection of the
faithful to eternal life; [which the Devils themselves do, and cannot but
beleeue] but that every true believer, who rehearses these articles, does, and
ought to believe, that he has a part in the communion of Saints, has
obtained remission of his sins, and shall at the last day rise to life
eternal. (...)
This interpretation of these articles is condemned by the Papists as
heretical. Whence we thus argue against them:

They, who deny that a man is bound to believe, that he is of the number of the
elect, or that his sins are undoubtedly forgiven him, etc. overthrow the
four articles above mentioned, according to their true meaning.

But the Romanists deny, that a man is bound to believe, that he is of the
number of the Elect, or that his sins are undoubtedly forgiven him, etc.

Therefore the Romanists overthrow the four articles above mentioned,
according to their true meaning.

Secondly, 2 Error.
it is a dangerous error, to affirm, that the present Church of Rome holds
the same foundation of Sacraments with the Ancient Church. Which I prove, first:

They who maintain seven Sacraments properly so called, hold not the same
foundation of Sacraments, with that church which held but two only:

But the present church of Rome maintains seven Sacraments properly so
called, the Ancient church of Rome held but two only: Therefore the present
church of Rome holds not the same foundation of Sacraments, with that church.

The first proposition, or major, if it be not evident in it self, may be
thus confirmed. The five Sacraments which the Romanists add, cannot be built
upon that foundation, which bears but two only: therefore those five
Sacraments are built upon another different foundation, or upon no foundation
at all. The second proposition or assumption is generally proved by all
Protestant writers that handle this question, with whom the Appealer professes
every where to hold fair quarter.

Secondly, I prove it thus;

Whosoever maintains an error overthrowing the nature of a Sacrament, holds
not the same foundation of Sacraments with the Ancient church:

But the present church of Rome maintains an error overthrowing the nature of
a Sacrament;

Therefore the present church of Rome holds not the same foundation of
Sacraments with the Ancient church.

The first proposition is evident in it self; for nothing can be more
fundamental to a Sacrament, then that which concerns the nature and essence
of a Sacrament; nothing more destructive, or euersiue then that, which
overthrows the very essence, and substance of it.

The second proposition, is contained totidem verbis, in express words in the
articles of religion of the Church of England, Artic. 28. Transubstantiation,
or the change of the substance of bread and wine, [a doctrine de fide in the
Church of Rome, defined both by the Council of Lateran, and the Council of
Trent] in the supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy Writ, but it is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, and has given occasion to many superstitions.

Thirdly, it is proved thus:

Whosoever holds an error concerning Christ's ordinance, and institution of
the Sacraments, erreth in the foundation of Sacraments, and therein differs
from the ancient Church:

But the present Church of Rome holds an error concerning Christ's ordinance
and institution of the Sacraments;

Therefore the present Church of Rome erreth in the foundation of Sacraments,
and therein differs from the ancient Church.

The first proposition is clear; for Christ's order and institution is the
foundation of the Sacraments, and therefore an error concerning it must needs
be fundamental in point of Sacrament. The second proposition or assumption, is
set down in Article 30. Both parts of the Sacrament by Christ's ordinance and
commandment ought to be ministered to all christian men alike; which assertion
touching Christ's ordinance, the present Church of Rome erroneously denies, and
defines the contrary in the Council of Constance and Trent.

Thirdly, 3 Error.
it is a dangerous error, to affirm, that the present church of Rome is not
diverse from the ancient undoubted church of Christ. Which I prove. First thus,

Whatsoever Church has most shamefully gone from the Apostles, from Christ
himself, from the Primitive and catholic church of God, and has utterly
forsaken the Catholic faith, is undoubtedly diverse from the ancient true
church of Christ;

The present church of Rome has most shamefully gone from the Apostles, from
Christ himself, from the primitive and catholic church of God, and has
utterly forsaken the catholic faith.

Therefore the present church of Rome is undoubtedly diverse from the ancient
true church of Christ.

The first proposition is most evident: the second proposition is verbatim in
the Apology of the Church of England, part 5. chapter 16. Diu. 1. and part 6. chapter
22. Diuis. 2. This Apology of the Church of England, as it bears the name, so
it has ever been accounted the Doctrine of the Church of England. When it was
first printed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, it was commanded to be had in
all Churches; and since was reprinted with the like command to be had in every
Parish Church in this Kingdom, in the year of our Lord, 1611. by our late
Sovereign King James, who See the Preface to the King, pend by Bishop Ouerall,
in the end.
gave a most singular testimony and approbation of Bishop Jewels works, for
the most rare and admirable that have been written in this last age of the
world: and also gave special direction to the late Archbishop of Canterbury,
Bishop Bancroft, to appoint some one The life was penned by D. F. then a
Student in C. C. C.
to write his, the said Bishops life in English, and prefixe it to his works,
which accordingly is done in the last edition.

Secondly, I prove it, thus;

Whatsoever Church is fallen away from Christ his Kingdom and Doctrine, is not
the same with, but diverse from the ancient undoubted church of Christ.

The present church of Rome is fallen away from Christ his Kingdom and
Doctrine;

Therefore the present church of Rome is not the same with, but diverse from
the ancient undoubted church of Christ.

The first proposition cannot be denied; the assumption is the Appealers,
Appeal page 149. In Apostasy the Turk and Pope are both interessed; both are
departed away; whether we take that apostacy to be a departing away from
Christ, and his Kingdom, and his Doctrine: or whether we understand apostacy
and defection from the Roman Empire, etc. page 150.

Thirdly, I prove it thus;

No Church maintaining and practicing Idolatry, can be the same with the
ancient Church that worshipped God in spirit and truth:

The present Church of Rome maintains and practices idolatry:

Therefore the present Church of Rome cannot be the same with the ancient
Church that worshipped God in spirit and truth.

The first proposition is the Apostles, 2 Cor. 6. 16. what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? The assumption is proved at large in the Homily
against the peril of Idolatry, confirmed to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, Artic. 35. The Homilies, and by name the Homily (the second against
peril of idolatry) contains godly and wholesome doctrine. If godly and
wholesome Doctrine, then certainly true.

Fourthly, 4 Error.
it is a dangerous error to affirm, as the Appealer does, Answer to Gagge page
50. That the present Church of Rome remains Christi Ecclesia et Sponsa.
Christ's Church and Spouse. That God has his Church even in Rome we do not
deny; but that the present Roman Church, specially since the Council of
Trent, holding the cursing and accursed Canons of that Conuenticle, or that the
Papacy, that is, the Pope with his Clergy and their adherents, are Christ's
Church and Spouse, the Appealer is the first Protestant that ever for ought I
know, affirmed it. Iunius (whom he alleges, Appeal, page 113. to this
purpose) in his book De Ecclesia, is so far from supporting his assertion,
that in the same book he quite overthrows it: his words are, page 60. and
61. Ecclesiamultis seculis fuit, cum Papatus non esset; accessit ei Papatus
contingenter, and sic ab ea separabilis, ut hoc etiam tempore Ecclesiae sint
ubi Papatus non est, and sine Papatu deinceps futurae sint. Papatus igitur non
est Ecclesia, sed in Ecclesia est adnatum malu^, pestis, hydrops, gangraena in
corpore, vitae atque saluti ejus insidians, ideoque succum vitalem salutaremque
Ecclesiae depascens quam infestissime. The Church of God was many ages when
there was no Papacy at all; as at this day also there are Churches where there
is no Papacy: and will be hereafter without the Papacy. The Papacy therefore is
not the Church, but a disease or botch grown to or in the Church, a plague, a
dropsy, a gangreene in the body, indangering the health, feeding upon, and
infesting the healthful moisture and vital blood of the Church. And within a
few lines after in the same page follow the words on which the Appealer wholly
relyeth, Appeal page 113. The Papal Church, (says Franciscus Iunius* neither
Papist, nor Arminian) qua id habet in se quod ad Ecclesiae definitionem
pertinet, est Ecclesia. As it has that in it which belongs to the definition
of a Church, is a Church. Why does the Appealer stop in the middle of a
sentence? why does he not go on to the full period? the sentence is yet but
lame, he has put out but the left leg, I will put out the right leg for
him, wherewith Iunius gives Popery a kick, and trips up the Appealers heels:
Qud vero habet in se adnatum malum, quod Papalitatem dicimus, eo respectu
Ecclesia non est, sed vitiata atque corrupta Ecclesia and ad interitum tendens;
But the Church of Rome as it has a disease or evil grown to it, which we
call the Papacy, in that respect it is not the Church, but a vitiate and
corrupt church, and tending to ruin.

Note here Reader, in the Appealers defense of Popery a trick of Popery, to
cite sentences by halfes, alleging only that which in show makes for them,
and concealing that which in truth makes against them. The meaning of the whole
sentence of Iunius is clear enough for us, and against the Appealer: to wit,
that the Church of Rome so far as it is Protestant, and holds some
fundamental truths agreeable to the Scriptures, is a Church: but as it is
Popish, and adds many errors to those truths, consequently subuerting those
very truths it holds, it is no Church. Which I thus prove:

No Spouse or true church of Christ is in part or in whole that Antichrist, or
whore of Babylon:

The present church of Rome, as it is taken for the Papacy or Popish state
thereof, is in part (as the Appealer confesses, Appeal page 149.) or in
whole, (as many See before in the Table, Artic. de Antichristo.
Pillars of our Church have taught,) that Antichrist, or whore of Babylon;

Therefore the present church of Rome, as it is taken for the Papacy or popish
state thereof, is no Spouse nor true church of christ.

I have heard that the Appealer in a late conference (wherein this passage, on
which I have so long insisted, was objected against him) should stand at this
ward, answering for himself, that these words [praesens Ecclesia Romana eodem
fundamento doctrinae and Sacramentorum firma semper constitit, etc. and manet
enim Christi Ecclesia and Sponsa: Answ. to Gag. page 50.] were not his own
words, but the words of Cassander. This his ward will not keep off the blow.
For first, he alleges this sentence in approbation thereof, and commendation
of the Author: [moderate men, says he, ibid. on both sides, confess this
controversy may cease:] [hee should have said, lukewarm men on both sides.]
Secondly, he rests on this passage as being a full answer to the Popish
objection concerning the visibility of the Church. Thirdly, in other places of
his book, Appeal page 113. and 139. and 140. he affirms in his own words,
as much in effect, as he here coteth, lingua Romana out of Cassander, but fide
Graeca. His words are, page 113. I am absolutely persuaded, and shall be, till
I see cause to the contrary, that the church of Rome is a true, though not a
sound church of Christ, as well since as before the Council of Trent; a part
of the catholic, though not the catholic church, which we do profess to
believe in our Creed: In essentialls and fundamentalls they agree, holding one
faith in one Lord. And p. 139 Rome is and ever was a true church, since it was
a church. And page 140. the church of Rome is a true church, ratione essentiae,
and being of a church, not a sound church every way in their Doctrine. Vt Marci
Antonij de Dominis discipulum possis agnoscere: I know well the mint where
these new tenants were coined: the Appealer shows himself a tractable and
respective Prebend to his late Deane, following him pene ad aras, near to the
Romish Altars. That his Deane, after his relapse into Popery, in the last
book, containing his poenitendam poenitentiam, et retractandam retractationem,
his repentance to be repented of, and retractation to be retracted, renouncing
the true religion which he had defended, labors to clear the present church
of Rome from the imputation of heresy, because, as he says, the wiser and
learneder Ministers of the church of England teach, that the church of Rome
does not err in any fundamental articles of faith. In defectu credendi
haeresis est, non in excessu; haereticus est censendus qui in fide deficit,
aliquid quod scriptum est non credendo; non is qui in fide superabundat, plus
quam scriptum est credendo: Heresy consists in the defect, not in the excess
of believing; and he is an Heretic, who is deficient in his faith, by not
believing something that is written; not he that superabounds in his faith by
believing more then is written. This error (as I am informed) spreads far
like a Gangreane, therefore most needful it is it be looked to in time. It is
true that the Church of Rome holds, if not all, yet most of the fundamental
and positive articles with us. It is true also, that most of their errors are
by way of addition: Yet whosoever from hence will conclude, that the Church of
Rome is not heretical, or erreth not in any point necessary to salvation,
grossly mistaketh the matter, as will appear to any, whose judgment is not
forestalled, by the demonstration of these two conclusions.

1 That Heresy or damnable Error may be as well by adding to, as taking from
the Orthodoxe faith.

2 That the Church of Rome erreth not only in excess, or believing more then
is needful, but also in defect and believing less.

The first is thus demonstrated;

Whatsoever errors are alike forbidden in Scripture under the same punishment,
are alike damnable:

Errors by adding to, and detracting from the Orthodoxe faith, are alike
forbidden in Scripture under the same punishment;

Therefore errors by adding to and detracting from the Orthodoxe faith, are
alike damnable.

The first proposition is clear by it own light. The assumption or second
proposition is delivered expressly in holy Scripture. Deuteronomy. 42. Ye shall not
add unto the words which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from
it. Proverb. 30. 5. 6. Every word of God is pure, add thou not unto his words,
lest he reprove thee. Galat. 1. 18. If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto
you beside that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Revel.
22. 18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy
of this Book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall take away from
the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of
the Book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from the things that are
written in this Book.

Secondly thus,

Whatsoever things alike destroy the nature of faith, are alike damnable:

Errors by addition and detraction, alike destroy the nature of Faith;

Therefore errors by addition and detraction are alike damnable.

The first proposition is unquestionable. The assumption I declare thus: Faith
is of the nature of a rule or certain measure, to which if any thing be added,
or taken away, it cease to be that rule. Cum credimus, says Tertullian,
Tertul. de Praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 8. c. 4.
nihil desideramus ultra credere, prius enim hoc credimus, non esse quod ultra
credere, debeamus: Fides in regula posita est; nihil ultra scire est omnia
scire. When we believe, we desire to believe no more; for we first believe
this, that there is nothing more we ought to believe. Faith is contained in a
rule: to know nothing beyond it, is to know all things. Virtue is in the mean,
vice as well in the excess, as in the defect. In our body the superabundance
of humors is as dangerous as lack of them; as many dye of Plethories, as of
Consumptions. A hand or foot, which has more fingers, or toes then ordinary,
is alike monstrous, as that which wants the due number. To use their own
similitude; A foundation may be as well ouethrowne by laying on it more then it
will bear, as by taking away that which is necessary to support the building.
Thirdly, thus:

The errors in faith and religion of the Samaritans, Malchamites, Athenians,
Galatians, Ebionites, Nazarites, Quartadecimans, Manichees, and Nestorians,
were damnable:

But all these several errors were errors of addition;

Therefore errors of Addition are damnable.

The first proposition will not be gainesaied. For all these errors are
branded as heretical or damnable, either by the Spirit of God in Scripture, or
by the catholic christian Church. The Assumption will appear in the suruay of
those particular errors.

The Samaritans feared the Lord, 2 King. 17. 33.
and served their own Gods. The Malchamites worshipped and swear by the Lord,
Zepha. 1. 5.
and swear by Malcham. The Athenians worshipped the true God by the name of THE
UNKNOWN GOD, Acts 17. 23. 2.
and withal worshipped Idols. Gal. 4. 9.
The Galatians, Ebionites, Nazarites, and Quartadecimans, believed the Gospel,
yet retained also and observed the legal ceremonies, But now, after ye have
known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? says Saint
Paul of the Galatians, Ebionitae ceremonias adhuc legis retinent, pauperes
interpretantur, et vere sensu pauperes: The Ebionites still keep the
ceremonies of the Law, Haymo hist. Sacr. l. 3. c. 17. ex Eusebius. histor. l. 3.
c. 27.
their name (Ebionites) by interpretation is poor men, and indeed such are
they, poor and simple in theirvnderstanding, August. de haeres. ad quod vult
Deum.
God wot, says Haymo. Nazaraei, dum volunt Iudaei esse, et Christiani, nec
Iudaei sunt, nec Christiani. The Nazarites, whilst they will be both Jews
and Christians, are indeed neither Jews nor christians; says S. Augustine.
His scil: Quartadecimanis, Blastus accedens, Iudaismum vult introducere, Pascha
enim dicit non aliter custodiendum esse, quam secundum legem Moysis,
quartadecima mensis; Quis autem nescit, quoniam Euangelica gratia euacuatur, si
ad legem Christum redigit? Blastus adjoining himself to the Quartadecimans,
would secretly bring in Iudaisme; for he says, the Passover or Feast of
Easter must no other wise be kept, then according to the law of Moses the
fourteenth day of the Month. Tertul. de praescript. c. 53.
Now who knows not, that the grace of the Gospel is made void; if Christ be
reduced to or joined with the Law? says Tertullian. The Manichees held two
chief first causes of all things, Cassander de reliquijs T^lag ad Johan. A
(...) Anno Dom. 431.
as also two souls in man: as Cassander. The Nestorians held two persons in
Christ, they denied not one; As the Ephesine Council.

The second conclusion [That the Church of Rome erreth not only in excess, or
believing more then is needful, but also in defect, and believing lesse] is
proved: First, they believe not the Articles of the Apostles Creed, according
to the true and full meaning: many special points of faith, contained in the
Apostles Creed, and by necessary consequence, deduced from thence, are not
assented unto by the Romanists, as I showed before.

Secondly, they believe not special and particular affiance in Christ's merits
for salvation, Council of Trent. can. 12. 13. S^s. 6.
and consequently they believe not a justifying faith, or justification by such
a faith: nay they condemn such a belief as heresy.

Thirdly, they hold not the formal foundation of faith: for albeit they
believe the Scriptures, and some points of faith deduced out of them, yet they
believe them not for themselves, or the authority of the Scriptures, but
because the Church has approved and commanded them to be thus received, and
believed. They believe not God and the Scriptures for themselves, but for the
Popes sake: that is, in effect, they believe Christ for Antichrist. Hence it
is, that although God expressly forbids all vice, and commands all virtue,
Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 5. Sect. Quod.
yet Bellarmine says, Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo
virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes esse malas,
nisi vellit contra conscientiam peccare. If the Pope should err by commanding
vice, and forbidding virtue, (which is directly contrary to the whole scope,
and tenor of holy Scriptures) yet the Church is bound to believe vice to be
good, and virtue to be evil; unless she will sin against conscience. But
Pope and Cardinal must pardon us, if, as we are bound, we believe and obey God
rather then man, who by the Prophet Esaias says, Woe unto them that call evil
good, Isaiah. 5. 20
and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

By this time I see the Appealer totum in fermento, crying shame on the malice
of his adversaries that mistake him, Appeal p. 139.
[Remember it lest you mistake my saying, or maliciously mistake it; the Church
of Rome is a true Church ratione essentiae, and being of a Church, not a sound
Church every way in their doctrine.] I remember well this memento; neither can
I forget the Appealers syllogism set down in the same page: viz.

The Church of Rome has ever been visible:

The Church of Rome is and ever was a true Church, since it was a Church;

Therefore the true Church has been visible.

The Appealer cannot infer the conclusion upon the premises, unless in his
minor or assumption he intend to make the Church of Rome more then a true
Church; he must make her the true Church, that is, not a particular Church,
but the Catholic, not a member, but the whole. The minor should be thus
altered, to make his syllogism current.

The Church of Rome has ever been visible:

The Church of Rome is the true Church;

Therefore the true Church has ever been visible.

The syllogism thus being set upon his true feet, any man may easily see the
lame leg; The Church of Rome is neither the true Church, nor, as the Appealer
confesses, p. 140. a sound member of the true Church. As for the syllogism
made by the Appealer prout jacet in terminis, upon which he would have his
friends and Informers to chew the cud, as they do after Lectures. p. 139. He
deserves himself to be sent to the University to chew the cud after a Logique
Lecture, and learn to make a better syllogism. For this his syllogism is
peccant tam forma quam materia, in matter and form. To say nothing of mood and
figure, which the Appealer, in the mood he was, little regarded; I say,
(allowing that there may be a lawful expositorius syllogismus, consisting of
pure singulars, and consequently in no mood) first there are four terms at
least in this syllogism, to wit, [The Church of Rome, visible, the true
Church, a true Church,] the true Church, and a true Church, are not one. Every
particular true Church is a true Church, yet neither every particular, nor any
particular Church is the true Catholic visible Church, of which the question
is propounded, and debated by the Appealer. Again, the minor terminus is not
in the conclusion; the minor terminus is, [A true Church since it was a Church]
which if he had put in the conclusion entirely, as he ought by the rules of
good syllogizing, his argument would have proved ridiculous: viz.

The Church of Rome has ever been visible:

The Church of Rome is and ever was a true Church since it was a Church;

Therefore a true church since it was a church has been ever visible.

Let the form pass, enough of the husk; we will now chew the grain, and
come to the matter of his syllogism. First, were both the propositions true,
yet the argument is fallacious: for the process is ab ignotiori ad notius, the
worst kind of the beggarly fallacy petitio Principii. The visibility of the
catholic Church is more known then the visibility of any one member, be it
the Church of Rome: for the Catholic Church is visible and known in all the
parts and members, and therefore must needs be more known then any one member.
Secondly, the major is false, if it be understood in the Appealers sense: for,
during many schisms in the Papacy, and when the Pope sat at Auennian, and
not Rome, when diverse Popes were deposed by Councels for Schism and Heresy,
and sometimes the Pope set up by the Councels, was deposed by the power of
Princes, as Amodius; and sometimes the Popes deposed by Councels were
reestablished in their Popedomes by the power of Princes, as Eugenius, the
Church of Rome was not so visible, as the Appealer would have it. Thirdly, if
the Appealer understand by the Church of Rome (as his friends and informers,
and all Protestants generally understand it, and as he must, if he say any
thing to the purpose.) a Church in Rome, and the Popes territories, or
elsewhere, holding the present Roman faith, which is set down in the Council
of Trent, both the major and minor are notoriously false. For neither was there
any church in the world, holding that faith, visible for many hundred years
after Christ; neither is the Church holding that erroneous faith a true Church*
Howsoever, it may please God in that Church (as he did in the Churches of the
Arrians in Saint Hilary his time) to call many by the Word and Sacraments to
the knowledge of the truth; (...)
quorum aures puriores erant quam doctorum ora: whose ears were purer then the
teachers mouths; who strained the milk they received from their mother, and,
casting away that which was impure, drank down only the sincere milk of the
word.

I suppose the Appealer will not affirm the Arrian Churches to be true
Churches; yet God had his wheat even in their floor all covered with chafe;
and, I doubt not, but he ever had, and still has many thousands even in the
Roman Church it self, who never bowed the knee to that Baal. Our question is
not of them, but of their Governors and Teachers; and the outward face of
their Church maintaining and practicing idolatry, and enforcing as far as
they can the accursed Canons of the Council of Trent, whether in this sense
the Church of Rome be a true Church. It is says the Appealer a true Church,
Appea^e page 14^.
ratione essentiae, in regard of essence, but not in regard of soundness of
doctrine. This answer explicateth not the question, but implies a
contradiction; to say, a true Church in respect of the essence, and not in
respect of soundness of Doctrine, is to say, the church of Rome is a true
church in respect of the essence, but not in respect of the essence; for,
soundness of Doctrine is of the essence of the true church. By it the true
Church is defined, Article the 19. The visible church of Christ is a
congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is Preached,
and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all
those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.

If the Appealer by (truth) means metaphysicall truth, which is of as large
extent as being or entity, the more he graspeth, the less he holds: for in
this account all Churches are true Churches; and the Church of Rome is no more
indebted to the Appealer for his Euloge, then all the heretical and
schismatic Churches in Christendom; they are Churches, therefore in this
sense, true Churches; for Ens et verum conuertuntur. In this acception, a
thief is a true man, because it is true that he is a man; and the Devil a
true Angel, because it is true, that he is an Angel; and the Appealer a true
writer, because it is true that he is a writer; Melancthon in Chroni^^s.
of whom it may be said, as it was of Seuerus, Omnia fuit et nihil profuit: he
turns every way, and yet cannot pass; he angleth in all waters, and yet
catches nothing; he has spent all his oil in making salues for the foul
sores of the Whore of Babylon, and yet has left Her worse then he found Her.

The filing up of the Writ.
THe errors of the Appealer, both in point of Arminianisme, and Popery, and of
a different nature from both, being laid open in simplicity and sincerity; I
first appeal from the Appealer to himself, as that Plaintiff sometime did
from Philip to Philip. I appeal from the Appealer, as set on by others, to the
Appealer as left to himself: from his rash, to his advised; from his former,
to his latter thoughts, which are usually the wiser, (...), etc. Secundae
cogitationes secundiores. And if he retract his errors, I will let fall the
suit: if he persist in his erroneous opinions, I refer him, together with
this discovery of his errors, to the Examination and Censure of the most
learned, religious, and judicious House of Convocation now sitting, to whom
under his Majesty the cognizance of Doctrinall differences properly belong.
Latius in Semipelagianismo.
Faustus Regiensis intending to refute S. Austine under another name, that he
might avoid all suspicion of Pelagianisme, intitles the first Chapters of his
Book against Pelagius; and under this veil of opposing S. Austins professed
enemy, from the third chapter of his book to the end covertly carps at, and
refels S. Austins learned Book of the Predestination of Saints. Let moderate
men, and no frantic Puritans judge, whether the Appealer, as in his matter,
so in his manner of writing, follow not Faustus the Demipelagian his pattern;
whether pretending an answer to a Gagger of the Protestants, he intend and
endeavor not to Gagge the most learned and zealous Protestants; and drawing
out his style more poinenant then a Stilletto, in color and show against the
Romish enemy, he cunningly give not therewith a secret wound to his own
Mother the Church of England, and the true professors of the Gospel therein.
As for the Fratres Descripti, the right and left hand of the Appealer, whose
Trade has been for these many years past, to inform against the zealous and
learned Defenders of the true religion established here in England under the
name of Puritans, quia volunt decipi, decipiantur. But for those grave and
venerable Divines, who are reported to have subscribed to the Appealers Books,
[I think the Relator was mistaken in the word, he meant proscribed them] and
all other ancient worthies of our Church, who yet applaud and approve these
late Polemickes of the Appealer, I humbly entreat them in the words of the
Orator, Videant Patres Conscripti ne circumscripti videantur.
(...) Galat. 4. 16.



