^OR ^F ^^^STITY.

(...) made and preached

BY ^^HN FEATLY.

(...) ^amentum nobilium, exaltatio (...) etc. Cypr. LONDON: Printed by G. P.
for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop, at the South entrance of
the Royal Exchange, 1632.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir THOMAS WARNER, Knight, Super-intendent of the
Islands of Saint Christopher and Metalina, in the Province of Carlisle in the
West-Indiaes, my much honored friend, etc.
Worthy Sir:
Goodness knowe's as well how to accept the service of humility, as to merit it.
Your courtesies challenge my thanks; and your love my affection. J have here
taught the World what J should (rather than what J can) perform. Thus J
acknowledge the rules of gratitude; and my desire to observe them. Let it be
your favor to entertain this expression; your glory to countenance it. Upon
this hope, I have ventured upon a vulgar censure: and what was intended to be
stifeled in an hour, now prostitutes it self to an Age. If the subject please
not the Readers, let them remember, it is Scripture: If not the Sermon; J
confess it is mine. So all the faults may be favorably corrected, because
freely acknowledged. J that am the Father of this weakness, profess my self
the admirer of better: and shall strive to imitate when the severest censurer
will set me a copy. To require a Masterpiece of learning and judgment from
the least of the Apostles, is to forget discretion by expecting a miracle. Let
the World rest satisfied that (for your sake) this atom is espied in the rays
of our Sun; and emboldened by your importunities. To you therefore I address
my self, desiring your acceptance both of this, and the Author,

Your faithful Friend to serve you, JOHN FEATLY.

THE HONOR OF CHASTITY.
GENESIS 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?


HVmane policy is the life of the unsanctified; but religious is the life of
the regenerate. The former plotting for the deceitful riches of this World;
the latter rewarding with a Crown immortal. It Is no task then of
impossibility to determine which of the two shall best deserve our approbation.
For the one (just like a Parenthesis) gives light only to the sentence of the
other. The same support's with a bladder only, exposed to the hazard of the
smallest flaw; the other is an Arc which carries us safely to the cape of
felicity. Dignori detur: Let the honor, then, be given (not to Pan, but) to
Apollo; not to humane devices, but to religion; and let each indifferent Judge
censure that gross eared Midas, whose impiety, or ignorance devote's him to
error. Joseph (in my Text) shall be the just deligate, and arbitrate the
matter (contrary to custom) without any sinister corruption. Had not he been
as pious to his God, as just to his Master, he might (peradventure) have
stolen a fall through impiety, to deprive him at once, both of chastity, and
honor. But 'twas the plot of his religion to preserve him honest, that he
might remain fortunate. He that was, at first, rejected by his brethren, was
received by the Ismaelites; and 'twas the chance of chance to make him happy,
when he expected misery. His bondage (instead of servility) became a freedom:
His slavery was soon converted into liberty: And (as if the Sea of his
afflictions deemed him too good to be drowned in infelicity) even that helped
him to float in the height of applause. None so great as Joseph, now, in the
love of the vulgar; in the talk of the greater; or in the heart of his Master.
Durst we to attribute this change unto Fortune, we might (with the Poet)
justly Deifie her. But the great Jehovah disdain's such a no-thing should prove
injurious to his Majesty; and hate's as much the Epicure's deity, as this
sacrifice. Joseph was not more highly promoted, than religiously disposed; and
render's, therefore, his best thanks to the God of honor. Yet, behold a
strange alteration. That which before exalted him, is now as ready to cry him
down. His Mistress love's him; So does he her: Nay she lust's after him; but
so will not he her. His conscience sweare's him to obedience to the King of
Kings, teaching him observance to his Mistress, but only in things lawful.
Yet cannot he be bolder in refusing, than she in wooing. The redoubt which
he had to repair to for an excuse, was the infidelity to his Master, which
would have insued upon it. And (lest he should be taken off from that) be
retreates to another of far greater strength, in the words of my Text; Quomodo
facerem malum hoc maximum, and peccarem in Deum.

The words are an interrogative objurgation to avoid a more impious temptation:
and contain, 1. The Author refusing, I Joseph. 2. The action refused,
aggravated, 1. By the name, Wickedness. 2. By the extension, Great.
3. The reason of the refusal. 1. In respect of the offense, Sin. 2. In
respect of the object, or party offended, God.



Of these in their order; and first of

The Author refusing, I Joseph.

The purity of the Operator contemn's a corrivall in the heart, solely
possessing that chair of estate: But (if once the malice of temptation
purchases entertainment) the former peace was not more delightful, than the
succeeding war prove's terrible. The Almighty become's a suitor, who (not
intending to work by his power) wooe's by entreaty: and (as if that Virgin,
that chaste soul of man were not worth acceptance, if won without opposition)
the devil likewise aime's at the purchase of it to. Happy is that person, whose
reason (despising the false allurements) yeeld's a consent to the God of Gods.
Thus was Joseph won by the deity: and his heart was found as constant, as the
opposer turbulent. Had his education nuzled him up in error; or his parents
instructed him in Idolatry: Had his brethren played with wickedness; or his
companions dallied with disobedience, then the mist of ignorance might
(peradventure) have bred a Cacatact, or drawn a Curtain over the eyes of his
understanding. But such excuses must needs be silent, because his education was
virtuous, his life religious. Quo semel est imbuta recens, etc. Teach a child
the trade of his youth (saye's Solomon) and he will not forget it when he is
old. Joseph had learned the principles of Religion of his parents; and,
therefore, must not (nay, cannot) forget them among the Egyptians. That Court
(which in some kind, was the school of villainy) could never prove guilty of
so bad a proficient in such ill and uncivil ways. But, What do thou here
Eliah? What has Joseph to do, that he dances attendance at the Court? Exeat
aula qui vult esse pius. Me thinks that a Cottage in the Country, or a lodge
in the Wilderness of rustickes should have better suited with his religious
life. He knowe's that company may allure a man by subtilty, to what they
cannot entice him by entreaty: And where did the Devil employ his servants
more than among King Pharoahs household; where wickedness was (with some)
become their religion, and iniquity their common devotion? But (alas) he was a
servant, and must obey: Yet, where the misery of bondage shall command him to
impiety, the uprightness of his conscience may repeal the act. It was the
Divine providence which raised his decayed estate, and now ravished his Master
with the love of his slave. He that before was sold by his brethren, is now
redeemed from bondage by the hand of his Father. For (behold) God suffers him
not to live in obscurity; but give's him success in his endeavors to usher
him to promotion: So that now his Captain begin's to take especial notice of
him; and reward's his fidelity with the command of his house. Where before his
honor goes humility; for he is humbled to his God, before he dare's venture
upon command. 'Twas his obedience to God which advanced him; and it is the
service of that God, which his thoughts entertain.

Thus shall it be done to the man whom God will honor. The envy of fraternity
shall be the means of promotion, where loyalty to the Divinity petition's for
it. Though the hatred of a brother (upon unjust terms) may seem to entreat,
yet it can never persuade the Almighty to curse, when the malice of the one
takes a daring from the devout Religion of the other. Though the strictness of
unfeigned zeal, receive's the daily alms of Ioseph's brethren, even in these
wretched times; I mean, nothing but opprobrious calumnies; yet the God of that
Zeal will burn up those reproaches with fire unquenchable. He that fight's
under the Colors of pure Religion and sanctity, shall be shot-free when he is
levelled at by any real injury: Enemies may spit the fire of wrath against
him; yet it shall prove as an ignis fatuus, to lead themselves to destruction.

To Ioseph's brethren (then) in this Age, I wish as much religion as their
neglected brother can teach them: and let the bond of Nature rectify their
minds, when the presumption of anger would swell into revenge.

And to Joseph himself I wish as much constancy in obedience, as honor in
observance; that his divine graces may promote him to happiness; and his
resolute perseverance in his duty to his GOD, may teach him both to know, and
shun every small and trifling mistake in the eyes of the world, because Religion
will write it, Wickedness; which is the subject of

The second general, the action refused, aggravated, First, by the name,
Wickedness.

The excellency of a curious Picture is the misty shaddowing of it: Our
Savior's Espouse (in the Canticles) is fair, though black: And the night is
best shaped to it is property, when it is muffled with it is wonted darkness.
But (alas) miserable man in this only become's wretched, being shaddowed with
corruptions; black with sin; and dark with wickedness.

Disobedience is the nature of an unregenerate person, which foile's that grace
that seek's to wound it; and the devil prove's destructive to the man, upon
whose ground they fight. Had God been pleased as well to forbid the nature of
Adam, as his person sinning, the strength of his authority would have
challenged the weakness of the others resistance; and (without contradiction)
have overcome by power, where it would not by entreaty. But (behold,) lest we
should grow too happy by obedience, our fore-father (through unadvisednesse)
hurried us unto misery by an ignorant knowledge. Yea, and (lest mischief
should want a mistress to work by) Eve was the Serpent's hand to offer up to
Adam the petition for disobedience. The Devil (as needing the wit of a woman
to plot our ruin) became humble, to work upon her pride; whereby the
temptation drew on our destruction. Feminae cum viris habitantes germinant
spinas; and arcana mentium acuto mucrone percutiunt; says Saint Ambrose: The
female sex growe's strong, only in allurements; and take's off the edge of
man's goodness, by a sharper edge of temptation. Yet (lest the observation
should prove too general, that the weaker sex are continually guilty of the
victory) Joseph step's in here to triumph over the intended conqueror. His
Mistress, wanting the power of command, dissolves her self into sick
entreaties. But the sweetness of her lovely complements, discover's the
ugliness of her foul intents. The grace of his Protector burne's in his
heart, and light's him to the knowledge of her intended mischief. He that
(before) seemed to be the object of her love, is (now) possessed with the
hatred of her lust; and in stead of consenting, construes it Wickedness.

When I read the variety of ways the Devil has projected to seduce us to
this Wickedness, I lose my self in the Labyrinth; and (struck dumb with
admiration) strange at the wretchedness of humane frailety. Let me crave your
audience and wonder at once, when I name the many filthy ways of purging this
Wickedness, by unclean physic. Eight several Monsters present themselves
unto you, under these titles:

VIZ. 1. Fornicatio. 2. Adulterium. 3. Stuprum. 4. Incestus. 5. Raptus. 6.
Mollities. 7. Sodomia. 8. Bestialitas.


1. Fornicatio.
The first of these receive's denomination from persons not matrimonially
engaged to a civil conversation.

2. The second is, -- Sed nescire melius. I would describe these deformed
Fiends in our Mother tongue: But I hold it fitter to draw Timanthes veil over
such a bed of snakes, lest I should teach by reproving. My desire is, that each
of these enormities might prove like the Herb Anonymos in Pliny, Plin. not.
hist.
Quae non inveniendo nomen invenit; which got a name by retaining the nature
thereof in obscurity; rather than the name of the vice should teach the crime.

Happy was Joseph, (then) who (knowing the malice of his corruption to project
a farther mischief, if once he had consented) neglect's the opportunity of
yielding to Adultery, (the second kind) and terme's that Wickedness, which his
Mistress would have judged happiness.

I doubt not (beloved) but that Ioseph's example (in my Text) shall work
powerfully in you against your provocations to uncleanness; and, where
destruction shall crave entertainment (being painted over with a seeming
pleasure) the GOD of Joseph shall tell you it is wickedness.

Who knows not the weakness, and wilfulness of them which Saint Paul terms
silly, and laden with diverse iniquities? Who skil's not the cunning of those
delicate imposters, in their wretched devices? As their arms embrace the
necks of their enchanted captives: so does vengeance their souls. They are
sad Ditties which their melodious voices warble out; though the notes be
harmonious: and that destruction which they bear about them, is as full of
deceit as allurement.

I fear (beloved) I shall not need to go farther than to your own guilty
consciences, for examples of men seduced to this impiety. Yet (rather than I
will condemn before I can accuse; or accuse you without a credible
information) I will search the Scriptures; where (I am sure) I shall find
Ruben entangled with Bilhah, his Fathers Concubine: Genesis 35.22. David with
Bathsheba: 2 Samuel 11. Herod with his brother Philip's wife: Mat. 14. And the
Corinthians, as Saint Paul had been informed, in his first Epistle to them, 5.
Chap. 1. verse.

Nec Sampsone fortior es, (as says Saint Ambrose) nec Davide sanctior; nec
Salomone sapientior: Sampson excelled thee in strength; David, in holiness;
and Solomon, in wisdom: yet they suffered by these enticing vanities. Let it
be your pious industry to be taught both by examples and precepts, that ye may
be crowned with the glory of celestial bliss.

Yet let not him expect the Diadem, which justifie's himself, being preserved
from the act of this wickedness only by compulsion: For, (as Saint Hierom
gravely advises us) Infida custos castitatis est necessitas; and ille vere
pudicus dicendus est, cui licuit peccare, sed noluit: Necessity is a faithless
preserver of Integrity; and he only is truly termed chaste, who may fall,
and will not. Thus does Joseph stand excused: for he leave's (in a manner) the
possibility of sinning, by a religious resistance.

To every Joseph here (then) let me prefer the example of him in my Text: If
superiors entice you, refuse them; if inferiors, disdain them; if equals,
shun them. Let not the complexion of the vice steal credit to the Lie; but
correct the fury of it by a pious reneaguing.

And, to Ioseph's Mistress, here, I must, in all humility, tender this advice to
her petulant disposition: Let her neither ensnare the righteous by her painted
hypocrisy; nor her Iezabels face entrap the ignorant: Let not her Siren songs
steal to the ears of any, on whom she desires to surfeit with incontinency:
But let her prayers rather crush those desires, and her devotion repel them.
Religion is the best remedy against such swelling tumors of impiety; and the
very remembrance that it is wickedness, nay, great wickedness, may control
the vice; if every one in particular determine with Joseph in my Text, How can
I do this great wickedness, etc. Which is

The second part of my second General, The action refused, aggravated,
Secondly, By the extension, Great.

Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati: Senec.
(says the divine Philosopher:) He that sell's himself to the custom of
disloyalty to his Creator, become's ignorant of his offense; and, instead of
correction, prove's unskilful in the knowledge of his sin. The gluttonous
satiety of our swelling Gulists, argue's their necessity of offending by
forgetfulness: and their own abundance barr's them from the just weighing of the
poverty of the distressed. The common drunkard cannot be taken with a due
thanksgiving for that superfluity which he corrupt's, from whence many
thirsty souls might suck a reasonable supply for necessity. How then can we
determine of any Religion to be found in him, who (inclined to this great
wickedness mentioned in my Text) borrow's his provocations from newfound
compositions?

We are all beleaguered by our homebred enemies: but especially by Saint
Paul's three squadrons; The lust of the flesh; The lust of the eye; and The
pride of life. He that loses but the least ground, upon necessity, to either
of these, suffer's in the retreat; and (unless he gathers strength by the
power of grace) can never recover what he has lost. Inter omnia certamina
Christianorum, sola dura sunt praelia castitatis; ubi quotidiana est pugna, and
rara victoria, Aug. l. de hom. c 2.
etc. as Saint Augustine speaks to the same purpose.

Ye may be pleased to observe both the entry and progress of this sin.
'Twas begun in Paradise inclusively, though not actually, by the fall of Adam.
It Is haereditary to all of Us the offspring of him: For, Libido quadam lege
naturae in scelus erumpit; as Hieron. has it. Hier. in Ep. ad Fieriam.
And (without repentance) it must be punished in Hell. The first enticing is
grounded either upon necessity; or pleasure; or sometimes upon both: At which
present (if GOD be not pleased to guide the heart) the sin is purchased,
though not yet acted. Then is the Devil, for the most part, rhetorical; and
perswade's by insinuating arguments for his own advantage. Trifles seldom
break friendship between the enticer and the allured; and what in it self is
impious, he perswade's to be a very slight (or rather no) sin. Thus, if the
heart consent, the Divel's proselyte is won: And (lest he should know what
destruction he plunge's himself into) he is kept in ignorance by that God of
this World, who blinde's the eyes of his understanding, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of CHRIST, which is the Image of GOD, should shine unto him: 2
Cor. 4.4.

But, o that ineffable, and most dreadful sequel which ensue's upon the first
consent! That which Joseph here accompt's a great wickedness, the forlorn
creature either not knowe's, or not value's. While he was tottering, he halted
(as it were) between two opinions; for the grace of his Protector withstood
the opposer: But so soon as the weak understanding had surrendered to the
will, the sin was entertained; yet that 'twas a sin, or a great
wickedness, was kept concealed. Facilis discensus averni, etc. It Is then an
easy matter to hasten to the pit of destruction, when the Devil drive's a man
by his hourly provocation.

But, alas miserable wretch! shall the fire of thy lust burn within thee, and
not the fire of hell burn for thee? Shall thou cast thy self into that deep
ditch, (as Solomon calls an adultresse: Prove. 23.27.) for thy pleasure; and
not expect a deeper ditch of destruction for thy pain? Shall the flashes of
this great wickedness dazzle thine eyes; and not the flashes of hell terrify
thy conscience? Earthly pleasures (me think's) in reason cannot, or (at least)
should not delight us; because they are of no continuance. Before they come, we
consume our selves with a longing desire, and expectation of them. When they
are present, if they continue long, they cloy us: if they fly suddenly, they
torment us. And, when they are past, we may hang down our heads with the
consideration of Saint Paul's Quaere, What profit had ye then in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of them is death.

Diseases (ye know) are the common rewards of the flesh in this life: and, for
the understanding, there shall not want the terrors, and gnawings of a guilty
conscience. Oh the hideous skreeches which the heart vent's in unmeasured sobs!
Oh the dismal affirights which the darkness of the night present's to the
fancy of an impious adulterer! Oh that ill-boading noise, and fearful
croaking which this creature heare's, yet knowe's not how, or where, or whence!
His conscience is sick of the worms: His understanding stifled in clouds of
mist: His will rushe's him headlong to the whirle-poole of destruction: and
(lest his body should be forgotten behind) that crawle's upon the very
diseases which it has gotten, and so stalke's to confusion.

Err not, then, my beloved brethren, (as St. James says) neither fall into
the tallons of your untutored lusts. Subject not your selves to the slavery of
temptation; but determine, with the Father, that Levissima cogitatio peccandi
fit peccatum; The smallest and finest-spun thought of sinning is an offense.
What, then, Joseph (in my Text) has termed great, call not thou small. What he
has determined to be styled wickedness, do not thou boast of with impudence;
but correct thy libidinous motions with the words of my Text. Levia sunt, sed
multa sunt, says S. Augustine: These sins (peradventure) may seem small to
thee, yet they are many; and will oppress thee as much by their number, as
others by their weight.

That this offense then (which belongs chiefly to our purpose) is not
wickedness, who dares affirm? Or that it is great, who can deny? Thomas
Aquinas is so sensible of the greatness of it, that he proposes a question,
touching a branch thereof, seeming very trivial in appearance; yet of greater
consequence than a common judgment will censure it: An in amplexibus, and
osculis consistat peccatum mortale? Tho. Aqu. in 2. secundae q. 154. art. 4.
Whether a mortal sin may not couch it self under our common greetings? And
he resolve's the question thus; Secundum suam rationem non nominant peccatum
mortale: Si autem fiant propter delectationem luxuriae, dicuntur libidinosa,
and sunt peccata mortalia. Those kind of complements (of themselves) suffer
not the name of sins: But if their aim be luxurious, their end is
pernicious. If then our very salutations, and common greetings (standing,
only, in impure vessels) may gather dregs, and so be turned into corruption:
What are those more impious acts which, swelling in our hearts, break forth
into wickedness? Might not Joseph, upon grounds sufficiently warranted,
aggravate the offense by the extension of it, and conclude it a great
wickedness?

Great indeed, in the first place on his own part if you consider him:

First, merely as a man; should he have thus trespassed with any of the
least, the worst, the poorest of women.

Secondly, as a man in honor, in the same house. Justly might his fidelity
have been stained with infamy, had his Captain's courtesy been rewarded with
such an injury.



Great, again, on her part too.

Tamar and Amnon) the future hatred wherewith she would have hated him, might
have been greater than the love wherewith she had loved him.

great in respect of her greatness also, by the Poet's censure; Omne animi
vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, etc. --
Enormities are built up higher, and grow more eminent, when their foundation
is the error of an eminent person. And Isiodore render's the reason of it:
Crescit enim delicti cumulus; and quod minoribus ignoscitur, majoribus
imputatur: For the fault (says he) increases: and the lofty Cedars are
viewed by all, when they are shaken; whilst the neglected shrubs are not
regarded.

Great, again, not in respect of Joseph the Favorite of his Master, only: or
his Mistress the wife of his Master: but also, in respect of the offense,
chiefly considered in it self, that it is a sin: Which is

The first part of my third General, The reason of the refusal; First, in
respect of the offense, Sin: How can I do this great wickedness, and sin,
etc.

This part of my Text command's me to extract something out of no-thing. For
my discourse must be of a privation; and that which only has gotten a name,
must teach us our proper nature. I am fallen here, upon sin; yet without
offense (I hope): and shall entreat thereof without trespassing on your
patience. My Text give's me not authority to be tedious in the generality, lest
I should neglect this which it does chiefly particularize. Curious
Schoole-distinctions I could, but will not trouble you with; lest the time
deny me your attention, and the niceness your acceptance. Let it suffice that
I walk in the vulgar tract, and divide sin only into original and actual.
Adam; and the evil which followed it: which is, as well the defect of
original good in the soul, and body; as the succession of evil instead of
that original good, in both.

Actual, is either internal, or external: spiritual, or carnal: of
omission, or commission: infirmity, or presumption, etc. as your daily Sermons
instruct you.

To our purpose, then, I must confine my self to the intention of my Theme.
Where I find, that if Joseph had sinned according to his temptation, it might
have been a great actual sin, committed (perhaps) with presumption; and
severely to be punished by the rod of Heaven. It was (therefore) the mercy of
our jealous God, to vouchsafe him assistance in his greatest temptations. Thus,
a man being in honor, was of understanding, that he might not be compared to
the beasts that perish.

Had he himself been the tempter, and she denied, his sin had been
entertained by the first extravagancie of his words: Ephesians. 5.4.

Had he wooed, and she consented; the mischief had doubled it self by the
act.

Had he secretly desired her, and not discovered the fire; yet Athanasius would
censure him in his Qui formam concupiscit, quamvis sine fascinore, peccatum
sine test commisit. He that desire's the beauty, yet not foulely enjoying it;
has committed a sin, though without a witness. Or (if you please) the
Scripture shall better English it in that Whosoever looks upon a woman to
lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his heart.

Here (peradventure) I have only, as yet, awakened the conscience of Ioseph's
Mistress; whilst the rest applaud themselves in their seeming integrity. But
(alas beloved) I must summon you all to the Court of Conscience; and (it may
be) find them guilty, which are most confident in their justification. For I
must distinguish of a twofold adultery, both Carnal and Spiritual. The
former ye have heard me hitherto treat of. The latter is twofold:

Metaphorical; which is any sin, of what nature and condition soever:
because our souls are espoused to Christ; which the Scripture terms
spiritual whoredom.

adultery, by way of sacrilege, as Thomas Aquinas will have it.

Not to enter into a strict examination of your hearts, or common application,
which your guiltiness (I suppose) has already prevented me of; Let me keep
to the purpose of this word as it is in my Text.

Ye have hitherto seen the diversity of sin; and the monstrous birth of this
we treat of. Let Isiodor now have leave to present you with the ladder, by
which this impious vice climbs up to heaven to call for vengeance. Cogitatio
prava (says he) delectationem parit; delectatio consensionem; consensio
actionem; actio consuetudinem; consuetudo necessitatem; and necessitas mortem.
Evil thoughts beget delight; delight a consent; consent the act; the act
custom; custom necessity; and necessity death. Saint James make's but three
rounds to this Ladder: Lust, when it conceives, brings forth sin; and
sin, when it is finished brings forth death. But he that has a desire to
walk more leasurely to his destruction, and (in spite of the Spirit of grace)
will follow his own unbridled lusts, may travel in those eight bypath of
iniquity mentioned formerly; and so build up the mighty Babel of his own
confusion.

But siste paulum viator, as Minutius Felix speaks in another kind. Stay thou
that walk in those uncouth paths, while I question thee with S. Bernard,
Quare peccas, etc. Why do thou sin thus, O thou unjust creature? Why do
thou offend, O thou miserable wretch? The all-seeing providence espie's out all
thy ways; and the darkest Cells, and fowlest cavernes of thy sooty heart lie
open, and manifest to his piercing eyes. Plead not the unchaste allurements of
lascivious women which tempt thee, for an excuse: For our age returne's it
self guilty of such hellish inventions; such Philtra, and Diasatyrions; such
powders, and potions to cherish this abortive brat of uncleanness, that they
seem even to justify the several allurements of the weaker sex by more
horrid, and divellish enchantments. Pascitur libido conviviis, (says Saint
Ambrose) nutritur deliciis; vino accenditur, and ebrietate inflammatur. This is
not to learn of S. Paul, to beat down our bodies, and keep them in
subjection: Nor of Joseph in my Text; to contend with the temptation, because
to consent, is to sin.

Again; he that seeke's to excuse himself by the superfluous humors of a
pampered body, should rather (with Lazarus) live by the crummes, than fare so
deliciously with gluttonous Dives.

Plutarch report's of Antiochus King of Asia, that when he was invited to
perform a visit to the fair Panthea by the various reports of her admired
beauty, refused to go; replying, Si modo illam convenero quum per otium vacat,
fortasse illa mihi persuasura est, ut, neglectis regni negotiis, illam
conveniam quum etiam non vacat. If (says he) I should repair unto her now my
leisure serve's me, perhaps she will so take me by her alluring form, that
when I should follow the affairs of my Kingdom, I should spend my time with
her when I have no leisure.

I read that Dionisius dis-inherited his son, which was heir to his
Kingdom, for defiling himself with another man's wife.

The Egyptians punished the adulterer with a thousand stripes, and the
adulteress with the loss of her nose. A punishment continued since to diverse
(not by Egyptian edict, to the women only; but by the Indian disease) even
many times, to both the delinquents.

If these examples, which are fetched from profane Authors, want the power and
efficacy of persuading you to shun this sin in my Text: let then the Word of
God (which is sharper than any two-edged Sword) divide between the joints, and
the marrow of him that run's on still in this wickedness.

Who so commits adultery with a woman, (says Solomon) lacks
understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul, Proverbs 6.32.

By the Leviticall Law, Levit. 20.10.
the adulterer and adulteress were both put to death.

Zimri and Cozbi were both thrust through by Phinehas, even in the tent, Number.
25.8.

Yea, and twenty and five thousand of the Benjamites were slain in battle by
the Israelites, Judge. 20.46.

What shall I say then? Think ye (my beloved) that either Zimri and Cozbi; or
those twenty and five thousand of the Benjamites were greater adulterers than
any of our age? I tell ye nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. The Canon of the Law runne's Paritas dilicti paritatem poenae requirit.
Those must equally share in their punishments, which have been equally guilty
of an offense. If those, before mentioned, suffered for their lusts in so high
a degree; 'twere but justice in God to punish us in the like nature as (or
rather worse than) them.

Go then thou guilty conscience; sin no more, lest a worse punishment than
these happen unto thee. As thou have yielded the members servants unto
uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity: even so now yield thy members
servants to righteousness unto holiness, and thy end shall be everlasting
peace. Learn of good Joseph here, to shun this spiritual Adder which
sting's thy soul, and then hisse's at thee for thy folly. Let God be the
object of all our desires; the moderator of our thoughts; and the controller of
our actions; so, whatsoever rebellious thought steale's into our fancies, he
will correct it, by discovering it unto us to be sin against his sacred
Majesty. In sole etiam levissimi pulvusculi cernuntur, says S. Chrysostom.
When the Sun shine's into a Chamber through any crevice, the smallest atoms
are discerned by it: So when the grace of the Sun of glory shine's into our
hearts we shall easily discover the smallest allurements to this impurity; and
suddenly then may we seek for help, when we find it to be a sin against
God; which is

The last part of my last general; The reason of Ioseph's refusal in respect,
Secondly, of the object, or party offended, God. How can I do, etc?

To question a Deity is to wound it: nay, to suspect it, only, is to deny it.
The hearts of men are the Book of God: wherein his Majesty is written (for the
most part) in so small a character, that it dazel's the eyes of their
understandings which attempt to pry into it. He that sit's in the high, and
holy places has commanded all to the knowledge, and service of himself.
Ignorance, therefore, of his sacred Majesty (although it may seem to plead an
excuse in some, yet it) can be at the most but a tanto, not a toto, as the
Schoolmen speak. For he has not left himself without witness, in that he
does good, and gives us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons; filling our
hearts with food and gladness, Acts. 14.17. Whatsoever, therefore, is endued
with a reasonable soul, cannot choose but determine of a supernatural power.
Caelum ipsum vide quam late tenditur, quam rapide volvitur, etc. as Minucius
Felix has it: and the Psalmist shall be the interpreter: The heavens declare
the glory of God; and the Firmament shows his handi-worke.

I will not labor your ears with the many and vulgar arguments to prove a
God, as if I were to catechize a congregation of Infidels. Let me only present
you with one of the same Author, which (I hope) shall command your attention,
and approbation. Let us consider our selves as we are men; and view the variety
of faces (which we daily behold) with a reasonable eye; and observe how we are
lost in the admiration of so much dissimilitude in our likenesses. Min. Felix.
Similes universi videmur; and inter se singuli dissimiles invenimur: We seem
all (among our selves) like one the other; and yet are we found (in some thing
or other) each unlike the other. Which demonstrate's unto us the wonderful
work of a superior Power to be magnified in this variety.

The Heathens, in ancient times, were confirmed in the Quod sit, in the
positive determination of a divine Commander: although they erred in the Quid
sit, as well as the Quis sit; what he he was, as who he was. And I can
justify, by mine own experience, that the Salvages in the Western Indiaes
(at this present) have a general tradition received from their Ancestors,
which teache's them as far in Divinity, as some of the former Heathen had
learned; even that there is a great Controller above, who does never injure
them: yet they sacrifice to the Devil, because they feel his frequent
correction.

I tax not our times for a worse (than salvage) ignorance: although (with
sorrow I speak it) I fear here are some, even among us, Qui non tam Dei
nomen, quam ipsum Deum ignorant: which are not ignorant of the name, but the
attributes of God. Let it not then be accounted a digression, if I give the
same Minucius leave to instruct such ignorant Christians in the properties of
their unknown GOD. Vniversa quaecunque sunt (says he) verbo jubet, ratione
dispensat, virtute consummat, etc. It Is he which commands all things which
are, by his Word; order's them by his reason; and perfect's them by his virtue.
Hic nec videri potest; visu clarior est: nec comprehendi; tactu purior est: nec
aestimari; sensibus major est; Infinitus, immensus; and soli sibi tantus,
quantus est, notus. He is such a GOD as cannot be seen, (to convict the
worshippers of beasts, and the like) because he is cleerer than our sight: Nor
can he be comprehended, (to confute our Labans with their stolen gods) because
he is too pure to be touched: Nor can he be sufficiently valued, (to convince
our Libertines, which serve him after their common, trivial, and irreligious
manner) because he is greater than our senses can determine him to be. He is
infinite, immense: yea, what he truly is, is only truly known to himself.
Sic eum digne aestimamus, dum inaestimabilem dicimus: So that we esteem him
most, when we conclude him inestimable.

But, this way to discourse of GOD, is not directly commanded by my Text. We
are here to look upon him with the eyes of our minds more directly, either as
a sin-revenging GOD; and so learn to avoid uncleanness, because it is a sin
against GOD, who will wound the heads of his enemies, and the hairie scalpe of
such a one as goes on still in his wickedness: Or else, as an indulgent
Father: and so learn to shun all appearance of this evil, because it is a
sin against GOD, who is so loving to us; and requires no requital at all,
but our reciprocal love (in our obedience) to him.

Should not Joseph, then, have been justly questioned, if (in this conflict)
his Mistresse's temptation had over swayed his religion, to tax him with
ignorance, or forgetfulness of the Lord his Maker? If neither a filial, nor a
servile fear of this GOD, could have reigned his unbridled appetite? To the
prevention whereof (ye see) it is the only spell which he charme's the fiery
devil, in his Mistress, with, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
AGAINST GOD?

Let not us then (beloved) who know the GOD of Joseph by his attributes; yea,
and are trained up in the ways of his service, subject our selves to the
bondage of our corruptions. Let not the affectation of, nor the smallest
consent to, the least sin, rob us of our service to the greatest GOD; but let
us reason with our temptations in the words of my Text.

Paula the Matron is commended by S. Hierom, that, Ita levia deflevit peccata,
ut grandissimorum crederes ream: She did so bewail her smallest sins, that
she seemed (by her zealous repentance) to be guilty of the greatest.

Servants we are to GOD: Let us therefore (as Saint Paul commands) be
obedient to our Master in all things. Sons we are of GOD: let us tender,
therefore, our duties to him, as he himself require's, and enable's us to
perform it; lest he question us in his own words; If I be a Father, where is
mine honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? says the Lord.

Rege, ergo, tuos adfectus; dirige actus; corrige gressus: (as says
Bonaventure:) Subdue, then, thine affections; direct thy actions; and correct
thy steps, that thou may not tread out of this path which Joseph has led
thee in; checking thine opposer upon all assaults, with, How can I do this
great wickedness, and sin against GOD?

Hitherto have I endeavored to handle each particular part of my Text,
severally. Your attention has now given me assurance of your acceptance: and
(to gratify you) I must crave your patience a second time. I am engaged to
look back upon my Text, once more, before I can leave it: and in the first
part, [which is, The Author, Ioseph] I must beseech you to consider, His place
of honor, from a low estate: His place of justice, guided by discretion: And
his place of providence, to store for a future necessity. Here is true honor,
begot by wisdom; borne by observance; and maintained by honesty.

Again; Here Is the some of envy from his brethren, wiped clean off by the
love of his GOD.

Moreover; Here Is poverty, and bondage, (without repining) climbed up into
riches and freedom (yet without pride, or ambition.)

Besides; Here Is patience in adversity; and faithfulness in servilitie. Here
is humility in honor; and piety in plenty.

If his example win us not in any of these; we will proceed to the second
part, [The action refused.] Here (I am certain) none can want admonition.

None of the eight sorts of uncleanness write our Joseph guilty. He denie's,
though his Mistress intreat's. Here Is GOD, and the Devil contending for a
soul. The woman (who first tempted man) exercise's her authority again, in
Potipher's wife: but GOD (who is greater) command's by his supremacy. Here Is
the wickedness of a woman, and the goodness of a man, positively: And again,
here is the goodness of a woman, (as some will have it) and the wickedness of
a man, inclusively. Here Virtue and vice are at contention. Here Is the
sulfureous fire of Hell burning in lust; and the power of Heaven quenching the
flame. Here Is a conflict between Chastity, and Adultery; but Religion
become's the Judge. Here Is a controversy in Law, but Piety is the Vmpire. And
(lastly) here is fire and water meeting together in a strong contention: but the
Spirit of God breathes upon the water.

See here how opposition adde's glory to the triumpher. Had not Joseph been
tempted, he had not been proved: But (being tempted) had he consented, he had
not been accepted. How knew he, but that it might be policy in his Mistress,
to allure him to wickedness not intended to be acted, that she might depose
him from honor, whom perhaps she hated?

To prevent an injury (therefore) in his repute, he disdained the power of his
Mistresse's temptation. 'Twas enough that he knew her a woman, and therein her
infirmities: although he remembered she was his Mistress, and therefore
instruct's her.

A virtuous Woman is like the Jewel in the field, mentioned in the Gospel: Or
as the Sun in the Heavens, dazeling the eyes of the weak spectators: and
giving luster to the rest of her sex, the smallest Stars. Yea, a Woman in
honor (invested with the Ermins of Religion) is all white, and goodness of
her self: though not without some black spots of malice and corruption. But
(on the other side) a Woman in honor, supported by power, leaning upon
command, and yet bending double with vice; is witty in her revenge; dangerous
in her malice; contemning the virtuous; and (in a furious rapture) plotting for
mischief on those who sell not their very souls to content her humor. Do
but observe the wife of Potipher, and ye may find it her truest character.

But (on the other party) Religion is predominant, though contemned: for great
wickedness, ready to be performed by great persons, (if it had not been
controuled by piety) would have broke out into destruction. Had she only loved
him, it had been her courtesy. Had she loved his Religion only, it had been
her goodness. Had she loved only his integrity, it had been her discretion.
Had she loved only his humility, it had bin her honor. But in her love (which
was but the counterfeit of her lust) she discovered her wilful impurity. Origo
quidem amoris honesta est; sed magnitudo deformis; says Hierom. The sparks of
love are honest; but the flames are dangerous. If any here have been scorched
with them, let the tears of contrition quench the fire; and the GOD of that
contrition accept the repentance.

Hitherto I have only touched upon that Adultery which is carnal, mentioned
formerly. I must now look back upon that which is spiritual also. S. Cyprian
speaking of some Virgins that were Votaries, saye's they were adulterae
priusquam nuptae; adulteresses before they were wedded to that austere life,
although they were Virgins: and he explaines himself presently after, saying;
Not to any husband, but to CHRIST. O that we could once be free from this
whoredom; and become like the Kings Daughter in the Psalms, All glorious
within! O that our souls were clad in white robes of innocence; and not in
the menstruous rags of our natural corruptions! O that a seared conscience
might not persuade us to a drowsy security in a seeming honesty, when these
Tabernacles of flesh cannot be truly freed from impiety.

Whatsoever sin we commit, is in it self a great wickedness; and the
Apostle tell's us, that the wages thereof is death. Our mortality, then,
teaches us the punishment of our disobedience, much more therefore ought our
lives to instruct us in repentance. Our sins are committed against a mighty
Jehovah, the LORD strong and mighty; and yet our GOD. Which put's me in mind of
my third and last part.

Quarrels among men may be taken up by the amity of friends: But sins against
God, only by enmity with our selves. If then, Joseph refused to admit of a
conspiracy against reason, and put it off divinely, lest he should sin
against GOD: How much more ought we, whose slacknesse in righteousness
condemne's us to be less religious. The least here has not Ioseph's command;
nor the greatest (I fear) his goodness: Let all contend for his honesty. What
vice soever beg's for entertainment, will be best answered in the words of my
Text; if each particular person reply, How can I do this great wickedness,
and sin against God? To which God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all
praise, honor, etc.

FINIS.

