AIRS: BY Alfonso Ferrabosco.

LONDON: Printed by T. SNODHAM, for JOHN BROWN, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstones Churchyard in Fleetstreet.

1609.



TO THE MOST EQVALL TO HIS BIRTH, AND ABOVE all Titles, but his own Virtue:
Heroique Prince Henry.
Excellent Prince:
THat which was wont to accompany all Sacrifices, is now become a Sacrifice,
MVSIQVE: And to a Composition so full of Harmony as yours, what could be a
fitter Offering? The rather, since they are the Offerers first fruits, and that
he gives them with pure hands. J could, now, with that solemn industry of many
in Epistles, enforce all that has been said in praise of the Faculty, and
make that commend the work, but J desire more, the work should commend the
Faculty: And therefore suffer these few Airs to owe their Grace rather to your
Highness judgment, then any others testimony. J am not made of much speech.
Only J know them worthy of my Name: And, therein, J took pains to make them
worthy of Yours.

Your Highness most humble Servant Alfonso Ferrabosco.

TO MY EXCELLENT FRIEND ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.
TO urge, my loved Alfonso, that bold fame
Of building Towns, and making wild Beasts tame,
Which Music had; or speak her known effects,
That she remoueth cares, sadness eiects,
Declineth anger, persuades clemency,
Does sweeten mirth, and heighten piety,
And is to'a body, often, ill inclinde
No less a sovereign cure, then to the mind;
To'alledge, that greatest men were not ashamed
Of old, even by her practice, to be famed;
To say, indeed, she were the Soul of Heaven,
That the eight Sphere, no less then Planets seven
Moved, by her order; And the ninth, more high,
Including all, were thence called Harmony:
I, yet, had vtter'd nothing, on thy part,
When these were but the praises of the Art.
But when I have said, The proofs of all these be
Shed in thy Songs; It Is true: But short of thee.
Ben: Ionson.

TO THE WORTHY AVTHOR.
MVsicks master, and the offspring
Of rich Musicks Father,
Old Alfonso's Image living,
These fair flowers you gather
Scatter through the British soil;
Give thy fame free wing,
And gain the merit of thy toil:
We whose loves affect to praise thee,
Beyond thine own deserts, can never raise thee.
By T. Campion, Doctor in Physic.

AMICISS: ET PRAESTANTISSIMO IN RE MVSICA, ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.
PErcellis, oro, mitte animam meam
O diue Siren, vinculaque auribus
Iniecta soluas, nec potenti
Perpetuo moriar camaena.
Ardore rapta men's furit entheo,
Scanditque Lunam, and circuit aethera,
Ter millies coelo reposta,
Et toties relocata terris.
O Musicae artis quanta potentia,
Ferra-bosco
Non in ferarum solavagum nemus,
Sed in virorum plus cateruas
Participes melioris aurae!
Alsonse, dux and rex Lyrici gregis;
Pulsare dignus coelicolum lyram,
Excellis omnes sic canendo
Semper vt ipse sies canendus.
N. Tomkins.

I.
^ LIke Hermit poor, in place obscure,
I mean to spend my days of endless doubt,
To wail such woes as time cannot recure,
Where none but Love shall find me out,
And at my gates despair shall, despair shall linger still,
To let in death whe^loue and fortune, when Love and Fortune will.
II.
^ COme home my troubled thoughts, stay and retire,
Call home your erring fellows make a stand,
Follow not still the colors of desire,
False are her wishes cruel her command,
Come then obey this summons come away, come away,
For here vain hopes, for here vain hopes must serve you for your pay.
III
^ COme away, come away, we grow ielous of your stay,
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear,
Sirens of the land then they, to doubt the Sirens of the Sea.
IIII.
^ Dear when to thee my sad complaint I make,
And show how often Love does my death renew,
And how afresh I suffer for thy sake,
I ever fear this answer to ensue,
Who would bewail the Bird that scapes the snare,
And ever caught and never can beware?
But my reply is just, that if the eye
That sees the danger, yet obayes the heart
That leads the sense, for his delight to dye,
In that this pray, preferres the better part
The gayner should have mercy to forgive,
If Beauty be a Tyrant who can live?
V.
^ Feign I would but O I dare not,
Speak my thoughts at full to praise her,
Speak the best cries Love, and spare not,
Thy speech can no higher raise her,
Thy speech then thy thoughts are lower,
Yet thy thoughts does not half know her.
VI.
^ COme my Celia, let us prove, while we may the sweets of love,
Time will not be ours for ever, he at length our good will sever,
Spend not then his gifts in vain,
Suns that set may rise again,
But if we once loose this light, it is with us perpetual night,
Why should we defer our joys, fame and rumor are but toys?
Cannot we delude the eyes of a few poor household spies,
Or his easier ears beguile, Thus removed by our wile
^ It Is no sin loves fruits to steal,
But the sweet theft to reveal,
To be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been to be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been.
VII.
^ SO, so, leave off, this last lamenting kiss,
which sucks two souls and vapors both away,
Turn thou ghost that way, And let me turn this,
and let our selves be-night our happy day,
we ask none leave to love, nor will we owe any so cheap a death as saying
go.
We ask none leave to love, nor will we owe any so cheap a death as saying go.
Go, go, and if that word have not quite killed thee,
Ease me with death by bidding me go to:
O, if it have let my word work on me,
And a just office on a murderer do.
Except it be too late to kill me so,
Being double dead, going and bidding go.
VIII.
^ YOung and simple though I am, I have heard of Cupids name,
Guess I can what thing it is, Men desire when they do kiss,
Smoke can never burn they say, But the flames, But the flames that follow
may.
2 I am not so foul or fair, to be proud or to despair,
Yet my lips have often observed, men that kiss them press them hard,
As glad lovers use to do, when their new met loves they woo.
3 Faith it is but a foolish mind, yet me thinks a heat I find,
Like thirst longing that does bide ever one my weaker side,
Where they say my heart does move, Venus grant it be not Love.
4 If it be alas what then, were not Women made for Men?
As good it is a thing were past, that must needs be done at last,
Roses that are ouer-blowne, grow less sweet then fall alone.
5 Yet nor Churl, nor silken Gull, shall my maiden blossom pull,
Who shall not I soon can tell, who shall would I could as well,
This I know who ere he be, love he must or flatter me.
IX.
^ Drown not with tears my dearest Love,
Those eyes which my affections move,
Do not with weeping those lights blind,
Which me in thy subjection bind,
Time that has made us two of one,
And forced thee now to live alone,
Will once again us reunite,
To show how she can Fortune spite,
Then will we our time redeem,
And hold our hours in more esteem,
Turning all our sweetest nights,
Into millions of delights,
And strive with ^ many thousand kisses,
To multiply, to multiply exchange of blisses. exchange of blisses.
X.
^ I Am a lover yet was never loved; well have I loved and will though hated
ever,
Troubles I pass yet never any moved, sighs have I given and yet she heard me
never,
I would complain, and she would never hear me, and fly from love, but it is
ever near me,
Oblivion only blameless does beset me, for that remembers never to forget
me.
XI.
^ WHy stays the bridegroom to in -- uade her, that would be a matron made,
Good night whilst yet we may, good night to you a virgin say,
To morrow rise, the same your mother is, and use a nobler name,
Speed well in hymen's war, that what you are, by your perfections we and all
may see.
First part. XII.
^ SIng we then heroyque grace,
So with lovely light adorning, that fair heaven of his face,
As the Star that leads the morning, body brave for part and whole,
purest seat of purer soul,
Where reposed lodge by nature,
Princely strength and comely stature.
Second part. XIII.
^ SIng the riches of his skill;
Long by studious toil provided,
Wit that never guides ill,
Will that never ill is guided,
Judgment that can best discern,
Memory that needs not learn,
Courage where such thoughts assemble,
Justly may his haters tremble.
Third part. XIIII
^ SIng the nobles of his race,
Sing his power, his wealth, his glory,
Breaking all the bounds of place,
endless ages, agelesse storry,
Peace that makes one of two,
more then ever war could do,
Terror chased, terror chased, Justice fixed,
Mercy, mercy still with Justice mixed.
XV.
^ WIth what new thoughts should I now entertain my mind,
if I my sadness should forgo,
What pleasing hopes have I not proved, I not proved vain,
or what false show of joy do I not know?
O partial love there is no power in thee,
to make her love or else to set me free,
to make her love or else to set me free.
XVI.
^ FLy from the world O fly thou poor distressed,
where thy diseased soul infects thy soul,
And where thy thoughts do multiply unrest,
Tiring with wishes what they straight control,
O world, O world betrayer of the mind,
O thoughts, O thoughts that guide us being blind.
O thoughts that guide us being blind, that guide us being blind.
2 Come therefore care, conduct me to my end,
And steer this shipwrackt carcass to the grave:
My sighs a strange and steadfast wind shall lend,
Tears wet the sails, Repentance from rocks save.
Hail death, hail death, the land I do discry,
Strike sail, go soul, rest follows them that dye.
XVII.
^ SHall I seek to ease my grief?
No my sight is lost with eying;
Shall I speak and beg relief?
No my voice is hoarse with crying,
What remains but only dying?
What remaynes but only dying?
2 Love and I of late did part,
But the Boy my peace envying,
Like a Parthian threw his dart,
Backward and did wound me flying.
What remains but only dying?
3 She whom then I looked one,
My remembrance beautifying
Stays with me, though I am gone,
Gone, and at her mercy lying.
What remaynes, but only dying?
4 Thus my vital breath does wast,
And my blood with sorrow drying,
Sighs and tears make life to last,
For a while his place supplying.
What remaynes but only dying?
First part. XVIII.
^ IF all these Cupids now were blind, as is their wanton brother,
Or play should put it in their minds, to shoot at one another,
What pretty battle they would make if they their objects should mistake,
and each one wound, and each one wound his mother.
Second part. XIX.
^ IT was no policy of court, although the place be charmed,
To let in earnest or in sport, so many loves in armed,
For say the dames should with their eyes upon the hearts here mean surprise,
Were not the men, were not the men, were not the men like harmed.
Third part. XX.
^ YEs were the loves or false or straying, or beauty not their beauty waying,
But here no such deceit is mixed, their flames are pure their eyes are fixed,
They do not war, they do not war, with diffrent darts, but strike a
music of like hearts,
they do not war with diffrent darts, but strike a music of like hearts.
XXI.
^ SO beauty on the waters stood, when Love had seuer'd earth from flood,
So when he parted air from fire, he did with concord all inspire,
And then a motion he them taught, that elder then himself was thought,
which thought was yet the child of earth, for love is elder then his birth.
XXII.
^ HAd those that dwell in error foul
and hold that women have no soul,
But seen those move, they would have then said,
women were the souls of men, so they do move each heart and eye,
with the worlds soul their harmony.
XXIII.
^ IF all the ages of the earth
were crowned but in this famous birth, but in this famous birth,
and when that they would boast their store
of worthy Queens, of worthy Queens they knew no more,
how happier is that age can give,
a Queen in whom they all do live?
XXIIII.
^ Unconstant love why should I make my moan,
or send sad sighs unto thy careless ear?
Since thy affection and thy faith is gone,
and all those virtues which I once held dear,
Farewell, farewell, most false of all to me,
that with affection dearly, dearly loved thee.
XXV.
^ O Eyes, O mortal stars, the authors of my harms,
that in slumbring wage wars, to kill me with sweet charms,
If closed you annoy me, being open you would destroy me.
If closed you annoy me, being open you would destroy me.
If closed you annoy me, being open you would destroy me.
If closed you annoy me, being open you would destroy me.
A Dialogue between a Shepherd and a Nymph. XXVI.
^ Fair cruel Nymph why thus in grief and anguish,
Make thou him thatadores thee pine and languish?
O but these fancies from thy beauty flow,
O how I joy, O how I joy in thee my happy choice,
As thou in me, as thou in me, so I in thee rejoice:
Then let us still together live and love,
and sing the joys, the joys,
and sing the joys that happy lovers prove.
Dialogue Nymph. XXVI.
^ WHy Shepherd do thou me condemn as cruel,
Since thine own fancies are thy passions fuel?
Then shall relief to thee from bounty grow,
O how I Joy, O how I Joy in this my happy choice,
As thou in me, As thou in me, so I in thee rejoice,
Then let us still together live and love,
And sing the joys, and sing the joys that happy lovers prove.
A Dialogue. XXVII.
^ WHat shall I wish what shall I fly?
False I defy, Such ever speak, Such never break,
Flattery yields pleasure, Only truth, only truth yields weight,
Happy are they that never knew deceit.
Happy are they that never knew deceit. never knew deceit.
A Dialogue. XXVII.
^ TRue Love I seek, Words have their truth,
Deeds have their faith, Flattery yields pleasure:
Happy are they that never knew deceit.
happy are they, happy are they that never knew deceit.
A Dialogue between a Shepherd and a Nymph. XXVIII.
^ TEll me O Love, when shall it be that thy fair eyes shall shine on me?
Whom nothing now reuiueth,
Alas sweet Nymph, I cannot choose since thou estranged lives from me,
Alas, what joy is in such love that ever lives apart?
O, let me die, yet stay sweet Love,
Dialogue Nymph. XXVIII.
^ I Pray thee Shepherd, I pray thee shepherd leave thy fears,
Drown not thy heart and eyes with tears,
Such sighs my sense depriueth, O do not me for that accuse,
My Love, my life does live in thee,
Alas, what joy is in such love, and never other comforts prove,
but cares that kill the heart?
And so will I, yet stay sweet Love and sing this song with me,
Time brings to pass what love thinks could not be.
Time brings to pass what love thinks could not be.
and sing this song with me,
time bring to pass, what love thinks could not be.
time brings to pass, what love thinks could not be.
FINIS.
A Table of all the Songs contained in this Book.
I. Like Hermit poor. II. Come home my troubled thoughts. III. Come away.
IIII. Dear, when to thee. V. Feign I would. VI. Come my Celia. VII. So, so,
leave off. VIII. Young and simple though I am. IX. Drown not with tears. X. I
am a Lover. XI. Why stays the Bridegroom. XII. Sing we then heroyque grace.
1. Part. XIII. Sing the riches of his skill. 2. Part. XIIII. Sing the Nobles of
his race. 3. Part. XV. With what now thoughts. XVI. Fly from the world. XVII.
Shall I seek to ease my grief? XVIII. If all these Cupids now were blind. 1.
Part. XIX. It was no policy of Court. 2. Part. XX. Yes were the loves. 3.
Part. XXI. So beauty on the waters stood. XXII. Had those that dwell. XXIII.
If all the ages of the earth. XXIIII. Unconstant Love. XXV. O eyes* O mortal
stars. XXVI. Fair cruel Nymph. Dialogue. XXVII. What shall I wish.
Dialogue. XXVIII. Tell me O Love. Dialogue.


