THE ARTS OF LOGIKE AND Rethorike, plainly set forth in the English tongue,
easy to be learned and practiced: together with examples for the practice of
the same for Method, in the government of the family, prescribed in the word
of God: And for the whole in the resolution or opening of certain parts of
Scripture, according to the same.

IN THE SWEAT OF THY FACE, SHALL THOU EAT THE BRIAD. Genesis 3. 19.


1584

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough these Treatises follovvinge, were begun and ended at the request
and for the benefit of some few which were desirous of them, for whose cause
they are also now come under the printe: though peradventure not done (as they
say in printe) yet because it is not unlikely, but by these means they will
come into the hands of many, who will enquire upon what grounds I have
adventured this thing, which to some will seem strange and new, yea
unprofitable and inexpedient, that they are made common to all which are wont
to sit in the Doctors chair: to other also (which will neither greatly mislike
the turning of them into our tongue, nor yet the following of the better sort
in that art, they will carry notwithstanding the same taste, because they
will seem newer then the newest:) I thought it necessary to write these few
following, if not to satisfy them, yet at the least to incline them to a more
moderate judgment concerning my labors, then otherwise, the former
conjectures will suffer them to come unto. There is in deed a third sort,
which will look for a defense of these arts in general, being by them
accused as vain and unprofitable. But because their reasonings are such as are
to be answered by keeping them in the dark and from the noise of sound
oppositions, which will more hurt them and trouble the world, then any
defense of good answer, profit others. I will follow the example of many
wise, nay the precept of Solomon, to confute them with silence. To come
therefore unto the first sort, there can be nothing more fit to satisfy
them, then to show that that which they do but florishe against us, will
deadly wound their cause. How can they call that new, the which has
testimonies of the wisestes and auncientest of both sorts. For to omit the
examples of these days, which have already brought all arts into French,
Dutch, and almost into English, and that by the hand of the most cu^ningest
workmen: What will they answer unto the knowledge and learning of the
Egiptians, wherein Moses excelled, before the Greek or Roman tounges became
general? Were not their writings, think they, in their own tongue? yea
after that, were not Salomons treatises and discourses (whether written or
unwritten) both of natural things, and of all that is done under the Sun, and
therefore of these things) were they not done in the most ancient and worthy
tongue of the Hebrews? Nay even their chief masters now, Plato and Aristotle,
Tullie, and Quintilian, wrote they not in their own tounges, and that even
when these arts were more ripe in the tongues of others? So that Tullie is
feign (as he him self somewhere confesses) to borrowe from the Grecians, and
of others, it is manifest they did it from the Egiptians and Hebrews.

Moreover, the end why these arts have bin kept in these tounges, does not
only propte, but also hold up this our practice, seeing it was done because
these tounges being most general by reason of the spread that the Grecian and
Roman Empire had made of them, they were the fittest to be made the
storehouse of the world for these commodities. A storehouse I say, not to
keep them for the Romans and Grecians alone, or for the expert in these
tounges their free denizons: but at the least that by their traffike, it might
with their gay ne of the praise and glory, become common to every particular
nation, that every one who had need might buie of the same. Wherefore seeing
the end was with their gain the commodity of all, let them not still keep in
this corner to make it rare and excessiuely dear, least the people curse them:
especially now that the famine of provision to discern of so many strifes
and subtelties, to understand and judge of so many Treatises as are written
both to hurt and benefit the world, both in regard of matters civil and
divine, humane and spiritual, does daily cry and call for it. Let them take
heed also of open injustice, for seeing the common use and practice of all men
in general, both in reasoning to the purpose, and in speaking with some grace
and elegancie, has sown the seed of these arts, why should not all reap
where all have sown? at least, why should not some of every sort gleane,
though by their cunning they had purchased these arts, as corn fields proper
to them selves? Unless the more excellent and necessary their commodities be
(as covetous men) they will be the more unmerciful and nigardlie. Neither let
them object against us: A sword in a fools hand: for besides that weapons are
not restrained and tied only to masters of fence, no^ singing to musitions
only: the simple playnes of these treatises, which draw men to no curiouse or
doubtful discourses, but only put them in mind of that which they may easily
seek and know in most familiar examples with great fruit and delight, shall
sufficiently answer for them selves in this behalf: praying all men to use
them with some study as their callings may suffer, to strengthen their
judgment, to discern of the sayings and writings of other men, to keep
better that which they learn, and not beyond their gift and calling, to
adventure to a further use then they can reach unto. And thus much for the
first sort.

Concerning the second I will not deal with every alteration and difference,
for some are such as I think the very alteration considered with the common
rules now received of the sounder sort, to judge by, will give sufficient
defense: the other more doubtful and strange, I will as briefly and plainly
as I can mainteyne. Wherein if I go beyond the capacity or reach of the
unlearned, they are to be desired either to stay till they have somewhat
labored in these arts, or else not to trouble the^ selves at all with this
discourse, but leave it to those for whose satisfaction chiefly it is written.
And here our labor shall be for the Logike: for the other I suppose need not
this defense, as having few and light alterations. Concerning the definition
of Logike I will not strive whether well reasoning, which is reasoning
according to the art, be contained in the general of the definition, An art
or no, it is sufficient for me that in my definition there is a true general,
an art, and a true full difference, by which it differs from all other
arts: namely that it is of reasoning. Now whether the proper end be declared
by the addition of well or no, I leave it to those who will dispute of all the
causes and not of the definition of Logike. For there is no reason why the end
of any thing should come into the definition any more then the efficient cause,
when as the difference is before full and sufficient. In invention that is most
general, which concerns the distribution of an argument, that I make it not
Artificial and inartificiall, but first and arising of the first, and after
divide the latter into more artificial, and less artificial. At which none
need greatly to marvel, seeing that reason which by art appears the
greater force of an other reason to the weaker force it has in it self, and
so reasons more forcibly as does a testimony, whose force the said
depends upon other arguments, it must be both artificial, and arise in part
of another: but because it has neither his force in it self, nor arise
perfectly as a definition or division, but in part only from other
arguments. It may for both causes be well judged to be an Argument, arising
imoerfectly of the first, and so be called a less artificial arising of the
first. The general being touched, the difference in the causes ask the next
place, where the referring of the end unto the efficient cause, will be odiouse:
but if it be weighed that by this means, the truth is preferred and the
doctrine of the end which is not commonly discerned from the effect and
adioynte, is more cleared, the gain will easily recompense the alteration of
the place. For seeing it is a cause only as it brings some force to the
very being of the thing, and all the force it brings is to move the
efficient or making cause to work, it follows that in that respect only it
is a cause. If it be said, the end does not move every efficient as the end
of natural and artificial things, as of the eye to see, the plu^met in a
clok to force the next causes of the orderly motion: the answer is, they are
deceived, for as it regards these artificial things, it is an effect of the
doing of it, and an adiointe in regard of the force wherewith it is done: and
to these things it gives or brings nothing, but receives and takes all
from them: but it is a cause only as it was set before the author of nature,
or the artificer to move him to make this thing apt to this effect, or to
have these properties: so that my sentence remains necessarily true. Neither
do I see what other respect of a cause it can have, for that which some speak
of the perfection it brings to the thing, is altogether untrue, for all the
perfection of the thing comes from the efficient, and lies in the matter and
form as the causes of the thing and the adiointes, as the ornaments of it: In
which respect this perfection is caused, and does not cause. The next to this
is that the division of conceyuing and begetting cause is left out, and
justly. For when as there ought to be no division, but that which arises of
some difference of the parts between them selves, and of agreement with the
whole, there being here no difference in the parts, because the begetting
cause is referred to procreation, as to his next effect, and the conseruing
or preserving cause, as to his next effect to preservation: in which respects
they remain only simple as all others efficientes or making causes: it is to
be inferred that they can make no distribution of the efficient cause.

The like is to be said, of working by it self and by chance, which make no
difference of working or causing: for although in such the principal
instrument had no such end or purpose, yet the chief worker GOD in his
providence has, besides this puts no difference in that force which
brings forth effect, b^^ only between the purpose of the chief worker of
the action, god: Ephe. 1. 11.
who works all things according to the counsel of his own will, and the
principal instrument who did it to another purpose. Next to these follow the
difference in the disagreeing arguments, where this is one and the chief,
that the divisions of Contraries are left out: First into affirming and
denying, which are no sorts of contraries, but of the manner of uttering
contraries, which as it falls not into Logike to handle, so it is nothing to
this purpose, because the difference arises not from any distinction of the
contrariety it self, which it should do, if they were diverse sorts of
contraries, but from the difference of expressing one and the same kind. And
this it yet more clear in the eiuers sorts of these: for relatiues are no
contraries, because the contrariety lies in the denial of the relation, not
in the relation: neither can it in that respect be a new sort of
contrariety, for when all the repugnancie lies in these two regardes, the one
that being set as agreeing in the consideration of reason to one, it must be
disagreeing and opposite in the same consideration one to another, as if it
agree with Jacob to be Isaaks father, it must disagree with Isaak to be so,
this it has from the general nature of opposites, the other respect being
that one is set against one, that it has from the general rule of
contrariety, and further it repugneth not. If say one it has this proper
that relatiues are here contrary, the answer is that brings no new kind
of contrariety, and if this be a just cause of a division of contraries, you
may divide contraries again: some of causes, some of effects, some of
subjects, and some of adiointes: seeing it may be said, these are causes
which are contrary, as it said, these are relatiues which are contrary.

The like almost may be said of the priuatiues, which are contraries, whereof
one is naturally in the subject as the habit, and the other diueth out or
depriueth it of the habit: for what new sort of contrariety is here? Surely
no other but that one is set against one, for the being naturally or not
naturally in the subject, belongs not the Logision to consider, but the
several Master in his art, as to the Physician that health is naturally in
the body and how, that sickness drives that away, and how: otherwise, why
may we not make hurtful contraries, whereof one is hurtful to the subject,
or profitable contraries, whereof one is profitable to the subject, as peace
and war to a common wealth, Vice and virtue to the minder?

Now let us consider of those others which they call contradictories, when
one affirms, and the other denies, as a man, not a man: just, not just.
Concerning these, when all the contrariety (which they say) is proper to
them, lies either in the contradiction, it is, it is not: which is proper to
judgment, not to invention, to set forth, or that one thing is opponed to
all other things which it is not: which is no contrariety, but the opposition
of disperates, seeing one is not opponed to one kind, but one to many kinds,
and that equally, as a man opponed to not a man, is equally opponed to
spirits, to fowls, fishes, beasts, insensible creatures, etc. in the same
not a man: wherefore it follows, that either they must allow my doing, or
else in the first bring in confusion whylest they speak of that part in one
part of the art, which is proper to the other, and in the second confusion
and folly both: whylest they make that a contrary which is none, and without
all gain repeat that which they have sufficiently handled before. Neither
let any say they are contrary, because their is no middle between man and
not a man, for so there is not between man and other things, and yet they are
not contrary but disperates only.

And thus much for the first arguments.

The leaving out of Notation and Conjugation remains only to be spoken of
in Invention, the reason whereof is manifest, because it is granted of all
that they have no new force, besides the first, no new reason or argument,
arising from the first: For he is just, he does justly, these are
co^ingates, refer them one unto an other, and what is their besides the cause
and the effect? What force or reason more? For that just and justly are
formed one of an other, apperteyneth to Grammar, that they allude fitly to the
figure of Rethorike, called Poliptoton, which changes finely the end or case
of words.

The like is to be said of Notation, which is the interpretation of a name,
which apperteyneth not to Logike but to Dictionaries: as in this, An argument
is so called, because it argues, a faithefull man, because he has faith: what
force of reason is there in the first example? of the cause and the effect.
What in the other? of the effect and the cause. But is there nothing else? yes.
A fit and elegant uttering of diverse things by words, not much, but somewhat
differing in sound, as argument, arguing, faith, faithful: but this is
neither reason, nor new force of reason; but only an elegancie of the Trope
called Paranomasia, or change of the name. Wherefore let us keep them no
longer, now the honor claymeth them, but according to the law turn them
home again. Thus much for invention: As for the change in a testimony, I am
content to leave it unto the judgment of the reader, when he shall examine
it according to the rules of Logike: as also those small differences which are
in the second part of Logike, for in that sometimes the first sort of a
Sillogisme is found in all his parts, there is now no longer any reason to
trase him up only in an Enthimeme. And thus much for the satisfying of both
these sorts. Now, if they be not fully contented, my desire is of the former
to bear with that, for the commodity of others, which them selves like not.
The other sort also I pray, to satisfy them selves in mending and bettering
that which can not yet sufficiently please them. And so I commit thee to the
direction of God his Spirit, whom I pray so to increase thy knowledge by all
good and lawful means, as thou may discern things that differ, and walk
without offense, until the day of the Lord.

AMEN.
The Art of Logike, plainly set forth in our English tongue, easy both to
be understood and practiced.
The first Chapter. Of the Definition and Division of Logike, and of an
Argument.
LOGIKE is an art of reasoning. An Art is that orderly placinge of rules,
whereby the easiest being first set down, and the^ the harder, the perfect way
of learning any thing, is ^ullie set down.


Logike has 2. parts. The spring of reasons called Invention. Judgment.


The spring of reasons is the first part of Logike, which gives rules of
the sorts of reasons, which because it does help much to the finding out of
reasons, is commonly called Invention.

A reason is that, which is apt to reason withal, which is commonly called
an Argument: of which sort are all things, when they are referred in
consideration of reason one unto another. For there is such an agreement of the
diverse sorts of reasons, as the nature of one hangs upon another, so that he
that perfect lie knows one, may also know the other, as in this example: God
is the Savior of all men: where GOD being referred to salvation, is a reason to
set forth salvation by the cause, and salvation being referred to God, sets
him forth by a thing caused, commonly called the effect: In which also we see,
he that knows GOD to be the cause of salvation, knows also salvation to be
the thing caused of God.

Arguments are many times known by their proper notes and marks, as shall
after appear: which if they be wanting, they must be known by the rules,
which do set forth every sort of arguments.

Of reasons there are two sorts. First. Those which arise of the first.


The first are those which have beginning in them selves, as in this example:
Love suffers long. Love is bountiful. Love does not frowardlie. Where the
Apostle shows the excellency of Love, by a reason of description which
arises of other reasons, as of that which Love does cause, long suffering: Of
the contraries to Love, as envy, froward dealing, etc.

First arguments are of 2. sorts Simple or vncompared. Compared.


Simple, is a reason which has force in it self, without regard of any
manner of comparison: as, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: Where
we see, the doing of the will of God is set forth first by a reason which is
vncompared, namely by those which should do it, Men in earth: then by a
comparison of the like, as the Angels in heaven do it.

Vncompared arguments. Agreeable. Dusagreeable.


Agreeable is that, which does agree with that to which in reason it is
referred, as, Love suffers long, Love enuieth not, where suffering long, is a
reason agreeing with Love, as a thing caused with the cause: and Envy is a
reason disagreeing with love, as one contrary with another.

Agreeable are of 2. sorts, More agreeable. Less agreeable.


More agreeable are those in whose agreement more is given and received too and
from one another, as, When God save, all that he had done, behold it was very
good. Where all his works, being the things caused of God, in their agreement
with God as with their cause, have more from God, then very good, which is the
adioint, has from all which he has made, which is the subject of goodness, or
that whereunto it is adjoined. So Christ, justification, and good works, do
agree, but Christ being the cause, gives more to justification, then, works
being the signs adjoined.

More agreeable arguments are of 2. sorts, The cause. The thing caused
commonly but more improperly, called the effect


The second Chapter. Of a cause.
A CAUSE is that which gives some necessary force for the very being of the
thing caused.

A cause is of two sorts, The one which is without the thing caused as the
making or efficient cause. The other within the thing caused.


The making cause is a cause which by setting the matter and the form
together, makes the thing caused. As, The Lord God also made man of the duste
of the ground, and breathed in his face the breathe of life, and the man was a
living soul Here we see that God which is of him self without Man, is the
making cause of man, and did make him, by breathing the breath of life which
was the form, into that of the duste, which was the matter. Now, where more
then one do the proper work of the making cause, all working together, are
the making cause. The parts whereof are the chief workers called the
principal, and the helps, called the instruments, and the end which moves
the making cause to set the matter and form together, is no other cause then
this, seeing it brings no other force for the being of the thing, then to
move the making cause to work, As, Of his own will begatte he us with the
word of truth, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures. Where
the end, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures moved Gods own
will, Gods own will being the principal worker, to begette us with the word
of truth being the isntrumental, And thus much for the efficient or making
cause.

The causes that are within the thing, are those causes which are always
inseparably remaining together for the being of the thing.

They are two, The matter. The form.


The matter is a cause of the which the thing caused is made: So the Lord made
woman of the ribbe of man. Noah the Arc of pine trees.

The form is a cause, by the which a thing is that which it is: and so
differs from all other things, as in the example of man before mentioned. But
the natural form of things, though they may be conceived by reason, yet they
can not well be uttered by speech. The artificial form of things is much
more easy to be conceived in reason, and uttered in words: and therefore of
such speeches there be many, as in all writers, so in the Scriptures
especially. So God set down the artificial form of the Arc and of the Arc
of covenant, the Table, the Candelsticke, the Tabernacle, the mercy Seat,
the Altar of burnte offeringes, the Court of the Tabernacle, and all the
furniture and appurtenances thereunto: by which artificial form they be that
they be, and differ from all other things.

Thus much of the cause: Now follows the thing caused.

The thing caused, is that which is by the whole force of all the causes, As,
So GOD loved the world, as he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. Where our happiness
is the thing caused: the love of God, and faith the efficient cause. Christ the
material cause, and eternal life the formal cause. So also every work or
moving of any thing, is the effect or thing caused by the worker or mouer.
Hitherto of more agreeable reasons. Of both which, relatiues are a most
excellent example, they are those which are so of and by one another, that they
are the mutual causes and effects one of another. As, The Father and the
Son, to give and receive, to teach and to learn.

Now of the less agreeable arguments. Less agreeable reasons are such in
whose agreement less is given and received to and from one another: as
appears in the example of more agreeable reasons.

The subject is of two sorts, Which receives the adioynt. That wherein the
adioint is is occupied.


As in this example, Wheresoever the carcass is, thither will the eagles
resort. Where we see in the first part, the word Where, noting out a place
(which is the subject of the thing that is in it) is the subject which
receives: the carkas is the subject wherein the Eagles which are the
adiointes, occupy them selves by resorting. So Husbandry is the subject of an
Husbandman: Ruling the Church is the subject of the Bishop, because in these
things they are occupied.

The subject which receives also is double, That which receives into it
self. That which receives to it self.


So Job was the subject in which was soundnes, vprightnes, and the fear of
God, and the mind is the subject in which are all evil qualities. So Job and
other men were and are the subjects which receive to themselves riches,
houses, lands, etc.

An adiointe is that which is adjoined unto any thing, as in all the former
examples, the things referred unto their subjects, were the adiointes: so what
soever is referred unto any thing not being cause or effect of the same, it
is the adiointe.

Again, adiointes are either Common, or Proper.


Either of them separable or inseparable, which for the most part arise of the
causes or being of the things, and are therefore called essential or of the
being.

Common are those which are adjoined unto diverse subjects, as the power of
eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. are common adiointes to men and beasts, and
can not be separated. So riches, poverty, sickness, and health, are common
adiointes to good and evil men, and may be separated from them.

A proper adiointe is that which is always joined to one and the same subject.
So righteousness, faith, joy in the holy Ghost, are the proper adiointes to the
children of God: so to be seen and felt are the proper adiointes of a body,
and the^e are inseparable. And it was proper to Adam and Ehauah, to enjoy
paradise, and yet separable: Also Paul to be rapte up into the third heaven,
and yet separable.

Hitherto of an agreeable argument, whereby only those things that differ in
themselves may yet be said to be one. So Christ says: I and my Father are
ont, meaning in nature or cause. So John says: There are three which bear
witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are
one, meaning in their witness which is their effect. So Paul says: He that
planteth and he that waters, are one, that is in office and function, which
is the adiuncte.

The third Chapter. Of disagreeable arguments.
DIsagreeable reasons are those reasons which disagree being referred one unto
another.

Disagreeable reasons are of two sorts Diverse, or somewhat differing. Such as
can not stand together, commonly called opposites.


Diverse reasons are those which disagree only in respect or after a certain
manner, the notes whereof are commonly these: Not this but that: albeit,
nevertheless, notwithstanding, and such like. As, I know thy works, thy
labor, thy patience, nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou
haste left thy first love. Where we see, that although these were
disagreeing in respect of this Church, yet they may agree: for Christ may both
know their patience and works, and yet have nothing against them. And these
reasons and all such answering the one to the other, which have notes, are
sometimes set down fully by their parts answering one unto another, sometimes
by their notes only.

Reasons which can not stand together, are reasons which differ not only in
respect, but also in nature, or the thing it self, and therefore can not
agree with the same thing, at the same time, according to the same respect or
consideration So one can not be sick and well at the same time in the same
part, in consideration of the soul or body, but he may be sick to day, and
whole to morrow, ill in his head, and well in his hand, well in respect of
his body, and ill in respect of the soul.

Opposites are either sundry, commonly called disperates, or contrary.


Sundry or disperates are opposites, whereof one is equally set against
many. David Psalm 8. shows, that God has given dominion unto man, over
sheep, oxen, beasts of the field, fowls of the air, fishes of the sea, all
which creatures are equally set one against another.

Contraries are opposites whereof one is set against one. And therefore they
directly fight one against another: So Christ and Beliall, light and darkness,
Christ and Antichrist, heaven and hell, life and death, good and evil, just
and unjust, sick and whole, to be ones Father and his, begotten Son. And
hitherto of vnco^pared reasons.

The fourth Chapter. Of compared arguments.
COMPARED reasons are such as are compared one with another, which when it
has parts, the first sets down the comparison called the propou^ding
part or proposition, the other applies the comparison to the thing compared
called the applying, rendering part or reddition. As, Mat. 24. As in the days
of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of m^n be. For as in the days which
were before the flood, they did eat and drink, they married and gave to
marriage, even unto the day in which Noah entered into the Arc, and knew not
till the floude came and took them all, so shall the coming of the son of
man be. In which example in the first of the verses, there are the signs of
the comparison, As, And so, in the two latter verses, are the two parts of the
whole comparison, the first setting down the comparison which is taken from
the floude of Noah, the other applying the comparison to the thing compared,
that is, the coming of Christ.

Comparison is either in Quantity, or Quality.


Comparison of quantity, is when the quantity of the things is compared
together.

Quantity is either Equal, or unequal.


Reasons of equal comparison, are those whose quantity is equal.

The notes of the equal reasons are these: As, equal, alike, the same that,
so much, no greater, as in these examples: With what measure ye meat, with the
same it shall be measured to you again. So Nomb. 9. Ye shall have the same law
both for the stranger, and him that it borne in the land So Iosuah 14. And
yet am I so strong at this time, as I was when Mosches sent me, as strong as I
was then, so strong am I now, either for war or for government. Hebr. 1. 4.
And is made so much the more excellent than the Aungelles, inasmuch as he has
obtained a more excellent nature then they.

Unequal are those whose quantity is not the like.

Unequal reasons are of two sorts Greater. Lesser.


The greater is that whose quantity is greater then that whereunto it is
compared: the notes whereof are these: Not only, but also: rather this then
that: Also every note of a greater degree of comparison. As, Romans 5. 3. Neither
do we so only, but also we rejoice in tribulation. Likewise Psalm. 88. 10. I
had rather be a door keeper in the house of the Lord, then to dwell in the
tabernacle of Princes. And Prouer. 8. 11. For wisdom is better then precious
stones. Also Plal. 19. And more to be desired then gold, and sweeter also then
the honey co^be.

Also denialles in comparison, As 1. Cor. 1. 1^. Christ sent me not to Baptist,
but to preach, to wit, not so much to baptize, as to preach.

The lesser are those whose quantity is lesser then that, whereunto it is
compared, the signs whereof are these, not this only, but not that, or no not
that, or a denial of the equal or equality. As, 1, Cor. 3. 2. For you were
not able to bear it, no nor are ye new able to bear it. Also Romans 3. 12,
There is none that does good, no not one. Likewise 2. Kings 23. 25. where
Josias is denied to be equal to the Kings that were before, or after him, and
presented above them all. Hezechiah by the same argument is commended 2. King.
16. 5. So the serpent is commended to be the subtilest beast of all that were
upon the earth, Genesis 3. 1.

Hitherto of the comparison of quantitite.

Now follows the comparison of quality.

Which is either of things Like. Unlike.


Like, which have the same quality, the signs whereof are, Like as, even as,
and so, also, a denial of the like; unlike. Mat. 13. 24. The kingdom of
heaven is like unto man that sewed good seed in his field. Mat. 6. 5. When
thou prayest be net as the hipocrites are. Also Mat. 24. 37 But even as in the
days of Neah, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Likewise Gal. 4. 1
Then I say, the heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a
servant, though he be Lord over all.

The parts of a similitude are sometimes severed or distinguished by three
considerations or steps of comparison, commonly called terms: and sometimes
by four. By three, 1 These. 3. 2. For you your selves also know perfectly,
that the Lord shall come even as a thief in the night. Where one step of
comparison must be twice repeated thus: As the thief in the night comes
suddenly, so the Lords day comes suddenly.

By four, in the 3. verse thus: For when they shall say, peace and safety,
then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel of a woman with
child. wherein four severed or distinct terms or steps are plain and
manifest, to wit, the careless wicked, sudden destruction, the woman with
child, sudden travel.

Unlike is that, whose quality in comparison is not the same. The signs or
notes whereof are, Unlike, differing, otherwise: As, Dan. 7. 7. And it was
unlike the beasts of the field, that were before. Also 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any
man teach otherwise. Also 5. 25. and 1. 3. Thus much of the first reasons.
Now follow those that arise of the first.

The fifte Chapter.
REasons arising of the first, are those which are made by the joining
together of the first.

They are of two sorts, More Artificial. Less artificial.


More artificial is that which has force of it self to reason withal. Romans
4. 6. As David also describes the blessedness of a man to whom God imputes
righteousness without works, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins be covered. Where the Apostle sets forth righteousness by a
declaration arising of two arguments, to wit, agreeing as the cause,
imputation of righteousness: disagreeing, without works. Which reason has
force in it self, because of the force which these two arguments gives unto
it: but the proof of this declaration which is drawn from the witness of
David, has not so much authority from the thing said, or the matter it
self, as from the author of it Gods spirit by David.

Of the more artificial arguments arising of the first, there are two
sorts, Division, commonly called Distribution. Definition.


Division is when the whole is divided into the parts.

The whole is that which conteyneth or has in it the parts.

The parts is that which is contained of the whole

A Division is made of arguments which are agreeable to the whole, but
disagreeable amongst them selves, so that it is so much the more perfect, by
how much the parts do more agree to the whole, and more disagree amongst
themselves.

Division is made of reasons which are More agreeable, Less agreeable.
First of the cause. Then of the thing caused.


A Division made of the cause, is when the parts be cause of the whole, and
then they are properly called members: for a member is that part which gives
being to the whole, and the whole being of such members, is called integrall.
For a man in the scripture is often divided into his members, the soul and the
body: and the body into his members, as head, hands, feet, etc. So the whole
Law divided into his two members, First, which teaches our duty toward God
in the first table, and that which teaches us our duty toward our
neighbor, in the second table. The whole Church is divided into his members,
the part in heaven, and the part in earth.

Distribution of the thing caused, is whose parts are caused of the whole, or
are the effect of the whole, as when the whole kind or general is divided
into his several sorts or sperialls.

The whole kind or general is a whole, which gives or conteyneth the ^eing
or essence which is common to the several sorts or specialls, as a living
thing is general to man and beast, containing in it a bodily substance, which
has life and sense, whithe is the general being of man and beast.

A several sort or special, is a part comprehended under the whole kind or
general form, from whence he takes that being which is common to all the
other parts or specialls, as in the 10. to the Romans The Apostle divides the
ordinary offices of the Church into Prophets, that is Ministers occupied in
the word, and other Ministers occupied in other business in the Church. The
first sort he divides again into the Teacher who is occupied in doctrine,
and the Pastor who is occupied in exhortation* The second sort again into
Elders, which rule the Church, and Distributors, which distribute to the
poor, in which and such like examples, the first is called the most general,
the other the vndergenerall or subalternall, which in respect of the former, is
the special, and in respect of that follows is the general. The last, is
the lowest sort, or most special, because it can not be divided into more
specialls, and this division of the causes into the effects, is most
excellent: yet that is not to be neglected when the parts are only set forth
by their effects, as Solomon makes a division of four small things in the
earth by the effects, the Emmets prepare their meat in the Summer, the Mise
which make their dwelling in the Rocks, and the Gres^^oppers, which go out in
bands.

Hitherto of the distribution of more agreeable reasons.

Now follows of less agreeable.

As of the Subject. Adiointe.


The Deuisions of the Subject or adioynt, are when the parts are set forth
by the subjects or adiointes. So John 1. 5 6. 7 8. In his division of
witnesses, sets forth the parts by the subject, some in heaven and some
in earth. So Matt. The seed is divided by the place: Some fell in stony
ground, some in thornie ground, some in the high way. So for the adiointes,
Romans 1 4. 5. Christians are divided by their adioyntes, some are strong, some
weak.

Of a Definition or setting forth of a thing.
A Definition is a reason arising of the first, which sets down what a
thing is,

It is either Perfect, or Imperfect.


A perfect Definition or setting forth of a thing, is that, which is made of
the whole kind or general, and the proper difference of that several sort
which is defined, where the first part is called the general, the other the
proper or special difference. So sin is defined to be the going aside from
the Law or right rule of obedience, where the going aside is the general, and
the right rule of obedience is the proper difference. So the Church is a number
of men in Christ Jesus, where A number of men is the general, and in Christ
Jesus, is the proper difference.

A description or an imperfect setting forth of a thing, does set a thing
forth by any other reason. So Job describes Leuiathan by his parts, his
adiointes, comparisons, similitudes, effects. etc.

Thus much of the more artificial arguments. Now follow the less
artificial.

The sixte Chapter. Of the less artificial argument, called a Testimony.
A LESS artificial reason, is a reason arising of the first, which reasons
not so much by his own force, as by the power of other reasons. It is called a
Testimony or witness.

A testimony is either a Law, or Notable sentence, such as be Parables,
Kiddles, Proverbs, etc. confessions, and Records. etc.


And they both are, either only pronounced, or written also.

Both of those sorts also may be With an oath, Without an oath.


And those are the general properties of a Testimony.

His sorts are either of God, called Divine. Man, called humane.


For a Law, Romans 7. there is a law written of God, to prove that a woman may
not forsake her husband as long as he lives.

For a notable sentence, Luc. 4. 23. there is a parable, Physician healethy
self. So all the proverbs of Solomon are divine and notable sentences.

Thus much of the spring of Reasons.

Now follows Judgment.

THE SECOND BOOK.
The first Chapter. Of Judgment.
IVdgement is the second part of Logike, concerning the ordering of reasons,
whereby they may be the better judged of, which order sometimes is altered by
additions, leauinges out, or displacing of any thing, and this is called the
hidinge of Art, when it is done artificially and to good purpose.

It is either of One sentence, called an Axiom, and that part is called
Axiomaticall. More sentences.


An Axiom or sentence is that ordering of one reason with another, whereby a
thing is said to be or not to be.

The parts of an Axiom are The couple or band. The parts coupled.


The couple is that which joins the other parts together.

The parts coupled, are The former. The latter.


The former is that part which goes before, and is called the antecedent.

The latter, which follows, and is called the consequente, As in this: A
soft answer appeaseth wrath: where a soft answer being a cause, and the
former part of this axiom, is joined by the couple, does, with the effect
and latter part, appease anger.

An axiom or one sentence is either Affirming, or Affirmative. Denying, or
negative.


An affirming axiom is, whose couple does affirm.

Denying is, whose couple does deny. And although in our English tongue
Denial is set after the band, yet in reason and in other tounges, it goes
before, and denies the band.

From this affirming or denying, comes the gaynesaying or contradiction of
axioms, which is when the self same axiom is playnlie and flatly affirmed
and denied. As in this: Good works do justify. Good works do not justify.

An axiom is true, when it is so affirmed or denied, as the thing is in deed,
otherwise false.

Which both are either Necessary or Doubtful.


Necessary, when the axiom is true or false without exception: yet to a
general axiom to make it necessarily true, exception is to be added: As,
Whosoever puts away his wi^e, except for the ease of fornication,
commits adultery.

Doubtful, when the truth or falsehoode is uncertain, which is called a
contingent axiom. As:

God is good, is necessarily true.

The Devil is good, is necessarily false.

The godly do prosper in outward blessings, is doubtful.

And here the judgment must be according to the property of the axiom: as,
that which is necessarily true, must be absolutely granted or affirmed: and
that which is necessarily false, must be absolutely denied: and that which is
doubtful, must be doubtfullie affirmed, or denied: or else for certainty
distinguish how far you deny, and how far you grant.

Now, when axioms are exactlie judged, they must not only be according to
this rule of truth, but also according to the rules of rightful placing or
rightfulnes, and wise placing, or rule of wisdom.

The rule of rightful placing is, when reasons are placed in an axiom,
according to their proper considerations, spoken of before in Invention: As,
the proper form with the proper thing formed, the proper subject, with the
proper adiuncte: the proper general with the proper special. As, All the
going aside from the rule of goodness, is sin, which both is necessarily
true, and the proper general is affirmed of the proper special. But it is
contrariwise in this axiom: The law of God is perfect. For perfectnes is
common to many other things, as to God and his creatures in their first
creation.

Wise placing, is when reasons whihch may be equally affirmed or denied one of
the other, are so placed, as that which is best known be in the first place,
as in the placing of reasons, the cause must be before the effect, the subject
before the adioint, etc. As, All going from the rule of godliness, is sin, is
wisely placed, because the proper general is set before the proper special,
which is, as it may be turned, All sin is goinge from the rule of
righteousness, it is truly and rightly placed, but not according to this exact
rule, for the proper special, not so manifest as the proper general, is
notwithstanding set before, which yet 1. 10. 5. is placed according to this
rule. All unrighteousness is sin.

The second Chapter.
THE sorts of an Axiom is either Single, called Simple. Double, called
compound.


A single axiom is an axiom, whose band is noted out by is, or are, or some
such ^^^^e. Where this is to be marked, that in the exact placing of this
axiom, nothing else must be in the second part, but that whereof the first is
affirmed or denied: As in this example: Every sin is to be blamed: this is a
simple axiom, and exactlie placed. But every man is lying is be blamed: is
not exactely placed. And in this kind of axiom, all arguments, except
diverse, and comparisons, and distributions may be coupled, so that the
agreeable be always affirmed, and the disagreeable be always denied. As, GOD
does justify. Where the cause and the effect are coupled together. Every man
is a liar. Where the subject and the adiu^cte are coupled together. God cannot
lie: where we see that two contrary arguments are coupled together. John 1.
In the beginning was the Word: Here the parts are turned: for it must be thus
understood: The word was in the beginning. So, God is in deed true: there in
deed abounds. Coloss. 2. 22. All which perish in the use, according to the
commandments of men, here prescribed, according to the commandments of
men, or some such thing must be understood. So John 1. 21. No, meaning, I am
not the Prophet, where both antecedent and consequent is wanting.

The single Axiom is either, General. Special.


General is, when the latter part is generally referred or attributed to the
former, As, All men are liars.

Special is, when the latter part is specially attributed to the former.

Special is either Particular. Proper.


Particular is a special, when the latter part is referred to some of the
former, but without certain limitation. As: Some men are aheadie turned back
unto Satan. Where the contradiction must be a general negative axiom: as,
No men are turned unto Satan. Also: Some men have ^ayth: No man has faith.

Proper is, when the latter part is referred to the former being one singular
or proper thing: As, Paul is the Apostle of Jesus Christ: whose contradiction
is, Paul is not the Apostle of Christ.

Thus much of a single Axiom.

Now follows the double or compounde.

A double or compounde axiom is, which is made of diverse simple axioms, whose
band or couple is noted out with and, or if, although etc. which join
sentences together, and are commonly called conjunctions.

Here the turninge of parts is very common and to be marked, and especially
because of the form of proving which shall follow: As, If thou keep my
Sabothe, I will bless thee. Esai. 58. 13. 14. which must be thus turned, if
one will bring it to this certain form of proof. If I will bless thee, thou
must keep my Sabbothe, but thou do not, Ergo

Also a compounde Axiom according to the nature of his conjunctions,

Is either Gathering or congregatiue. Seuering or segregatiue.


A gathering or congregatiue Axiom is which by such bands or conjunctions
coupleth together the agreeable and disagreeable arguments, affirming the one,
and denying the other.

The gathering axiom is either, Coupling or copulative. Knitting or connexiue.


Coupling or copulative is that, whose band or couple is, and, also* etc.
James. 3. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
and gentle, and easy to be entreated, and full of mercy and good works* etc.

The true judgment of this Copulative Axiom, depends upon the truth of
every particular part. For if all the parts be true, it is a true Axiom: If
one only be false, is a false Axiom. Hereunto may be referred the full
comparisons and the similitudes, as, Look what number of stars there be in
the heavens, so many in number shall thy seed be: said God to Abraham. Whose
contradictions, are the denial of every part.

A knitting or connexiue axiom is, whose couple is, If, as, If you were the
children of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham. Whose contradiction
is, If the first be yet the second does not follow. So that when we judge
this axiom to be true. we must judge the parts to be truly and necessarily
knitte together. Which may be, though the parts be both false: as in this
example: The Jews neither were Abraham's children, neither did the works of
Abraham This axiom is doubtful, when the parts and the following are
doubtful: As Paul in the ship: If you obey my counsel, you shall not
perish. Hitherto must be referred the band which is expressed by the word of
time: as, When we were Gentills, we lived according to the flesh. Also, When I
was a child, I spoke as a child.

A seuering or segregatiue axiom is, whose couple or conjunction is seuering,
and therefore is fittest to dispose the disagreeable arguments.

It is either Discerning, or discretiue. Disioyning, or disjunctive.


Discerning is, whose couple or conjunction is discerning. Therefore of
disagreeable arguments it is fittest to dispose the diverse. As, Although Esau
sought the blessing through tears, yet he found no place to repentance: whose
contradiction is the denial of the principal conjunction, as, not although.
This axiom is judged to be true and witty, when as the parts be not only
true, but also diverse: otherwise it is judged false or ridiculous: As although
a man be a fool, yet he wants wit.

The disioyning or disjunctive axiom, is whose couple or conjunction is
disioyning: As, Romans 14. 4. Every one stands or falls. etc.

Here the contradiction does not necessarily make the parts true or false:
For the disjunction may be true, although the parts severally considered
be doubtful: As, Either Peter was at Rome, or not, Where we see the
disiu^ction to be necessary, though the parts be doubtful.

Thus much of the judgment of one sentence or axiom.

Now follows of mo sentences or axioms.

The fourth Chapter.
THE judgment of more Axioms is, when one axiom is inferred one upon another,
or drawn one out of another.

It is either A certain frame of proving, called a Sillogisme. Or a plain and
perfect way of handlinge any thing, called Method.


A frame of proving or Sillogisme, is that placing of an argument found out,
with a question in 3. Axioms, where the two first being granted, the third
does necessarily follow. Therefore when an axiom is doubtful, it is made a
question, and for proof of the truth, we must inueate a third reason, and
place it with the question after the forenamed order.

The parts of a Sillogisme are, Former, or antecedent. Latter, or consequent.


The former or antecedent, is that upon which the conclusion is inferred or
brought in.

It has two parts, The propounder, or proposition. The applier or assumption.


The proposition is the first part, wherein at the least the latter part of
the question is placed with the reason found out.

The assumption is the second part which is taken out of the proposition.

The latter part or conclusion is that part which is inferred upon the
antecedent, concluding the question in this sort:

Every sinner is subject to condemnation. Every man is a sinner. Ergo Every
man is subject to condemnation.
In this example we see first, that the conclusion standing upon two
arguments, the subject and adiunct, is made a question: and by the third
argument, Sinner, the affirmative is proved true, by the fit placing of it in
these three axioms, wherein at least the last part of the question is placed
in the proposition.

Here mark that if any part be wanting, it is called the kind of an
imperfect Sillogisme, which is called an Enthimeme, or an holding in the mind.
If anything be added more then the axioms usually placed in a Sillogisme, it
is called a prosyllogisme, or an addition to a syllogism, or second proof.
The parts of a syllogism are oftentimes disorderly placed, as in this
example, where the Apostle proves that we are justified by faith:

Either we are justified by faith, or by the works of the law. But not by the
works of the law: Ergo By faith.
Here the proposition is wanting: the assumption is found in the 20. verse of
the 3. Chap. the conclusion in the 22. verse, and in the end of the 20. verse
there is a prosyllogisme or second proof, whereby the assumption is proved:
as thus: By the Law comes the knowledge of sin: Therefore we are not
justified by it.

The fifte Chapter.
OF Sillogismes, some are simple or single, others are compounde or double.

The simple is that wherein the latter part of the question is placed in the
proposition, and the former part in the assumption.

This is said to be affirmative, when that all the parts do affirm:
negative when that all the parts do deny. General where the conclusion and
proposition or assumption be general: special, when one of them only is
general: proper, when both of them are proper.

There are two sorts of a simple Syllogism, The one more plain. The other
more artificial.


A more plain is, whose order of placing is more plain then the rest, and it
is, when the reason found out to prove a particular question, goes before in
both parts, and is affirmative in the assumption.

All our Fathers had the same Sacrametes in substance. Many of the Fathers were
not saved, therefore some were not saved that had the Sacraments in substance.
The proposition is in the 1. of the Cor. the 10. The Assumption, verse. 5.
Which sort of simple Sillogismes, because of the playnes of it, is very
seldom found set forth in all his parts, but most commonly in this order. The
argument being put for an example.

Some putting away good conscience, have made ship wrack of says, as
Alexander and Hymeneus.

1 Timothy 1. The affirmative general.

All the justified shall be saved: All the justified shall reign with Christ:
Therefore Some that reign with Christ, shall be saved.
The negative with the proposition general.

No hypocritical caller upon God shall be saved: All hypocritical callers upon
God, say, Lord, Lord, Therefore Some that say, Lord, Lord, shall not be
saved.
Affirmative special.

Some who sell in the wilderness, heard the word. All who fell in the
wilderness, tempted God, Therefore Some that heard the word, tempted God. Heb.
6. 3.
Negative special is:

No right Papict is a true subject: Some right Papist is a Jesuit: Therefore
Some Jesuit is not a true subject.
Affirmative proper.

Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: Abraham was
a man, Therefore Some man believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
Negative proper:

Paul was not condemned: Paul was an Apostle, Therefore Some Apostle was not
condemned.
Less plain Sillogismes are those, whose frame of concluding is not so
plain: and here the proposition must be always general or proper, and the
conclusion negative, if either proposition or assumption be negative: and of
this there are two sorts. The first, where the reasons found out do follow
both in the proposition and assumption, and must be denied in one of them.

The first general: Every true Christian, can justify his religion by his
works: The dissembling professor can not justify his religion by his works,
Therefore The dissembling professor is no true Christian.


The second general. Every Christian loves God: No transgressor of the
commandment loves God, Therefore No transgressor of the commandment is a
true Christian.


The first special. A Pastor is not an Apostle: Paul is an Apostle:
Therefore Paul is no Pastor.


The second special. An Apostle may preach throughout the world. Archippus
may not preach throughout the world, Therefore Archippus is not an Apostle.


The first proper. Judas Iscariote was not the servant of Christ: Judas the
brother of James was the true servant of Christ, Therefore Judas Iscariot was
not the brother of James.


The second proper. Timothy was an Euangeliste: Paul was not an Euangeliste:
Therefore Timothy was not Paul.


Of the 2. sort, Of a less plain Sillogisme or more fully expressed.

In the second kind, the reason found out goes before in the proposition,
and follows in the assumption affirmatiuelie:

The general affirmative. Every sinner is subject to condemnation. Every
man is a sinner: Therefore Enery man is subject to condemnation.


The general negative. No sinner is justified by his works: Every man is a
sinner, Therefore No man is justified by his works.


The special affirmative. Every Apostle must preach the Gospel: Paul is an
Apostle: Therefore Paul must preach the Gospel.


The special negative. No dissembler was ever approved of God: Ananias was a
dissembler: Therefore Ananias was never approved of God.


The proper affirmative. The Son of God is the true Messiah: I am the Son
of God: Therefore I am the true Messiah.


The proper negative. John did not deny Christ: This Evangelist is John:
Therefore This Euangeliste did not deny Christ.


Thus much of the simple Sillogisme.

Now follows the compounde.

The fifte Chapter.
THE compounde or double Sillogisme is, where the whole question makes the one
part of the proposition affirmed and compounded, and the argument found out
makes the other part of the proposition.

To deny any part in a co^pound Sillogisme, is to set down the co^tradiction
thereof.

The compounde Sillogisme is either Connexiue, or knitting together.
Disjunctive, or seuering, or disioyning.


The knitting together or connexiue is whose proposition is connexiue or framed
with words which knitte together sentences. This is of two sorts: The first
sort is, when the former part of the proposition, is repeated affirmatiuelie
in the assumption, and the latter part in the couclusion.

If God do justify the faithful, no man may condemn them. But God does
justify the faithful, Ergo No man may condemn them.
Here oftentimes the former part of the proposition makes not the assumption,
but that which is greater or of more force to conclude then it is.

If the Magistrate do^ justly hate thee for thine offenses, then thou ought
to tremble: But God of heaven hates thee justly for thine offenses, Therefore
thou ought to tremble.
The same kind of Syllogism is framed by a word of time, which has the
same form with the other. As:

If, or seeing, or when we are dead with Christ, let us live with him: But we
are dead with Christ, therefore Let us live with him.
The second kind of a knitting or connexiue Sillogisme.

The second kind of a knitting or connexiue Sillogisme is, when the
consequente or latter part of the proposition is denied in the assumption,
that the former also may be denided in the conclusion. As:

If Abraham were justified by works, then he has to glory with God: But he
has not to glory with God, Therefore He is not imstified by works. Romans 4.
1.
A disioyning or disjunctive Sillogisme.

It is that whose proposition is disioyned, and is framed after two sorts. The
first does deny one part of the proposition in the assumption, and
concludes the other in the conclusion. As:

A man is justified, either by works or faith: But not by works, Therefore By
faith.
Or thus: Man is justified by faith or works: But not by works. Therefore By
faith.


The second frame is that which is made of a disioyned axiom, affirmed in
both parts, and affirms one part in the assumption, that it may deny or
take away the other in the conclusion. As thus:

Faithful men must either be saved or condemned: But they shall be saved:
Therefore not condemned.
The same Sillogisme is also made of a coupled or copulative axiom being
denied, because it has the same force with a disioyned axiom.

We can not serve both God and Mammon, But we serve God, Therefore not Mammon.
Or thus: We can not serve both Mannon and God, But God: Therefore not Mammon.


Thus much of the certain frame of proving or Sillogisme. Now follows the
plain and perfect way of handling any thing, or Method.

The seventh Chapter.
METHOD is the judgment of more axioms, whereby many and diverse axioms
being framed according to the properties of an axiom perfectly or exactlie
judged, are so ordered as that the eafiest and most general be set down
first, the harder are les^e general next, until the whole matter be so
conveyed, as all the parts may best agree with them selves, and be best kept
in memory.

For as we consider in an axiom truth or falseshoode in a Sillogisme,
necessary following or not following, so in Method the best and perfectest,
the worst and troublesomest way to handle a matter.

Therefore according to this perfect way, the definition of that which is to
be handled, must be first set down, and then the division of the same into
the members, and the general properties of the same, and then the diverse
sorts of it, if there be any: so proceeding until by fit and apt passages
or transitions, the whole be so far handled, that it can be no more divided.

A passage or transition is the band of Method, whereby one member of a
division is joined to the other, which thing refreshes the Reader or hearer,
and helps the memory. Such is that in the Acts, 1. Chap. 1. The first
Treaty, Theophilus I have made of all things which Jesus began to say or do.
etc. And so goes to the other history of the Acts of the Apostles

Examples hereof you may see in the distribution of the effects, and in all
other things rightly handled, and in the treatise of Householde government
following.

Now this Method because it is so agreeable to reason, and easy to be
practiced, i^ for the most part followed of all writers or speakers, yet so as
they may and do according to their matter, time, place, persons, and all such
circumstances, wisely alter, change, or hyde the same: and then it is called
the hyding or concealing, or crypsis of Method, whereas they leave out the
former orderly placing of Definitions, Divisions, and Transitions, and do take
in diverse repetitions, declarations, makings lightsome, enlargings, or
amplifications, prouings of the thing, preventing of objections, outgoing from
the matter, called digressions, as it shall make most fit for their purpose.
All which shall appear in that which is set down for the practice of Logike.

FINIS.
The Art of Rhetorike, plainly set forth in in our English tongue, easy
both to be understood and practiced.
RHETORIKE is an Art of speaking finely.

It has two parts, Garnishing of speech, called Eloqution Garnishing of the
manner of utterance, called Pronunciation.


Garnishing of speech is the first part of Rhetorike, whereby the speech it
self is beautified and made fine.

It is either The fine manner of words, called a Trope. The fine shape or frame
of speech, called a Figure.


The fine manner of words is a garnishing of speech, whereby one word is
drawn from his first proper signification to another, as in this sentence:
Sin lies at the doors: where Sin is put for the punishment of sin
adjoined unto it: lies at the doors signifies at hand, as that which lies
at the doors, is ready to be brought in.

This changing of words was first found out by necessity, for the want of
words, afterward confirmed by delight, because such words are pleasant and
gracious to the ear. Therefore this change of signification must be
shamefaste, and as it were maydenly, that it may seem rather to be led by
the hand to another signification, then to be driven by force unto the same:
yet sometimes this fine manner of speech swerueth from this perfection, and
then it is

Either The abuse of this fine speech, called Katachresis. Or The excess of
this finesse, called Hyperbole.


Be not to just, nor too wicked: which speech although it seem very hard,
yet it does not without some finenesse of speech utter thus much, That one
seek not a righteousness beyond the law of God, and that when none can live
without all sin, yet that they take heed, that sin bear not dominion over
them: As, My tears are my meat day and night. Those that hate me are more in
number then the hears of my head: Both which do utter by an excess of
speech, a great sorrow, and a great number of enemies.

The abuse of speech is when the change of speech is hard, strange, and
unwonted, as in the first example.

The excess of speech is, when the change of signification is very high and
lofty, as in the second example. And Psalm. 6. 7.

But the excellency or finenesse of words or Tropes is most excellent, when
diverse are Shut up in one. or Continued in many.


An example of the first sort is in the 2 King. I pray thee let me have a
double portion of thy spirit: where by spirit is meant the gift of the
spirit, and by thy spirit the gifts of the spirit like to thine.

The continuance of Tropes called an Allegory, is when one kind of trope is
so continued: As* Look with what kind of matter it be begone, with the same
it be ended. So in the 23. Psalm, the care of God toward his Church, is set
forth by the words proper to a sheepehearde. So in the whole book of
Canticles, the sweet conference of Christ and his Church, is set down by the
words proper to the husband and the wise. So old age ^e set down by this
garnishing of speech. Eccle. 12. 5. 6.

Hitherto of the properties of a fine manner of words, called a Trope.

Now the diuer* sorts do follow.

They are those which note out No comparison and are with Some comparison No
respect of Division, Or Some respect.

The first is double The change of name called a Metonomie. The mocking
speech called an Ironie.


The change of name is where the name of a thing, is put for the name of a
thing, agreeing with it

It is double, When the cause is put for the thing caused, and contrariwise.
when the thing to which any thing is adjoined, is put for the thing adjoined,
and contrariwise.


The change of name of the cause is when The name of the maker or the matter
is put for the thing made.

Of the maker, when the finder out, or the author of the thing, or the
iustrument whereby the thing is done, is put for the thing made. So Moses is
put for his writings. So Love is put for liberality, or b^stowing benefits
the fruit of love. So Faith the cause is put for religious serving of God, the
thing caused. Romans 1. So the tongue the instrument of speech is put for speech
it self. Rule thy tougue, Iam. 3.

Of the matter: Thou art duste, and to dust shall thou return, that is one
made of duste.

Now on the other side, when the thing caused or the ef^^ct is put for any of
these causes. So the Gospel of God is called the power of God to salvation,
that is the instrument of the power of God. So Love is said to be bountiful,
because it causes one to be bountiful. S. Paul sateth, The bread that we
break, is it not the communion of the body and blood of Christ, that is an
instrument of the communion of the body of Christ. So the body is said to be
an car^h^ie tabernacle, that is, a tabernacle made of earth.

The change of name or Metonimie, where the subject or that which has ar ie
thing adjoined, is put for the thing adjoined or adioynt. So the place^s put
for those or that in the place. Set thine house in an order, that is, thy
household matters. It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorra, that is the people
in Sodom and Gomorra, So Moses chayie is put for the doctrine taught in Moses
chair. So all lericho and Jerusalem came out, that is all the men in lericho
and Jerusalem. So before Sin was put for the punishment of Sin. Let his
blood ^^st upon us and our children, that is the punishment which shall follow
his death. So Christ said: This is my body, that is, a sign or sacrament of
my body. This wine is the now testament in my blood, that is, a sign or
seal of the new testament in my blood. So John says, He saw the spirit
descending in the likeness of a dove, that is the sign of the spirit.

On the other side, the adioynt is put for the thing to which it is adjoined,
As, Christ is called our hope, 1. Tit. that is, on whom our hope did depend.
So, We are justified by says, that is by Christ applied by faith. So, Love is
the fulfilling if the law, that is, those things to which it is adjoined.
Hope, for the things hoped for, Romans 8. 28. So in the Epist to the Ephe. The
days are evil, that is, the manner, conversation, and the deeds of men in
the days.

Hitherto of the Metonimie or change of name.

Now follows the mocking speech or Ironie.

The second Chapter.
THE mocking Trope is, when one contrary is signified by another, as God said,
Man is like to one of us. So Christ says: Sleep on, and yet by and by, Arise,
let us go. So Paul says, You are wise, and I am a fool.

This Trope is perceived either by the contrariety of the matter or the manner
of utterance, or both: So Elias said to the prophets of Baal: Cry aloude.
etc. So the Jews said unto Christ: Hayle King of the Jews.

Hitherto appertains the passing by a thing, which yet with a certain
elegancie notes it. So Philemon 19. That I say not thou owe thy self unto
me.

Hitherto of the finesse of words which respect no division.

Now follows that which respects division, called Synechdoche.

A Synechdoche is when the name of the whole is given to the part, or the name
of the part to the whole.

And it is double, When the whole is put for the member, and contrarily. When
the general or whole kind is put for the special or some sort, and
contrarily.


So S. John: Not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world.
So righteousness, a member of goodness, is put for all goodness. So unrighteousness
is put for all manner of sins.

Examples of the second sort, as these: So Israel is put for those of Judah
sometimes. So Nations for the heathen. A minister of Christ, for an Apostle of
Christ, Romans 1. A minister put for a distributer. Romans 12.

On the other side, one sort or special is put for the whole sort or
general in the examples following. In the Lords prayer Bread one help of
life is put for all helps: This day, one time for all times. So Solomon says,
The thing of the day in his day, that is, the thing of the time in his time.

So sometimes less is spoken, and yet more is understood, which is called
diminution or Meiosis, As, I am. says, to him that knows how to do well and
does not, it is sin, that is a great sin. So our Savior Christ says, If
they had not known, they had had no sin, that is, no such great sin as
they have now. Likewise the denial by comparison. So Solomon says, Receive
my words and not silver, that is, my words rather then silver. So Paul
says, I was sent to preach, and not to baptize, that is, not so much to
baptize as to preach.

Hitherto of the finenesse of words, which note out no comparison. Now
follows the finenesse of words which notes out comparison called a
Metaphor.

The third Chapter.
A Metaphor is when the like is signified by the like* as, 1. Cor. the Apostle
says, Doctrine must be tried by fire, that is, the evidence of the word
spirit tryinge doctrine as fire does metalls. So Christ is said to baptize
with fire, where fire is put for the power of the holy Ghost purging as fire.
So Christ says, None shall enter into the king dome of God, but he that is
borne of the holy Ghost and Water. So Paul calls him self the Father of the
Corinthes, who says that he begat them in Christ. So he calls Timothy and
Titus his natural sons in the faith.

Hitherto of a trope or garnishing of speech in one word, where the Metaphor
is most usual, then the change of name, then the Synecdoche, and last of all
the Ironie. Now follows the fine frame or shape of speech, called a Figure.

A Figure is a garnishing of speech, wherein the course of the same is
changed from the more simple and plain manner of speaking, unto that which is
more full of excellency and grace. For as in the finenesse of words or a
trope, words are considered asunder by them selves: so in the fine shape or
frame of speech or a figure, the apt and pleasant joining together of many
words is noted*

The garnishing of the shape of speech or a Figure is garnishing of speech In
words. In a sentence.


The garnishing of speech in words called Figura dictionis, is wherein the
speech is garnished by the pleasant and sweet sound of words joined
together.

This is either In the measure of soundes. In the repetition of soundes.


The measure of soundes is belonging either to Poets, with us called Rymers.
Orators, with us called eloquent pleaders.


The first is the measure of soundes by certain and continual spaces. And it
is either Ryme. Verse.


Ryme is the first sort, containing a certain measure of Syllables ending
alike, and these in the mother tongues are most fit for Psalms, songs or
Sonets.

Verses are the second sort, containing certain feet fitly placed.

A foot is a measure framed by the length and shortness of Syllables. For the
several sorts whereof, as also of the verses made of them, because we have no
worthy examples in our English tongue, we judge the large handling of them
should be more curious then necessary.

The measure of soundes belonging to Orators, is that which as it is not
uncertain, so it differs altogether from ryme and verse, and is very
changeable with it self. Therefore in that eloquent speech you must altogether
leave ryme and verse, unless you allege it for authority and pleasure.

In the beginning of the sentence little care is to be had, in the middle least
of all, and in the end chiefest regard is to be had, because the fall of the
sentence is most marked, and therefore least it fall out to be harshe and
unpleasant both to the mind and ear, there must be most variety and change.

Now this change must not be above fix syllables from the end, and that
must be set down in feet of two syllables.

And thus much of garnishing of speech by the measure of sou^des, rather to
give some taste of the same to the Readers, then to draw any to the curious
and unnecessary practice of it.

Now follows the repeating of soundes.

The fourth Chapter.
REpetition of soundes is either of The like The unlike
sound.

Of the like is either Continued to the end Broken of.
of the same sentence. of a diverse.


Continued to the end of the same sentence is when the same sound is repeated
without any thing coming between, except a pare^thesis, that is some thing put
in without the which notwithstanding the sentence is full. And it is a joining
of the same sound, as Rom 1. As unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness. And in
the prays of Christ, My God, my God, from men by thine hand O Lord, from
men. etc. Psalm. 17.

Continued in a diverse sentence is either a Redoubling, called Anadyplosis. A
pleasant clyming, called Clymax.


Redoubling is when the same sound is repeated in the end of the former
sentence, and the beginning of the sentence following. As, Psalm 9. 8. The Lord
also will be a refuge to the p^er^, a refuge I say in due time. Psalm. 48. 14.
^or this God is our God. But more plain in the 8. A^ We have heard so have
we seen in the city of the Lord of ^estes, in the city of our God. God
will establishe it for ever.

A pleasant clyming is a redoubling continued by diverse degrees or sleppes of
the same soundes: As Romans 8. 17, If we ^^ children, we be h^yres, even ^en^s of
God, annexe^ with Christ. Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined, them also he
called, and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he ^^stfied, them
also he glorified. Also Romans 9. 14. 15.

And hitherto of the same sound continued to the end.

Now follows the same sound broken of.

The fifte Chapter.
THE same sound broken of is a repetition of the same in the Beginning. In the
end.


In the beginning is called Anaphora, a bringing of the same again, As Romans 8.
38

Nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalies, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. So likewise Ephe 4. 11. Some to be Apostles, some Preachers, some
Prophets, some Evangelists. So Gal. Nor Jew, nor Gentil, nor bend, nor
free. So likewise Hebre. 11. 1. 2.

Repetition of the same sound in the end is called Epistrophe, a turning to
the same sound in the end. So Ezech. Behold greater abhominattens then
these. Lament. 3. 41. 42. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God
in the heavens, we have sinned, and have rebelled, therefore thou have not
spared.

When both of these are joined together, it is called a coupling or Symploce,
As, 2. Cor. 6. 4. to the 11. But in all things we approve our selves, as the
Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in neces^ities, in
distreses, in stripes, in prisons, in ^^multes, in labors. By watching, by
fastinges, by p^^^tie, by knowledge, by suffering, by kindness, by the holy
Ghost, by love un farned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the
armor of righteousness, on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, by evil re^ort and good report, as deceyuers and yet true: as
unknown and yet known, as dying and yet behol^^ we live, a^ chastened, and
yet not killed, as sorrowing and yet always rejoicing: as poor and yet make
mani^^^che, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. See also 2 Cor.
22. 23.

Hitherto of the repetitions in the same place.

Now of those that do enterchange their place.

They are either Epanal^psis, which signifies to take back. Epanados, which
signifies, A turning to the same tune.


The first is when the sa^e sou^de is repeated in the beginning and the
^n^ing, as, My son Absolon, my son, Sam. 19. 1.

Epanados is when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the middle,
in the middle and the end, as Ezech. 35. 6. I will prepare thee unto blood,
and blood shall pursue thees except thou hate blood, even blood shall pursue
thee. And 2. These. 2. So thee he that does sit as God, in the temple of God
sh^weth him self that he is god.

Hitherto of the repetition of those soundes which are alike.

Now of those that are unlike.

The sixte Chapter.
Unlike are A small changing of the name, as Paronomasia. A small chaunginge
of the end of case, a Polyptoton.


A small change of the name is, when a word by the change of one letter or
Syllabe, the signification also is changed, As, Patience, experience, Romans 5.
4. 19. We walk after the flesh, not war in the flesh. So by honor and
dishonor, as unknown, and yet known.

A small changing of the end or case, is when words of the same beginning
rebounde by diverse ends: Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more,
death has no more power over him. He that does righteousness is righteous. If
ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he that does righteouslie, is
borne of him. And of both these there are many in the Scripture, but the
translations can not reach them.

Hitherto of the garnishing of the shape of speech in words.

Now follows the garnishing of the shape of speech in a sentence.

The seventh Chapter.
GArnishing of the frame of speech in a sentence, is a garnishinge of the
shape of speech, or a figure, which for the forceable moving of affections,
does after a sort beautify the sense and very meaning of a sentence.
Because it has in it a certain manly majesty, which far surpasses the
soft delicacie or dayntines of the former figures.

It is either the garnishing of speech Alone. With others.


The garnishing of speech alone, is when as the sentence is garnished without
speech had to other. And it is either in regard Of the matter. Of the person.


In regard of the matter, is either A crying out, called Exclamation. A
pulling or calling back of him self, called Reuocation.


A crying out or Exclamation is the first, which is set forth by a word of
calling out: Sometimes of wonder, As Romans 8. O the depth of the judgments of
God! Psalm. 8. O Lord, how excellent is thy Name!

Sometimes of pity, also these words, Behold, alas, oh, be signs of this
figure, As, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which stonest the Prophets. Sometimes of
desperation, As, My sin is greater then can be forgiven. Behold thou driuest
me out etc. Sometimes of wishing, As, O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy
tabernacles. Sometimes of disdayning, As, Roman. 7. in the end: O miserable
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin! Sometimes of
mocking, as they which said to our Savior Christ, A thou that. etc.

Sometimes of cursing and detestation, as in David, Let their table be made a
snare, and ^^^e down their back always. Also when this Figure is used in the
end of a sentence, it is called a shooting out of the voice or Epiphonema, as
when the sins of Iesabel were spoken against, this is added at the end,
Seemed it a little to her to do thus and thus. So after the high setting
forth of the name of God, David shuts up his praisewith this: Blessed be
his glorious name, and let all the earth be filled with his glory. Sometimes
here is used a certain liberty of speech, wherein is a^einde of secret
crying out: As, Pet. 3 Act. says: Ye men of Israel hear these words. And
Paul 1. Cor. 11. Would to God you could suffer a little my foolishnes, and in
deed ye suffer me.

Thus much of crying out.

Now follows the Figure of calling back, or reuocation.

Reuocation is when any thing is called back, and it is as it were a coolinge
and quenching of the heat of the exclamation that went before.

And this is either A correction of ones self, called Epanorthrosis. A holding
of ones peace, called Apofiopefis.


Epanorthrosis is correction, when some thing is called back that went before:
as, Paul conecteth his doubtfulnes of Agrippa, his belief, when he says,
Beleeust thou King Agrippa, I know thou beleeuest. Paul 1. Cor. 15. I labored
more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God in me.

A keeping of silence or Aposiopesis is when the course of the sentence begone
is so stayed, as thereby some part of the sentence not being uttered, may be
understood. So our Savior Christ says, My soul is heavy What shall I say,
John 12. 27.

Thus much of a Figure garnishing the spehch alone in regard of the matter.

Now follows the garnishing of the speech alone in regard of the person.

The eight Chapter.
GArnishing of the speech alone in regard of the person is double.

Either in Turning to the person, called Apostrophe. Feyning of the person,
called Prosopopeia.


Apostrophe or turning to the person, is when the speech is turned to another
person, then the speech appointed did intend or require. And this Apostrophe
or turning is diversely seen, according to the diversity of persons.
Sometimes it turns to a man's person, As David in the 6. Psalcae, where having
gathered arguments of his safety, turns hastily to the wicked, saying,
Away from me all yeworkers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of
my petition.

Sometimes from a man to God, as Psalm. 3. David being dismayed with the number
of his enemies, turns him self to God, saying: But thou Lord art my
bu^klar. etc. Sometimes to unreasonable creatures without sense, Esai. 1. Esai.
20. 1.

Prosopopeia or a Feyning of the person is whereby we do feyne another person
speaking in our speech. And

It is double, Imperfect. Perfect.


Imperfect is when the speech of another person is set down lightly and
indirectlie. As in the Psalm. 10. David brings in the wicked, Who say unto my
soul, Fly is the berde unto yender hill.

A perfect Prosopopeia is when the whole feyning of the person is set down is
our speech, with a fit entering into the same, and a leaving it of. So Wised.
Pro. ^. Where the entrance is in the first verses, her speech in the rest of
the chapter.

Hitherto of the figures of sentences concerning one speaking alone.

Now follow the other which concern the speeches of two.

The 9. Chapter.
THEY which concern the speeches of two, are either In asking. In answering.


That of asking is either In deliberation. In preventing an objection.


Deliberation is when we do ever now and then ask as it were reasons of our
consultation, whereby the mind of the hearers wavering in doubt, does set
down some great thing.

This deliberation is either In doubting. In communication.


A doubting is a deliberating with our selves, as Paul. 1. Philip. 22.
doubtinge whether it were better to dye then to live, he garnisheth his speech
on this manner: For I am greatly in doubt on both sides, disiring to be
loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all: nevertheless to abide
in the flesh is more needful for you.

Communication is a deliberation with others. Gal. 3 1. 2. O foolish
Gallathians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, to
whom Jesus Christ before was described in your sight, and amongst you
crucified: This only would I learnt of you, Received you the spirit by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of the word preached?

And hitherto of the figure of speech between two called deliberation.

Now follows the figure of speech between two called the preventing of an
objection, or occupation.

Occupation is when we do bring an objection, and yield an answer unto it:
Therefore this speech between two in the first part is called the setting
down of the objection or occupation: in the latter part, an aunswering of the
objection or the subjection: as Romans 6. What shall we say then? shall we
continue still in sin, that grace may abound? In which words is set down
the objection, the aunsweringe in these words: God forbid. And here this
must be marked, that the objection is many times wanting, which must be
wisely supplied by considering the occasion and answer of it: As. 1. Tim. 5.
They will marie, having condemnation. Now least any might say, What, for
marying? He answers, No, For denying their first says.

Hitherto of the figures of asking.

Now follows the figures of answering.

They are either in Suffering of a deed, called permission. Granting of an
argument, called concession.


Suffering of a deed or permission, is when mockingly we give liberty to any
deed, being never so filthy, as Revel. Let him that is filthit, be filthy
still. And 1. Cor. 14. If any be ignorant, l^ him be ignorant.

Concession or granting of an argument is, when an argument is mockinglie
yielded unto, As, Eccle. 11. Rejoice young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes: but know that for all these things God will bring
thee to judgment.

Hitherto of the first part of Rhetorike of the garnishing of speech: the
second part which is the garnishing of utterance, because it is not yet
perfect (for the precepts for the most part pertain to an Orator) which
when it shall be perfect, it shall either only conteyne common precepts for the
garnishing of utterance in all, or also proper precepts for the same in
Magistrates, Ambassadors, Captains, and Ministers, therefore until it be so
perfitted, we think it unnecessary to be translated into English.

Although the rules of Sophistry be needelesse for them that be perfect in
Logike: yet because the knowledge of them brings some profit to young
beginners, both for the ready aunswering of the subtle arguments, and the
better practicing of Logike and Rhetorike, we have thought good to turn it
into the English tongue.

Sophistry is the feyned Art of Elenches, or colored reasons.

A coulourable reason, or Elenche, is a show of reason to deceive withal.

It is either When the deceypt lies in the words. In the default of Logike
called a Sophisme.


In words is either When the deceypt lies in one word. In words joined
together.


In one word is either The darkness of a word. The doubtfulnes of a word.


The darkness of a word, or an insolency deceyueth, when by a reason the
meaning is not understood, whether the strangeness be through the oldenes,
newnes, or swelling vanity of the word, and of the last sort is that spoken
of in 2. Pet. 2. 18

By this fallacian the papists conclude, the Fathers to be on their side, for
deserning by good works.

Whosoever says men's merits are crowned, they say men's works do deserve,
But the Fathers say, man's merits are crowned, Therefore the Fathers say, man's
works do deserve.
Where Merits is an old word, put for any works done under the hope of
reward, whether it come by deserte or freedom of promise.

Doubtfulnes of a word is either Likeness of name, called Homonymia. By a
Trope or finenesse of speech.


The likeness of name or Homonymia, is when one word is given to signify
diverse things: As,

He that believes shall be saved: The hypocrites to whom our Savior Christ
would not commit himself, believed: Therefore they shall be saved.
where faith does note out both a justifying faith, and a dead faith.

Doubtfules by a Trope, is when a word is taken properly, which is meant
signtatiuelie or contraritie, As:

That which Christ says is true: Christ says that breade's his body,
Therefore it is true:
Where by body is meant the sign on Sacrament of his body.

Unto the first a perfect Logisian would answer, that the proposition is not
an axiom necesiarily true, according to the rule of crueth, because of the
doubtfulne of the old and new signification of merit. And if the word be
fair worn out of use that it be not understood, than the answer must be, I
understand it not, or put your axiom in plain words.

To the second, he would answer, that the proposition or first part is not
according to the rule of righteousness, because the proper subject and adicinte
are not joined together: which if it were, it should be, Who soever has (...)
faith, or beleveeth sincerely, shall be saved, and then the aslumption being in
the same tenc^ ime^^ed, is fal^e.

Unto the third he would answer, that the assumption (...) ^es^arilie true,
because if the word Body be taken properly, it is not then true that is set
down, but if it be taken figuratively, it is true, and then fore would bid
him make the assumption necessarily true, and then say, Christ says in
proper words, It is my body, and then it is false.

Hitherto of the fallacians in single words.

Now of those joined together.

It is either Amphibolia, or the doubtfulnes of speech. Exposition, or unapt
setting down of the reason.


The first is when there is doubtfulnes in the frame of speech, as thus: If
any obey not our word by a letter, note him: Where some refer, by a letter,
to the first part of the sentence and some to the latter, where the
signification of the word and right pointing does show, that it must be
referred to the first.

The answer is, that the right and wise placing of the sentence is perverted.

Unapt setting down of the reason, is when the parts of the question and the
reasons entreated is not set down in fit words: As,

All sin is evil: Every child of God does sin: Therefore every child
of God is evil,
Here the answer according to Logike, is that the assumption does not take
the argument out of the proposition, but puts in another thing, and so it is
in no right frame of concluding, as appears by the definition of the
assumption.

Hitherto of the deceiptes of reason which lie in words.

Now of the default of Logike, called Sophisme.

It is either General. Special.


The general are those which can not be referred to any part of Logike.

They are either Begging of the question, called the petition of the principle.
Bragging of no proof.


Begging of the question is when nothing is brought to prove, but the question,
or that which is as doubtful: As,

That righteousness which is both by says and works, does justify: But this
righteousness is inherent righteousness, Ergo.
Here the proposition in effect is nothing but the question.

If together with the blood of Christ we must make perfect satisfaction for
our sins, before we come to heaven: Then there must be purgatory for them
that dye without perfect satisfaction.
But the first is so. Ergo. Where the argument they bring is as doubtful, and
needs as much proof as the question.

The answer is this out of the definition of the Sillogisme is that there is
no new argument invented, therefore it can not be a certain frame of
concluding.

Bragging of no proof is when that which is brought is to much, called
redou^ding.

It is either Impertinent or another matter called Heterogenium. A vain
repetition, called Tantologia.


Impertinent or not to the purpose is when any thing is brought for a proof,
which is nothing near to the matter in hand, where unto the common proverb
gives answer: I ask you of cheese, you answer me of chauke.

A vain repetition, is when the same thing is in effect, though not in words
is repeated, as They that after long time of prayer say, Let us pray. And this
fallacian out Savior Christ condemns in prayer, Mat. 5. and this is a fault
in Method.

Special are those which may be referred to certain parts of Logike, and
they are of two sorts:

Such as are referred To the spring of reasons, called Invention. To judgment.


Those referred to Invention are when any thing is put for a reason which is
not, as no cause for a cause, no effect for an effect, and so of the rest.

In the distribution this is a proper fallacian, when any thing simply or
generally granted, thereby is inferred a certain respect or special not
meant nor intended, as:

He that says, there are not seven Sacraments, says true: He that says,
there are only three, says there are not seven: Therefore he that says there
are three, says true.
The right answer is, that the proposition is not necessarily true, for there
may be a way to say, there are not seven, and yet affirm an untruth.

Fallacians of Judgment are those that are referred to the judgment of one
sentence. of more.


Of one sentence, either to the properties of an axiom. Sorts.


To the properties, as when a true is put for a false and contrarily: an
affirmative for a negative, and contrarily. So some take the words of S.
John, I do not say concerning it that you shall not pray, for no denial, when
as it does deny to pray for that sin.

To the sorts are referred, either to the Simple. Compounde.


The first when the general is taken for the special, and contrarily. So the
Papists by this fallacian don answer to that general saying of Paul: We are
justified by faith, without the works of the law. Which they understand of
works done before faith, when that was never called in doubt.

The fallacians which are referred to a compound^ axiom, are those which are
referred either to a Disioyned. Knitting. Axiom.


To a disioyned axiom when the parts in deed are not disioyned: As, Solomon
was either a King, or did bear rule.

To a knitting Axiom is when the parts are not necessarily knit together: As.

If Rome be on fire, the Popes chair is burnt.

And hitherto of the first sort of fallacians referred to judgment.

Now follows the second.

And they be either those that are referred, To a Sillegisme. To Method.


And they again are General. Special.


General which are referred to the general properties of a Syllogism.

It is either when all the parts are Denied. Particular.


All parts denied: As, No Pope is a Devil: No man is a Devil: Therefore No
man is a Pope.


And this must be answered, that it is not according to the definition of a
negative Syllogism, which must have always one affirmative.

All particular: As, Some unlawful thing must be suffered, an namely that
which cannot be taken away: The stews is some unlawful thing: Therefore the
stews must be suffered.


This is answered by the definition of a special Sillogisme, which is that
has one part general.

The special are those which are referred to the Simple. Compounde.


The first simple Of the first sort. Of the second.


Of the first sort, More plain. Less plain.


More plain is when the assumption is denied, or the question is not
particular: as,

Every Apostle may preach abroad Some Apostle is not an Pope: Therefore Some
Pope may not preach abroad.
Also:

Every Pope is a Lord: Some Pope may give an universal license: Therefore
every Lord may give an universal license.
Less plain has one fallacian in common, when the proposition is special:
As,

Some player is a roge, Every vagabonde is a roge: Therefore, every player is a
vagabonde.
Also. Some player is a Roge: Every vagabonde is a player: Therefore every
player is a roge.


The fallacian of the first kind is when all the parts be affirmative: As,
All Paul's Bishops were ordained for unity: All Archebishops be ordained for
unity: Therefore All Archbishops are Paul's Bishops.


The fallacian of the second kind is when the assumption is denied: As,
Every puritan is a Christian: No L. Bishop is a puritan: Therefore, No L.
Bishop is a Christian.


Hitherto of the fallacians referred to a simple Sillogisme.

Now follow those which are referred to a compounde, which are those which
are referred either To the connexiue. To the disioyned.


Of the first sort one is when the first part or antecedent is denied, that
the second or consequent may be so likewise: As* If any man have two
herefices, he may escape unpunished at the Bis^ops hands: But he may not have
two benefices, Therefore He may not escape unpunished at the Bishops hands.


The second is when the second part is affirmed, that the first may be so
also. As,

If every ignorant minister were put out of the Church, and a Preacher in his
place. We should have good order: But we have good order: Therefore, Every
ignorant minister is put out of the Church, and a Preacher in his* place.
Of those referred to the disioyned, the first is when all the parts of the
disjunction or proposition are not affirmed: As,

Every ignorant minister is to be allowed or not, But he is not: Therefore he
is.
The second kind is when the second part of the copulative negative axiom
i^ denied, that the first may be so. As,

A non resident is either a faithful or unfaithful minister: But he is
unfaithful, Ergo. etc.
And thus much of the fallacians in a Sillogisme.

The fallacian in Method is when to deceive withal, the end is set in the
beginning, the special before the general, good order begone, confounded: And
finally, when darkness, lenght and hardness is labored after.

FINIS.
THE ORDER OF HOVSholde, described methodicallie out of the word of God, with
the contrary abuses found in the world.
THE order of an Household called Oiconomia, is an order for the government of
the matters of an household, according to the word of God. 1. Tim. 3. 4.
Which governs his house well and excellently. Psalm. 101. I will walk in
the perfect way, in the vprightnes of my soul in the midst of mine house.
which declares there is a perfect way which comes from GOD only, as all
perfection does, wherein is required the vprightnes of ones soul, and whereof
he sets down some part afterward. Prou. 24. 3. 4. By wisdom the house is
builte, and established by understanding, and by knowledge the rooms shall be
filled with all precious and pleasant substance.

Now the wisdom meant in this book is that which is allowed of gods word:
especially when he joins such blessing unto it.

The household order has two parts, The first of these which concern the
governors of the family. The second of those which are governed in the same.


1. Tim. 5. 8. If one care not for his own, especially those of his house:
which shows an especial rule of mutual duty between these two. Also the
wisdom of the holy Ghost, in setting down mutual duties unto them. Pro.
31. Ephe. 6. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first
commandment with promise. 3 That it may be well with thee, and that thou
may live long on earth. 4 And ye Fathers, provoke not your children to
wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord. 5
Servants, be obediente unto them that are your Masters according to the
flesh, with fear and humblinge, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ.
6 Not with service to the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Colos. 4. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24.

Those which govern the family, are those Superiors who have authority in
the same. Their general and common duty is, to order their house according
to the former rule. Yet one may (being urged by the great care of Magistracy,
or for such like) have a steward, that is, one to govern his household,
according to the rules he prescribes. Contrary to this is the common and
whole casting off of this care, unless in worldly matters. The first part of
this rule is proved by these places: I will have the younger women to marry,
and govern their household. 1. Tim. 5. 14. If one rule not his household well,
how shall he care for the Church? 1. Tim. 3. 5. The example of David, Psalm.
101. 4. 1. Salomons mother. Pro. 31. 1. 2. 3. etc.

The second part of this rule is proved by the example of Abraham, who had
his elder servant in his house, who was over all that he had, and to whom he
committed the weighty duty of prouidinge a wife for his Son. Gene 24. 2.
Then Abraham spoke unto the elder servant of his household, which was over all
that he had, saying: Putt now thy hand under my thighe, 3 That I may bind
thee by an oath, by the Lord God of heaven, and God of the earth, that thou
will not take a wife unto my Son of the daughters of the Cananites, amongst
whom ^ dwell. 4 But that thou will go unto my country, and to my kindred, and
take a wise for my son Isaac. So Joseph in Putaphars house.

This government must be performed with all comelines fit for the household,
which is, that agreeable fitnes or conueniencie, which worthily becomes the
diversity of persons in the family, as, Superiors, inferiors, equalles: of
sex, male, female, of age, childehoode, youth, ripe age, old years: of
matters, as some concerning God, some man: of time, the day, the night. For
all these have not one and the same Rule of decency: Therefore the Apostle
says: Which rules his house, which keeps his children in subjection, with
all comelines. 1. Tim. 3. 4. Now* as there is comelines peculiar to the
subjection of children, so of servants: And as there is comelines for
subjection, so for equality: and as for behavior of those of the house, so to
those not of the house, and so likewise in all other the former reipectes, as
shall appear by the shining light or eye of this general rule in every part
of household government.

Of the duties of ordering the household, by the chief of the same: There are
2. sorts, The first regards those in the household. The other, strangers or
guestes coming into the same.


1. Tim. 5. 10. If she have brought up her children well: if she have been
given to hospitality* Job 31. 31. If the men of my tente have not said. O
that some would give us of this flesh: we are not satisffied, because the
stranger did not lodge abroad, I opened my doors to the wayfaring man So he
caused servants to give place to stranngers, which shows this diversity
of duties.

Now both of these are in regard of Christian holiness. The things of this
life.


Pro. 31. 15. She opens her mouth in wisdom, and the doctrine of mercy is
on her tongue. And rising whiles it is yet night, she gives meat to her
house, and a task to her maids. And Exodus 18. 5. And Iethro the father in
law of Mosche coming with his children and with his wife unto Mosche into
that deserte where he had placed his Tents, to wit, to the mount of God: 6
He said unto Mosche: I thy father in law Iethro do come unto thee: also thy
wife and her two sons with her. 7 Th^^ Mosche went forth to meet his
father in law, and bowing him self he kissed him, and they asked one another
of his welfare: afterward they went into his Tente. 8 Where Mosche declaring
unto his father in law whatsoever things the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and
the Egyptians for Izrael: and all that troubles which had happened unto them in
that way, from whence the Lord had delivered them. 9 Iethro rejoiced for all
these benefits which the Lord had done unto Izrael, because he had delivered
them cut of the hands of the Egiptians. 10 And Iethro said: Blessed be the
Lord God which has delivered you out of the hand of the Egiptians, and ^ut
of the hands of Parrho: Which has delivered his people from under the hands
of the Egiptians. 11 Now I know that the Lord is greater then all gods:
for in that thing wherein they were proud, he is above them. 12 Therefore
Iethro the Father in law of Mosche, took and offered Sacrifices, and a burnte
offeringe unto GOD, and Aaron and all the Elders of Izrael came to eat meat
with Iethro Mosche his father in law, before God. 13 And it came to pass the
next day, Mosche ^ittinge to judge the people, when as the people stood
about Mosche from the morning of that day unto the evening. 14. That the
Father in law of Mosche beheld all that he did unto the people: and said:
What is this that thou do unto this people? Why sit thou alone, and all
the people stand before thee from the morning unto the eueninge? 15 Then
Mosche said unto his father in law: Because this people come unto me to ask
ceunsell at God. 16 When there is any business between them, every one comes
unto me, that I may judge between both, and I make known the Statutes of
God and his laws. 17 But Iethro his father in law soyde: the thing is not
good which thou do. 18 Thou will altogether fainte both thou and the people
that is with thee, or this thing is to heavy for thee, thou can not perform
it alone. etc.

And this arises from a double respect: the commodity they receive, and the
duty they owe to the common state wherein they are: that as they have of their
children, servants, guestes, not only bodily service and friendship, but
that which is of conscience, and comes from their faith and religion, and
their prayer, and the blessing in them Matthew. 10. 41. so they must give them
this douh^e recompense. Also to the common state they are bound by couenaunte,
not only as much as in the^ lies by their household government to further
the peace and tranquillity of the common wealth, but also of Religion and true
holiness. 2. Kings ^1 17. Contrary to this is, their best care to be most
exquisite in the latter, and wholly negligente in the forme^, which is the
chiefest: So that their administration of householde matters, is altogether
civil, not religious.

For the family, the duty which regards them is to keep them in
subjection, for the performance of all duties of holiness and religion, and for
the diligent performaunce of those works and labors, which are fit for
every one.

1. Tim. 3. 4. Which may govern well his house, which may keep his children
in subjection, with all honesty. 1. Tim. If any be unblameable, the Husband
of one Wife, having faythefull children, which are not slaundered of riot,
either stubburne. Psalm. 101. 1. I will singe mercy and judgment unto thee, O
Lord will I singe. 2 I will mark (in an upright way) when thou shall come
unto me, I will continuall^e walk in the soundnes of my mind, in the midst
of mine house. 3 I will not set before mine eyes a wicked thing: I have hated
the works of them that decline, it shall not cleave unto me. 4 A frewarde
mind shall depart from me: I will not acknoweledge evil. 5 The tongue that
privily hurts his neighbor, I will cut out: him that is proud in his eyes,
and swelling in his mind, I shall not be able to suffer. 6 Mine eyes shall
wait upon the faithful of the land, that they may abide with me: He that
walks in the sound way, shall minister unto me. 8 The deceytfull shall not
dwell within mine house: He that tells lies, shall not be established before
mine eyes.

Now for the performance of this general duty, two sorts are required:

which are, Such as where they must commonly go before them and direct them.
Such as they must perform unto them.


Gene 35. 2. Wherefore Jacob gave commandment unto his family, and to all
that were with him: Put away the gods of the strange people, which are
amongst you, and cleause your selves, chaunginge your garments. ^ Afterward
arisinge let us ascend to Bethel, that there I may make an Altar to that
strenge GOD, which heard me in the day of my distress, and was present
with me in the way wherein I went. 4 Which when they had given unto Jacob
all the gods of the strange people which were in their hands, and the
earerings which were in their ears: Jacob hid them under that Oak which is
besides She^em.

Where we see that both Iaacob does both instruct them what to do, and in the
doing of these things directs them.

Such as wherein they must only go before them and direct them, are those
which only ought to be done jointly of the whole famelie, and then the
superiors must be there the chief directours of them: otherwise when they are
absente, they they must cause them to be done: as in prayer before and after
their labor, in thanks giving before and after meal* Iam 5. 13. Is any
amongst you sick in mind? Let it him pra^e ^s any man cheerful? let him
singe. Psalm 127. Unless the Lord build the house, then labor ^^ but lost
that build it* Unless the Lord keep the City, the keeper is diligent in
vain. 2 Let them be in vain unto you, which rise be^^mes, which sit down
stowelie, which ar^ ^edde with the meat of sorrows, so he gives sleep to
his beloved. Psalm. 55. 18. In the evening and morning, and a^ none days will I
me lita^e and make a noise, until he has heard my voice 1. ^im 4. 4 For what
soever God has created is good, neither is any thing to be refused, if it be
taken with thanksgiving. Luke 22. 17. And he took the cup, and when he had
given thanks he said: Take this and ^e^ide it amongst you. So Abraham's
servant said, Genesis 24 12. O Lord GOD of my master Abraham, cause I beseech
thee, that it come unto me this day, and exercise this goodness toward my
master Abraham. 48 And I bowed down and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the
Lord God of my master Abraham, because he had brought me by the right way,
to take my masters brother daughter for his Son. And upon any great
judgment on the family, Church, or common wealth, to direct them in
fastinges and prayers, with readings, meditations, and use of the word, as may
serve to give especial cause of humblinge, and especial cause of comfort
fit for that work. Hest. 4 16. Go gather together all the Jews which are
at Susis, and fast for me, and neither eat nor drink these three days,
night no^ day: I likewise and my maids will fast: so at length I will go in
to the King, which is not according to the commandment: and when I shall
perish, I will perish. Nehem 1. 4. And it came to pass* when I heard these
words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, in which I fasted
and prayed before the God of heaven. 5 And I said: I beseech thee O Lord God
of heaven, most strong God, greatest, and chiefly to be feared: Keeping
covenant and mercy, to them that love him and keep his commandments. 6
Let thine ear be attentive, and thine eyes be open to hearken to the which I
pray before thee at this time day and night for the Izraelites thy
servants: and I confess the sins of the Izraelites wherewith we have
sinned against thee: I also and the house of my fathers have sinned. etc. For
as it is their duty in their own private fast to do this by them selves, so
to direct others in the same, when they do it with them. Contrary to this is
the unchristian prophanenes in such cases: Also the unchristian shamefastnes
of some, and common negligence in others in these duties.

Such as they must perform unto them are duties of instruction. Reforming.


Pro. 13. 24. He which keeps back his rod, hates his son, but he
which loves him, does give him instructions betimes. Pro. 15. 32. He which
withdraws him self from instruction, despises his soul: but he that
harkeneth unto rebuke, possesses his soul.

The duties of instruction are, that by a familiar and most plain manner of
teaching, they may grow in the knoweledge of that truth which is according to
godliness. Gene. 18 19. When as I have known him, should I not reveal it, for
this cause that he may command his children and household after him, that
they may keep the way of the Lord by exercising righteousness and judgment,
and that the Lord may perform unto Abraham that which he has promised unto
him. Gene 14 14 When Abraham had heard that his kinsman was taken, he armed
his men, instructed 318. and followed them unto Dan. Deuteronomy. 20. 21.

They are for Continual daily instruction. That which respects the public
ministry.


Exodus 12. 25. 26. Let it be therefore, when ye shall come into the land which
the Lord shall give unto you as he has said, and shall observe this
worship. Let it be (I say) when your children ask pou: What signifies
this worship unto you? that ye say: It is the Sacrifice the Passover of the
Lord, who passing by the houses of the children of Israel, in Egipte, when he
sl^we the Egiptians, he delivered our families. Exodus 13. 14. And let it be
when thy son shall ask thee hereafter saying. What means this? that thou
say unto him: With a strong hand has the Lord brought us out of Egypt out
of the house of servants. For it came to pass when Pa^ho showed himself
cruel in letting us go, that the Lord slew every first borne of men, unto
the first borne of beasts. Therefore I kill unto the Lord the males of all
that open the womb: but every first borne of my children I redeem.

Duties for daily instruction, are Instruction out of the Scriptures.
Instruction drawn from Gods works.


Psalm. 87. 1. Receive with your ears (my people) my doctrine, incline your
ear unto the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth in a parable, I will
power forth hid things, which HAVE BIN OF OLD TIME. 3 Which we have
heard and known, as our Elders have told unto us 4 We will not hide it from
their children, the after generation 5 Being about to declare the praises of
the Lord, his might, and his wonders which he has done. For he has set a
testimony in Iahha^ob, and put a law in Israel: which he commanded our Elders
to make known to their children. 6 That the after generation, the sons which
should be borne, rising up, might declare it to their sons. 7 And they may
set their hope on God, nor might forget the works of the strong God: but keep
his co^maunpementes 8 Nor that they be not as their elders, a stubburne and
rebellious generation: a generation which has not prepared their mind, and
whose spirit was not constant toward the strong God.

Instruction out of the Scripture, is by the daily readinge of the same with
them, both to make them acquainted with the course of them, so that they may
mark the same for their better profiting, by the allegations of the public
ministry, and also to refer those things which are plain and easy, or
which they have learned from the public ministry, unto such plain
instruction, as they instructed, may understand and know, how to bring it in
use. 2. Tim. 3. 15. Thou haste known the Scriptures from a child: which can
not be spoken of a through knowledge, no not such as belongs to the old men,
who should be sound in faith: much less such as belongs to a Minister:
but such as this, in being made acquainted with it, and caused to mark as he
was able, the course of it, and to learn for use and practice, such as his
parents were able to note unto him, and he fit to receive by daily
practice. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. And let these words which I commanded he this day, be
in thy heart. 7 And put them pearcinglie into the children, and speak of them,
when thou ^ittest at thine house, when thou walk by ante way, when thou
lie dow^e, and when thou risest up. 8 Also build them for a sign upon
thine hand, and let them be for frontelettes between thine eyes. 9 Briefly,
write them on the posts of thine house, and on thy gates.

Contrary to this is, first that they are utterly negligente and ignorant
how they should do this: Th^n that some presume above this rule, and go
beyond their calling: and especially that their household is not trained by
this means, nor made fit for the public ministry, and to amend their lives
by such christian exercises.

Instruction drawn from Gods works is, by applying the works of God paste or
present, to move them the better to confidence, and trust in God, by works
of his mercy: to fear to offend God, by works of his justice, and so to
sow the very seed of true religion and good conscience in them. Genesis 18. 19.
When as I have known him, should I not reveal it? for this cause that he may
command his children and ho^sholde after him that they keep the way of the
Lord by exercising justice and judgment, that the Lord may perform unto
Abraham that which he has promised unto him.

The duty which respects the public ministry, Double, First concerning
the obteyning of it. The second concerning the use of it.


First concer^ing the obteyning of i^, they must (if it be possible) in their
place and calling adioyne them to a set ministry, if not, to b^st^we at least
the Sabbath days, yea other also, in seeking to the Ministers and Prophets of
God, to hear the word of God: This is manifest, first: Because we must
first seek the kingdom of God, whereof this is a part, Esa. 32. 1. Behold
a King shall rule justly, and excellent ones shall govern according to the
rule, the eyes of them who see shall not wink, but the ears of them who
hear, shall hearken: the mind of the ^astie shall understand knowledge, and
the tongue of the stutterer, shall readilye speak shining things. When
Sauiors, to wit, ministers of the doctrine of salvation* shall ascend in the
mountain of the Lord to judge the mountain of Esau, the kingdom shall be to
the Lord. Hob^d. 21 Diverse administrations but one Lord. 1. Cor. 12 We are
the Ambassadors of Christ, to beseech* you to be reconciled. 2. Cor. 5.
Secondly it is the ordinary means to begette and nourishe faith in us. How
can they believe except they hear: how can they hear without a Preacher:
how can he preach without he be sent? Romans 10. He has given Pastors, and
Doctors, for the gathering together of the Church the work of the ministry,
and building them up to a perfect age in Christ, that they be not as children
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Ephe. 4. Attend to
reading exhortation and doctrine, in these continue, in these things be, for in
so dooinge thou shall save thy self and others, 1. Tim. 4.

Secondly because it is the greatest blessing to have it, and the greatest
plague to want it. Iere. 23. having threatened them that they feed not the
people, he says after, I will gather the rest of my sheep out of all the
land whither I had driven them, and I will bring the^ back unto their
sheepeco^^s, where they shall multiply and m^^ease, and I will set over them
Pastors, which shall feed them: so that they shall fear no more, nor shall be
wanting, says the Lord. Iere. 3. I will bring you to Syon, where I will give
you Pastors after my heart who shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. God will give you in deed the bread of affliction and water of
oppression: but none of thy Teachers shall ^shut up any more in a corner, but
thy eyes shall see thy teachers, and thy ears shall hear a voice behind us,
saying, Hear is the way walk in it. Esa. 30. 20.

A famine not of bread, nor a thirst of water, but hearing the word of the
Lord. etc.

Mat. 8. But when he saw the multitude he had compassion on them, because they
were dispersed and scattered abroad as sheep having no shephearde: Then he
said, Surely the harvest is great, but the laborers few, etc. Which shows
how miserable they are which want this benefit: It allows also this duty
of seeking. 2. Kin. 4. 22. And he said, wherefore will thou go to him (meaning
the Prophet) to day? It is neither ^^w Mo^n^ nor Sabbath day Which shows that
in the scarcity of the preaching ministry, they went on those days to the
Prophets to hear the word of God. The second duty is to cause them to do
that which is commanded them in the third Command* to that purpose. Which
although it be not proper to this place, yet for the simpler sort, it is thus
set down First, to prepare themselves to the preaching of the word, by
consideration of Gods ordinance and promise, and their corruption* so that
laying aside all superstuitie of evil, that they ^aye with meekenes receive
the word. Iam. 1. 17. Luc. 8. 8. Take heed therefore how ye hear: for
whosoever has, it shall be given unto him, and who so has not, even that which
he seems to have, shall be taken from him: And for the Sacraments, to consider
Gods institution, their ministry, his mercy in Christ, their faith, their
repentance, and their wantes: and so seeking the assurance of grace, of
reconciliation and comfort, to come unto the table of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.
28. But let every one prove him self, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. Esa. 1. 16. Wash your selves, purify your selves, put
away the wickedness of your actions, and cease to do evil before mine eyes.
Esa. 66. 2 But upon hint do I look that is poor and contrite in spirit, and
trembles at my words. Mat. 5. 23 Therefore if thou have brought thy gift to
the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee. 24
Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy ways: First, he
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift

Secondly, in the works themselves, with reverence and understanding to hear
and receive the word, to be touched according to the matter, and with joy and
assu^a^ce of faith receive solace and increase of grace by the right use of the
Sacraments, and after to call to mind and try by the scripture things
delivered, and so hold fast the good and to apply the comfort of the
Sacraments unto all temptations afterward. Psalm. 78 1. Hear my doctrine O^ny
people, incline thine ^are to the words of my mouth. Nehe. 8. 10. After
Nehemiah said (to wit the Kings Ambassador) and Ezra the Priest and Scribe,
and the Levites teathing the people, unto all the people: This is the day
sanctified unto the Lord your god, mourn not, neither weep* (for all the
people wept when they ^oarde the words of the Law). 1. These. 1. 5. Because our
Gospel abode wi^h you, not in speech on^y but also in power: both in the holy
Ghost, as also with much sure persuasion, as ye have known what manner of men
we have bin amongst you for your sakes Mat. 26. And when they had song a
Psalm, they went out into the moun^ Oliue^. 1. These 5. 20. Quench not the
spirit: Set not light by preaching: Try all things: Hold fast that which is
good.

For obedience of life it behooves them to teach them, call on them, and see
the^ do this which they learn, that the public ministry and private use of
the word be not contemned, neglected, unprofitable unto them, and so god
provoked not only against their family, but also the Church of which they are.
Contrary to this is, that men both themselves and their families, go to the
public ministry, as to a common matter, let it fall after to the ground,
without any lookinge into the certainty of doctrine, the power and practice
of it: and some with the ministry of the word become worse, both they and
their housholdes, then those which never heard it. Exodus 13. 1. And declare
unto thy son in that day, saying: For this has the Lord done these things
unto me, when I went out of Egipte 9 So shall it be unto thee for a sign
upon thine hand, and for a monun^ente between thine eyes, that the doctrine
of the Lord may be in thy mouth: to wit, that the Lord with a strong hand
brought thee out of Egypt. Which with the rest of the Law shows, that a^
those times this must be done, and that so thoroughly, that this work by this
means, may be a lively sign, and the doctrine be so understood, that it may
more fruitefullie and lively be communicated by conference one to another.
Also Act. 10. 24. And the other day after, they entered into Caesarea. And
Cornelius waited for them, having gathered together his kinsemen and special
friends. Nehe. 8. 13. And all the people came to eat and to drink, and to
send por^ions, and to make great joy, because they understood those words
which they had made known unto them. 1. King. 13. 31. And i^ came to pass
after they had buried him, that he gave commandment unto his sons, saying:
When I shall be dead, bury me likewise in this se^ulchre, in the which that man
of God is buried: place my bones besides his bones. 33 For surely the things
which he has foreshewed by the word of the Lord, against the altar which is
in Bethel, and against all the high places which are in the Cities of
Schom^m, shall come to pass

Job the first chap. v. 5. After it came to pass, when they had fnished the
days of the banquet, that Job sent and fanctisyed them, and rising earelie, he
offered a sacrifice according to the number of them all. For Job said,
Peradventure my sons have sinned, or cursed God in their heart. So Job did
every of those days. Which shows, he called on them to do their duties, in
sanctifyinge them selves and their families, and preparing them according to
the manner prescribed.

The duties in reforming, are those duties whereby they must labor to
reform every thing amiss which is espied, for Gods glory and their good, and
least it creep further. Contrary to this is, that many corruptions are not
accounted of, that they are winked at.

Job. 1. 5. Psalm. 101. 3. 4. 5. I Will not set before mine eyes a wicked
thing, I hate the works of those that decline, it shall not cleave unto me.
A froward mind shall depart from me: I will not acknowledge evil. That
tongue that priuelie hurts his neighbor, I will cut out: Him that is
proud in look, and swelling in mind, I can not suffer.

The rule of this must be the meaning of the ten commandments, which
because it is necessary for the simple, though not so proper for this place,
it is briefly set down. They shall suffer none in their house unreformed:
which A Phil. 1. 9. 10. Col. 1. 10 11. B Command. ^. Ier. 9. 24 C Deuteronomy. 6. 4
5. 12. 13. He. 1228. Genesis 17. 1. D Command. 2 Deuteronomy. 12. 31. 32. Esa. 29. 13.
14. Mat. ^5. Col. 2. 23. Psalm. 119. Psalm 26. 8. Act. 2. 42. E John 4. 22 2
King. 18. 4 Act. 10. 26. and 14. 13. Exodus 33. 24. Romans 1. 23. Hos. 2. 17. Esa
30. 22. F Command. 3. Mat. 5. 34. Iam. 5. 12. G Act. 9. 15. H Genesis 4. 26. Mal.
1. 11. 12. (prap.) 2. Chro. 24. 2. Eccle. 5. 2. Genesis 24. 5. Luc. 8. 18. Eccle.
5. 1 1. Cor. 11. 28. (Feeling) 2. Chro. 24. 22. Ierem. 4. 2. 1. These. 2. 13.
Nehe. 8. 10. (Fruit) Heb. 6 16 1. These 5. 20- Act. 17. 11. Psalm. 51. 9. K
Comman. 4 Esa. 58 13. Amos 8. 5. M Command 5 Mark. 7. 10. Romans 13. 7. Romans 1.
31. 32. 1. Tim. 5. 8. N Leut. 19. 32. Job. 32. 6. Rom 12. 6, 7. 1. Pet. 4. 6.
Col. 3. 22. These. 5. 12. 1. Pet. 5. 2. O Command. 6. Mat. 5. 21. 22. Leuit. 19.
17. Exodus 21. 29. P Command. 7. Ephe. 5. 3. Mat. 5. 28. 1. Pet. 4. Job. 31. 1.
Q Command. 8. Exodus 26. 14. 15. 1. These. 4. 4.
A either in judgment is known to err from the truth of the word of God,
or in manners, from the practice of the same But if any B delighte in the
ignorance of God, be careless to approve him self as one that C wholly
depends on him, loves him, fears him, fears him, reuerenceth him,
labors to approve all his ways before him: D If any be given to Idolatry,
snperstition, etc. and cares not in every part of the worship of God, to
follow his revealed will: or if in the parts commanded, he appear negligent
and cold. E Or to put them to any other use then is commanded, or be given
to images, superstitiouse monumentes, customs, occasions, or such like. If
any dishonor the Name of God, either F in the vnreuerent using, or abusing,
or perverting and not using with that preparation before, feeling at the
present time, and fruit after which is prescribed, his citles, G word, H
Sacraments, I works. And if any K profane his Sabbath by vain pastimes, going
to plays, or give L not him self to the exercises appointed on that day, out
of the word: M If any neglecte especial duties toward their equalles, N
superior or inferior in years, gifts, authority, as Masters, Parents,
Magistrates, Ministers, servants, children, or people. If any declare not a
conscience to flee O evil, anger, malice, contention, quareling, fighting, or
any hurting of the person of a man, either in soul or body: not being
careful to succor the same according to his calling: P If any be found
unchaste, in body, words, countenance or gesture: intemperate in diet, in
apparel dissolute, not caringe to maintain the contrary holiness in him self
and others: Q If any care not for the goods of another man, but by falsehoode.
fllatterie, oppression, etc. diminishe the same. R If he be negligent in
increasing of his own by honest and lawful means* R. Command. 9. Ephe. 4.
28. Pro. 28. 19. S. Co^man. 10. Psalm. 15. 3. Tit. 3. 1. Co. 13. 4. Pro. 25. 13.
V. Iam. 1. 23. Gal. 5. 24.
if he mispende it in cards, dice, gaming. etc. S If any care not to maintain
the good name of others, but be given unto unnecessary blasing of other men's
infirmities, by lying, slaundering, backebiting, taunting. etc. T V If any show
him self careless to restrain the motions and entisementes unto sin, and
the Iustes of the same: Then they shall use the means following to redress
them.

The duties which are to be applied to this rule, are these: Those which they
must do by themselves. Those which they must procure to be done by others.


Iam. 5. 15. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up: and if he have committed sin, they shall be forgiven him. As this
must be done for him in sickness, so in health: and as in this cause so in any
other of the like nature.

The duties they must do by them selves must have two properties: They must
be done with wisdom fit for those duties. Pacientie fit.


Wisdom is that the causes may be thoroughly sifted, and soundly reproted
out of the word of God. According unto this wisdom also, until a fitter
occasion, this duty may be let pass, and with keeping the authority of the
chief of the family be winked at for a time. Eccles. 7. 21. Apply not thy
mind unto all the words that are spoken, seeing thou ought not to hear
thy servant curfinge thee. 22 For also many times thy mind is privy, that
thou have cursed others. Prou. 20. 21. He which brings up his servant
deltcatelie, shall in the end be deprived of his children.

Patience fit for it is, with keeping the authority of the chieefe of the
family, to hear what can be alleged, and by equity also to allow or
disallowe the same. Contrary to which is, hastines without discretion and
making the matter plain, that the conscience may be touched for the fault.
Also pride not to hear any excuse or defense delivered in duty, submission
and obedience of child or servant. Finally, bitterness, which may provoke
wrath rather then cause amendment. Colos. 3. 21. Fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath, least they be discouraged. Job. 31. 13. If I contemned the
cause of my servant or mine handmayde when they plead with me. 14 For what
should I do, if the strong God should rise? or if he should visit, what
should I answer him? Nomb 22. 26. After the Angel of the Lord went
forward, and floode in a na^^^we place, where there was no way to decline,
either to the right hand or to the least. 27 And when the asseseeing the
Angel of the Lord God layee down under Baalam, Balaam being kindled with
wrath, smote the Ass with his floffe. 28 And the Lord opened the mouth of
the Ass, which said unto Baalam: what have I done unto thee, that thou have
smitten me new three times? Paalam said unto the Ass, because thou haste
meeked me. I would there were a sword in mine hand, for even n^we would I
kill thee. Ephe. 6. And ye Masters, do the same things toward them, letting
pass threatninges: knowing also that your master is in heaven, neither that
there is respect of persons with him.

And these are the properties of those duties.

The diverse sorts are, Rebuke. Correction.


Pro. 22. 15 The foolishnes which is bound unto the heart of a child, the
rod of instruction, will remove far from him. Pro. 23. 13. Withdrawr not
correction from thy son: when as thou shall strike him with the rod, he
shall not dye thereof. 14 Strike him with the rod, and thou shall deliver his
soul from the grave. Pro. 20. 30. Horsecombes are for the evil man, blewenes,
wounds and stripes, pearcing through the inner parts of the belly. Pro 29.
15. The rod and rebuke gives wisdom: but the child let alone to him
self. shameth his mother.

Rebuke is a sharp admonition to take heed of the evil reproved aright, as
is gathered out of that before.

Correction is when with a sharp rebuke of instruction, punishment is
inflicted or laid upon the offender, according to their discretion:
consideration being had of the fault and all circumstances of the same. Yet if
this at any time for some causes be omitted, a greater is to be threatened and
performed, when they shall next deserve the same. Pro. 19. 19 Be thou great in
the seruencie of anger, in forgiving the fault, saying, that if thou shall
deliver him, thou will further punish him afterward. Contrary to this is, to
much lenity, also immoderate correction. Pro. 19. The rod and rebuke gives
wisdom, but a son permitted to him self, shamed his mother. Pro. 29. 16.
Chastise thy child, and he shall bring thee rest, he shall delight thy soul.
Pro 29. 19. A servant is not chastised with words, etc.

That which they must procure to be done by other is, that when the former
means will not serve, they do according to S. James his rule, send for the
Elders of the Church, that they may by new admonitions, rebukes, and censures
of the Church draw them to repentance: and if that serve not, to bring them
to the Magistrate, and so (those which they may) to discharge the^ from the
family, unless they amend: and those which they may not to keep them in such
order, till God or the common wealth cut them off. Iam. 5. 15. And the prayer
of faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Mat. 18. 16. But if he shall not
hear thee, take yet with thee one or two, that of the mouth of two or three
witnesses, the whole matter may be confirmed. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. If any man shall
have a stubburne and rebellious son, which hearkeneth not unto the voice of
his father, nor to the voice of his mother, although^ they have chastised him,
yet he hearkeneth not unto them: 19 At length his father and his mother taking
him, let them bring him to the Elders of their City, and to the gate of
their place: 20 And let them say unto the Elders of their City: This our
son is stubburne and rebellious, he hearkeneth not unto our voice, he is a
ryotous person and a drunkarde. 21 Then let all the citizens ouerwhelme him
with stones, that he may die, and take away that evil out of the midst of
thee, that all the Izraelites may hear and fear. Psalm. 101. 7. He that
works deceypte, shall not dwell within mine house: he that speaks lies
shall not be established before mine eyes.

And hitherto of the first sort of duties concerning Christian holiness in
the family.

The other concerning the things of this life, is conveniently to provide the
necessary things of this life, as that they have convenient clothing, food,
rest: and (if on certain causes need be) recreation. 1. Tim. 5. ^. But if
any man provide not for his, and especially those of his house, has denied the
faith, and is wors^ then an infidel. Pro. 31. 21. She fears not for her
family because of the snow, for all her family is clothed with double
clokes. Pro. 12. 9. The just man regards the life of his beast, but the
compassions of the wicked, are the compassions of the cruel.

And then much more the master must care for the servants, that they may
have even that refreshing and ease which is meet. And thus much for the
general duties, and of their special duties toward those which shall be
co^tinuallie or ordinarily under their government in the family.

Now follows the other which is the intertaynement of strangers: whose
property is, the love of intertayning of Ghestes, 1. Tim. 3. 2. Therefore a
Bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, watchinge, sober,
modest, given to hospitality, etc. Heb. 13. 2. Be not unmindful of
intertayning Chestes: for hereby certain unawares have intertayned Aungells.
1. Pet. Be hailcicus one toward another, without grudging.

The first duty required of this work is, a liberal and cheerful
ministering of protection and all things which serve for the necessity and
comfort of this life, as is meet for the ability of them which receive, and
the condition of those who are received. Genesis 18. 2. For when lifting up his
eyes he had looked, behold three men stood before him, whom whilst he saw
he runs to meet them from the door of the Tente and bowed him self to the
earth. And he said: My Lords: If new I have found favor in thine eyes,
pass not I pray thee from thy servant. 4 Let there now be taken a little
water, and wash your feet, and sit down under this tree. 5 In the mean
time I will take and bring a morsel of bread, and refreshe your heart,
afterward ye shall go forward, seeing that for this cause you pass by your
servant: which said: Do so as thou haste spoken. 6 Therefore Abraham going
hastily into the Tente unto Sara, said: Make ready at once three measures of
corn: Take fine meal, kneade it, and make kakes baked under the ashes. 7 But
Abraham running to the heard, took a sucking calfe, tender and good, and gave
it to a servant, which made haste to prepare it. 8 Therefore taking butter
and milk, and the calse which he had prepared, he set them before them, who
did eat he standing by them under the same tree. Gene. 19. 1. And those two
Angels coming unto Sodom in the eueninge, Lot sat at the gate of Sodom:
whom when Lot saw, he risinge went to meet them, and bewed him self with
his face to the ground. 2 And he said: Behold now my Lords, turn I pray
you into the house of your servant, For protection see a notable example of
Lot, Genesis 19. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. And Judge. 19. 16. 17. 18
and wash your feet, after rising in the morninge, ye shall go your way.
Which said: Not so, we pray thee, for we can lodge all night in the streets.
3 But when he was instant upon them exceeding lie, they turning unto him,
entered into his house: which made them a banquet, and did bake unleavened
bread, and they did eat. 1. Tim. 5. 10. Being decked with a fit testimony in
good works, if she have brought up her children, if she have bin har ^erous,
if she has washed the Saints feet, if she have succored the afflicted, if
she have followed every good work diligently.

The other is as occasion serves mutuallie to edify one another, by calling
to mind Gods works, mutual instructions and exhortations: Also by bringinge
them to the public service of GOD, and causing them to keep with them the
Sabbath, as appears by the example above. And Romans the first Chap. the 10.
verse, Always in my prayers beseechinge, that (if by any means) ^t length a
prosperous iourneye by the will of God might be given me to come unto you. 11
For I long to see you, that I might imparte unto you a spiritual gift, that
you may be established.

Contrary to this is nigardlines, such as was in Nabal in receiving of
guestes. Also suffering God to be dishonored, his word or Sabbath neglected,
or any such abuse to be committed by their guestes, and not labor by good
means to amend them or remove them from the family.

And hitherto of the chief of the family, and their duties as are general
to all.

Now for the most part, the chief of the family are married folk, and so
in common the governors of the house. They are called married folks, because
of the band of Marriage. Marriage is that ioyninge of one man and one woman
together by the covenant of God, that they may be one flesh, until they end
their life. Gene. 2. 24. Therefore shall man leave his father and his mother,
and clean to his wise, and they shall be one flesh. Leuit. 18. 18. Take not one
woman unto another to vex her, by uncovering the shame of her that is married
upon this in her life. Pro. 2. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God. Mala. 2. 14. But you say, Wherefore?
Because the Lord has witnessed between thee and the wise of thy youth,
against whom thou do vnfaithfullie: yet she is thy companion and wife
couenaunted unto thee. 1. Cor. 7. 30. The wife is bound by the law as long
as her husband lives, but if her husband be dead, she is free to marie unto
whom she will, only in the Lord. Rom 7. 1. Know ye not brethren (for I
speak to them that know the law) that the law does bear rule over a man
as long as he lives? 2 For the woman being subject unto the man being alive,
is bound by the Law: but if her husband be dead, she is delivered from the
law of the man. 3 Therefore whilst the man lives, she shall be called an
adulteress, if she become another man's: but if her husband be dead, she is
free from the law, that she is not an adulteress, though she become another
man's.

To be one flesh, by a part put for the whole, is that most near and holy
society with the power and use of the bodies one of another in purity, whereby
the man in an especial manner is become the head of the wife, and the wise
another help unto the husband likewise. Gene. 2. 18. And the Lord said: It
is not good that man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him.
Pro. 2. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant
of her God. Mat. 19. 6. Therefore they are no more two but one flesh: that
therefore which GOD has joined together, let no man separate. Ephe. 5. 31.
Therefore shall man leave father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and
they which were two shall become one flesh.

Therefore in the whole government of the family, The husband is the chief
or foregouernour. The Wife is a fellow helper.


To be a foregouernour is in the whole administration of household government
to be over all persons and matters in the house, and even the wife. 1. Tim. 3.
5. For if any man knows not how to govern his own house, how shall he^
care for the Church of God? And to look as the chief honor, to all revenues
and the estate of the good things of this life, especially to care for the
keeping and increasing of it. Diligently know the estate of thy heardes. etc.
Pro. 27. 23.

To be a fellow helper, is to yield help to her husband, especially as
home, in all the matters of the family. 1. Tim. 5. 14. I will therefore that
the youger women marry, and bring forth children, and govern the house, and
give no occasion unto the adversary to speak evil. Tit. 2. 5. That they ^^
temperate, pure, tarying at home, good, subject to their husbands, least that
the word of God be blasphemed. Judge. 5. 24. Blessed be Iahell the wife of
Chebar the Kenite before all women, Let her be blessed before the women which
abide in tents. Pro. 31. 5. Who shall find a woman of strength, seeing her
price far exceeds the Carbuncles. 12 She does him good and not evil all
the days of her life. Gene. 18. 6. Therefore Abraham going hastily into the
tente unto Sarah, said: Make ready at once, three measures of corn, take
fine meal, kneade it and make kakes bread under the ashes. 7 And Abraham
running unto the heard, took a suckinge calfe tender and good, and gave it
unto a servant, which made haste to dress it. 8 Then taking butter and milk,
and the Calfe which he had prepared, he set them before them, which did eat,
he standing by them under the tree.

Contrary to which is, that we keep not the authority and chiefedome in all
matters: that women usurp any part of it: that they be given to gadding and
to meddle with matters not fit for their labor and travel. 1. Tim. 5 They
will go from house to house. etc. Pro. 7. 11. Her feet dwell not in the house.

The duties of married folk in the family are of two sorts, First mutual.
Then toward others.


Pro. 31. 12. 15. Who shall find a strong woman, when as her price exceeds
the car^^ncles? And rising whilst it is yet night, she gives food to her
house, and a task unto her maids.

Mutual duties are those which are to be performed one to another of the,
they are Common to both. Proper to each.


Exodus 21. 10. If he shall take another unto him self, let him not diminishe
her food, her clothing, and benevolence due unto her. Tim. 2. 3. Likewise unto
the old women, that they we are such apparel as may become holiness, not
slaunderers, not given to much wine, but teachers of honest things. 4 That they
may make the young women wise, that they may love their husbands and children.
5 That they may be temperate, chaste, tarying at home, good, subject to their
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.

Common to both is that which both owe to each other, and it is Dwelling
together. Mutual good proceedings from thence.


The 1. Epist. to the Cor. 7. 12. If any brother have an unbelieving wife, and
she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake her. 13 And the wife
which has an unbelieving husband, which is content to dwell with her, let
her not forsake him.

Dwelling together is to be ordinarily in a dwelling place for the better
performance of each other mutual duetis. Mat. 1. 18. For when his mother Marie
was betrouthed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child
by the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 7. 10. And to the married I command, not I but the
Lord: Let not the wife separate her self from her husband. But to the
remnaunt I say, and not the Lord, if ^ay brother have an unbelieving wife,
and she be content to dwell with him, let him not not forsake her. 13 And
the wife which has an unbelieving husband, which is content to dwell with
her, let her not forsake him. 1. Pet. 3. 7. Likewise let the men dwell together
as becomes them that ha^ knowledge, giving honor unto the woman's vessel, as
to the weaker, that when as ye be (...) jointly of the grace of life, your
prayers be not interrupted. Ruth. 4. 11. Unto whom all the people which were in
the gate, and the Elders said: We are witnesses: The Lord make this woman
which shall come into thine house, like unto Rachell, and Leah, which both did
build the house of Iizraell, and get thou the riches of Eph^ata, and let the
name of Bethlehem be renowned. 12 Letee thine house be as the house of Peretz
whom Thamar bare unto Iehuda, of that seed which the Lord shall give thee of
this maid.

Yet the Scripture aloweth upon necessary occasion of warfare service to the
common wealth, Church, or necessary affairs of their own, sometimes a long
absence. Deuteronomy. 20. 7. What man soever has espoused a wife, and yet has not
married her, let him go and return to his house, that he dye not in this
battle, and another man marie her. 8 And let the Governors proceed further
to speak unto the people: What man is he that is soft and fearful in
heart, let him depart and return to his house, that he make not the hearts
of his brethren to melte as does his heart. 9 Then when the Governors shall
cease to speak unto the people, they shall make Princes of the bands o^
war, in the heads of the people. 2. Samu. 1^. 11. And Vriah said unto
David: The Arc and Izraell and Iehuda, abide in Tents, and Ioab my Lord and
the servants of my Lord, have their Tents in the plain field, and should
I enter into mine house to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? As thou
live and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. Pro. 17. 19. For
mine husband is not at home, he is gene a far journey, at the appointed
day he will return again.

Contrary to this is ordinary abuse and negligence of this duty, which
brings manifold inconveniences.

The mutual good proceeding from dwelling together is that which consists in
a sweet communicating of the persons and goods, for the mutual necessity and
consolation one of another. 1. Cor. 7. 3. Let the husband give unto the wife
due benevolence, and likewise the wife unto the husband. 4 The wife has not
power over her own body but the husband: and likewise the husband has not
power ever his own body, but the wife. 5 Defraude not one another, unless it
be by consent for a time, that ye may apply your selves to fasting and prayer,
and come together again, least Satan tempte you for your incontinencie. It is
not good for man to be alone. Genesis 2.

Here also must be considered the parts of this duty: first, due
benevolence which is the honorable possession of their vessels in holiness one
toward another, for avoiding of sin, bringing forth a seed of God, and the
honest and proper delight which ought to be between the man and the wife.
Hebr. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled: but
whoremongers and adulterers God shall condemn. Mala. 2. 14. And ye say,
wherefore? Because the Lord has witnessed between thee and the wife of thy
youth, against whom thou doeest vnfaithfullie wherea^ she is thy companion and
joined in covenant unto thee. Esai. 62. 7. As when a young man marries a
virgin, when thy children do marie wives, as in the joy (I say) of the
bridegroom with the bride, so shall the Lord rejoice with thee. Genesis 26. 8. And
it came to pass when they had bin there many days, that Abimelech king of the
Philistims looked by the wind^we and saw that, behold I saak played with
Rebekka his wife, wherefore calling Isaak, he said to him, Surely behold she
is thy wife.

Pro. 5. 18. Let thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife of thy
youth. 1^ Let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant wild goat: let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times, and wander in her love continually. 20 And
wherefore should thou wander my son with a strange woman, or embrace the
bosom of a stranger?

Contrary to this is the abuse of their liberty between them selves,
communicating that which is proper to the husband to other in whooring,
dancing, uncomely familiarity with other.

The second is their mutual help or labor one toward another, in word,
deed, and commuuicating of good things, for the mutual nourishing one of
another. Ephe. 5. 29. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes i^, as Christ also does the Church. Pro. 31. 28. Her children do
rise, and call her blessed, her husband also does praise her, saying: Many
women have done stoutelie but thou exceedest them all.

And these are the common duties of one toward another: the proper do
follow They are the duties one of them in several to another.

They are of the Husband to the wife. Wife to the husband.


Ephe. 5. 33. But also you particularly every one so love his wife as him
self, and let the ^ife fear the husband.

The proper duties of the husband are, A proper care for his wife. The
applying of the general duty of all men toward women to his wife.


1. Pet. 3. 7. Likewise let men dwell together with them: giving honor unto
the woman's vessel as unto the weaker, seeing that ye are heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.

The proper care for the wife is to cover her that is to provide all things
meet for a mate so neerily joined in full blessing to him, and thus according
to their condition, to give honor to her as the fittest for him, in heaven and
in earth, When Adam had perfectly known the nature and property of all
beasts, and given a fit name to every one yet to Adam he found not a fit
helper before him, therefore he must perform this honor to her.
with a paciente covering or bearing of her infirmities. 1. Pet. 3. 7. Exodus
21. If he shall take another unto him, let him not diminishe her food, her
clothing and bene^olence due unto her. Genesis 30. 16. And unto Sarah he said,
Behold I have given a thousand Cicles of silver unto thy brother: behold he is
the covering of thine eyes amongst all that are with thee: Let it be known
amongst all, and be thou instructed. Ruth. 3. 9. Unto whom he farde: who art
thou? which said: I am Ruth thy handmayde: that thou may spread the wing
over thine handmaide, because thou art the kinseman. Esai. 3 28. In that day
shall 7. women take hold of one man, saying: We will eat our own meat, and
put on our own clothes: only that we may be called by thy name: Take away our
reproach.

The applying of the general duty of all men in regard of care toward; his
wife, is when in an especial manner the image of Gods glory and wisdom does
^hine in the government of the husband toward his wife, and the glory
which God has in the same, shines in the honor and glory which the man in
all things takes from the wife. 1. Cor. 11. 3. I will that ye know, that
Christ is the head of every man, and the man the woman's head, and God is
Christ's head. 7 For the man ought not to cover his head, because he is the
image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man. 8 For the man
is not of the woman, but the woman of the man etc.

Contrary to this is, when men are indiscreet, childish, fond, lose their
authority; or keep it not, but also their hardness, bitterness, want^ of
wisdom in framing them to perfection in obedience.

The proper duties of the wife are, Recompense of her husbands care. And the
applying of that general duty of all women in regard of men, in a peculiar
manner to him, which is called to have him that covering of her eyes before all
men.


The recompense of the husbands care, is by obeyinge him in all good things,
and by her advise, sweet counsel, labor and travel, to be a comfort or help
unto him. Pro. 31. 11. The soul of her husband does trust her, and the
spoils do not sail. 12 She does him good and not evil all the days of her
life. 13 She secketh ^oll or flax, and makes it for the pleasure of her
husbands. 14 She is like to the merchants ships, she brings meat from
far. 17 She girdeth her loins with strength, and confirms her arms. She
tastinge her merchandise to be good, her candle is not put out by night. She
puts her hands to the whar^e, and her hands do hold the spindle.

The labor is double: Either in matters of this life: or Christian holiness.


Pro. 31. 26. She opens her mouth wisely, and the doctrine of mercy
sits on her tongue. 28 She beholds the ways of her family, and eats
not the bread of slothfulness.

The matters of this life are, her labor In regard of her family. And her
own work.


For the family, she must ouersee all the ways of them, and both set them
work and task, and also give them their meat and other necessaries in due
season. Pro. 31. 15. And rising whilst it is yet night, she gives food to
her house, and a task to her maids. 16 She considers a field, and takes
it: of the fruits of her hands she planteth a vineyarde. 17 She girdeth her
loins with strenght, and confirms her arms. 21 She is not afraid of her
household, because of the snow, for all her household is clothed with double
clokes.

Her own work is to labor diligently, earelie and late, in something of
profit for the family. Pro. 31. 13. 14. 15. 17. 19. 22.

Her labor for Christian holiness is, to see all duties accomplished at the
commandment of her husband: for which Christian watchefulnes proper to a
Mistres of the house, is requires even to be his eyes, foot and mouth, when
he is away: in espying, looking, admonishing, rebuking, and also giving alms
to the poor. Pro. 31. 20. She opens her palm of her hand unto the poor,
and she stretches out her hands unto the needy. 26 She opens her mouth
wisely, and the doctrine of mercy is set on her tongue.

The second especial duty of the wife so called by the sign of it, is to be
an image of the authority and wisdom of her husband, in her whole
administration, and so to be his glory and honor: and from a meek and quiet
spirit in all her behavior of words, deeds, apparel, countenance, gesture,
etc. to signify plainly she has feeling of him in her heart, as of the image
of gods Majesty, glory, and perfection. Genesis 24. 63. (For Isaac had gone
forth to pray in a certain field in the evening) and when he liften up his
eyes and beheld, Behold the Came m^ls came. 64 R^bekka also lifting up her
eyes, when she saw Isaak, she descended from the Cammell. 65 For Ribhah saying
unto the servant, who is that man which walks by that field to meet us?
The servant answered, It is my master. And she took a ^ayle and covered her
self. Gene. 20. 16. And unto Sarah he said: Behold I have given a thousand
Cicles of silver unto thy brother: behold he is unto thee a covering of the
eyes amongst all that are with thee. 1 Pet. 3. 6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham,
calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are made as long as ye do well, even
when ye are not terrified with any sear.

Where Sarah speaking of her husband but in her heart: the Apostle says she
did it as of her Lord. Contrary to this is, the pride and untamed affection
of the wise, their uncomely gestures, their whote and chiding answers
toward their husbands, their unshamefast or equallike looks: finally,
whatsoever is contrary to the former rules.

And hitherto of the duties which are between them selves.

Now follow the duties toward others.

They are double, As they are parents. As they are masters and maistresses.


Coloss. 3. 21. Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, least they be
discouraged. Colos. 4. 1. Ye Masters, give right and equality unto your
servants, knewing that you have a master in heaven. Tit. 2. 4.

The duty of parents must be performed moderately of the Father, with great
gravity and authority. Genesis 22. 7. And Isaak speaking unto Abraham his
Father, said: My father: which said: Behold, here I am my son. Then said
Isaak: Behold, here is fire and wood, but where is the small beast for the
sacrifice? Unto whom Abraham said: God shall provide for him self a small
beast for the sacrifice, my son: when they went both together. Pro. 4. 3.
When I was a son with my father, tender and only beloved before my mother. 4
He teachinge me, said unto me: Let thy mind hold my words, keep my
commandments and live. 5 Get wisdom, get understanding, forget not,
neither decline from the word of my mouth. Of a Mother, with that cheerful
easines of a mother which keeps her authority. Pro. 31. 1. The gathering
together of the words of Lemuell the king, wherewith his mother had instructed
him. 2 What shall I say my Son? What thing, O son of my womb? And what, O
son of my desires? 3 Give not thy strength unto women, and to those that
work that Kings may be abolished.

The duties are, Common to both. Proper to each.


Common to both from the first conception of children to take care of the^,
even to the end of their lives, as appears by the parts following.

The especial parts of this duty are these.

Which respect Their tender age. Youth.


Gal. 4. 1. This I say, the heir as long as he is a child, differs not
from a servant, though he be Lord of all. 2 But is under tutors and
governors until the time appointed of the father.

The duty in their tender age, is according to their years and ability, to
^ource them up in discipline fit for children, and admonitions of the Lord.
Ephe. 6. 4. And you fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them
up in doctrines and admonitions of the Lord. Pro. 22. 6. Instruct thy child
according to his capacity, yea when he shall be old, it shall not depart
from him.

Discipline fit for children is, when by intisementes, allurementes,
corrections. etc. fit for them, they are framed to good The giving of the
admonitions is, by little and little, by often repetitions, in greatest playnes
which may be, to make them understand some chief grounds and seeds of
religion, of good manners, and behavior toward al, and so to begin some
conscience in them. Esa. 28. 10. When as there shall be added precepte unto
precepte, precepte unto precepte, line unto line, line unto line, here a
little, there a little. 2. Tim. 3. 15. That thou haste learned the holy
Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, which
is in Christ Jesus. Hebr. 5. 12. For you which for the time ought to be better
learned, have need to be taught again what are the principles of the word of
God, and ye are become those which have need of milk and not of strong
meat. 13 For every one that uses milk, is vnexperte of the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe. Prou. 20. 11. Let a child make him self
known in his works, whether his work be pure and right.

Contrary to this is, to let them have their will from the beginning, to
discourage them by severity, to let the common ignorance of the word to be
rooted in them, and not in this care to frame them to truth and goodness, and
to prepare them to be apt to receive profit from the public ministry.

Their duty toward them in their youth is, Either in the entrance of their
youth. Or in their ripe age.


Their duty in the entrance of their youth is, according to their gifts and
diversity of them, to prepare them unto some profitable calling in the church,
by applying them unto it, beating into them the gifts and conscionable use of
the gifts which is required. 1. Chron. 28. 9. Then also Solomon my son,
know the God of thy father, and worship him with an undefiled body, and with
a careful mind, because God does search all hearts, and does understand
every imagination of the thoughts: if thou shall seek him, he will be found
of thee, but if thou shall forsake him, he will forsake thee for ever. 10
Behold now, seeing the Lord has chosen thee to build an house for the
Sanctuary, be thou strong and do it. 11 Then David gave to Solomon, the
pattern of the porche, and of the houses thereof, and the treasure houses
thereof, and of the Parl^re thereof, and of the inner chambers thereof, and of
the place of the mercy Seat. Pro. 31. 1. The gathering together of the words
of Lemuell the king, wherein his mother had instructed him. 2 What shall I say
my Son? What thing, O son of my womb? And what, O son of my desires? 3
Give not thy strength unto women, and to those that work that Kings may be
abolished.

Here the Church may not be deprived for honor, gain, or such fleshly
respects of meet Ministers.

In their ripe age their duty is to give their children that which may help
them in this life, and also if they have not the gift of continency, to
counsel them, to govern them unto a fit and religious wife, such as is
fit for the duties before named.

2. Cor. 12. 14. For I seek not yours but you: For children ought not to
gather treasures. for their parents, but the parents for the Children. Gene.
24 2. Put thine hand under my thighe, 3 That I may bind that with an oath by
the Lora God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou will not take a
wise unto my son, of the daughters of the Cananites amongst whom I ^well. 3
But that then will go unto my countreye, and to my kindred, and take a wise
unto my senne I^chak Ruth. 3. 1. Afterward Naemi her mother in law said unto
her: Shoul^^ I not seek rest unto thee, that it might be well with thee? So
1. Cor. 7. etc.

Contrary to this is the neglecte of their life to come, to make matches
only for carnal respects, suffering them to live wantonlie and vncleanelie,
and not seeking the ^^n^^die appointed.

The proper duties of both is commonly toward them in their infancy. The
Fathers duty is with all cont^enient speed that may be, according to the
assembly of the congregation, to present the Chilo^ for the first Sacrament,
and there to give a name in the mother tongue, which may have some godly
signification, fit for that work.

Contrary to this is, differring of that work, for trifles or unmeet causes,
a giuinge of a name in another tongue, a profane name. Gene. 25. 25. And the
first came forth roughe, being all over as an hearie gown, and they called
his name Esau. 26 Afterward his brother came forth, whose hand held the
heel of Esau, therefore every one called his name Jacob. Luke. 1. 59. And it
was so on the eight day, they came to circumcise the babe, and called him
Zacharias, after the name of his father. 62 Then they made signs to his
father, how he would have him called. 63 So he asked for writing Tables,
and wrote saying: His name is John, and they marueyled all. Gene. 4. 25. And
after Adam knew his wise, which brought forth a son, and called his name
Sheth: For said she: God has laid up for me another seed for Ab^ll whom
Kain slew. Gene. 19. 11. Furthermore the Angel of the Lord said unto her:
Behold thou art with child, and shall shortly bear a son, therefore call
his name Izmaell, because the Lord considers thine affliction. 15 Therefore
Agar brought forth unto Abraham a son, and Abraham called the name of the
son which Agar brought forth unto him Ismael.

So the Greeks in Greek: as Timothy, the fear of God, Acts 16. 1. Then
came he to Darbe and to Listra, and behold, a certain Disciple was there,
named Timotheus, a woman's son which was a I^wesse, but his father was a
Grecian.

And the Latins in Latin, as Tertius, Romans 16. 22. I Tertius which wrote out
this Epistle, salute you in the Lord.

The proper duty of the mother is, to nourishe it up, if she be able, with
her own milk, and to wayne it, and perform all such motherlie care and
duty. 1. Tim. 5. 10. If she have nourished her children, if she have lodged
strangers. etc. Gene. 21. 7. Furthermore she said: Who would have said unto
Abraham, Surely Sa^ah shall gtue children suck: but I have borne a son in
his old age. 8 And the babe grew and was wayned, and Abraham made a great
feast, what day Izaak was wayned. 1. Sam. 1. 29. So the woman abode that she
might nurse her son until she had brought him up. Luc. 2. 12. And this
shall be a sign unto you: you shall find the child swadled and laid in a
cratche.

Contrary to this is, the tenderness of many mothers, that bring on them the
threatening of the Prophet willingly, of barren breasts, which should go
only with a barraine womb.

Hitherto of their duties as they be parents.

Now follows their duties as they be Masters and Mistresses, where besides
these, common both to children and servants, this is proper, in regard of
servants, that not only according to justice they pay them their due
wages, but also otherwise help them, comfort them, liberally reward the^,
as far as christianity, liberality, in equality shall bind them.

Contrary to this is, to retain their wages, to exact of them, to oppress
them, or only reward them strictelie, according to the exact deserving.
Colos. 4. 1. Ye Masters, do unto your servants that which is just and
equal, knewing that ye also have a master in heaven. And these are the duties
which they must perform in their life time, All which must be shut up with
setting order for all things at their death, with especial exhortations and
prayers for Religion, for vprightnes in their callinges, for peace and order
after them.

Esai. 38. 1. In those days Hezechiah was sick unto death: Esaiah the son
of Amotz the Prophet came and said unto him: so says the Lord: Give
precepts unto thy family, for thou shall shortly die, and shall not live. 1.
Kings. 2. 1. And when the days of David drew near that he should die, he
commanded Schelom^h his son, saying: 2 I shall shortly depart after the
manner of all the world: but be strong and be a man. 3 And keep the
ordinances of the Lord thy God, by walking in his wyaes, keeping his statutes,
and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is
written in the law of Mosche: that then may prosper whatsoever thou shall
do, and whither soever thou shall turn thy self. 4 That the Lord may
perform the word which he promised me saying: If thy children shall keep my
way by walking before me in faith from their whole heart and their whole
mind, saying, I say, there shall not be cut of unto thee a man from the
scate of Izraell. 5 Moreover, thou know what Ioab the son of Zeruiah has
done unto me, what he has done to the two Captains of the host of Izrael,
Abner the son of Ner, and Hamasa the son of Iether, whom he slew,
appointing slaughter of war in peace, as he has put the blood of slaughter
of war on his girdle, which was about his loins, and in his shoes which were
upon his feet. 6 Wherefore do according to thy wisdom, neither suffer his
white head to go down to the grave in peace. 7 But exercise mercy toward
the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be amongst those that eat
meat at thy table, because likewise they came unto me, when I fled from
Absolon thy brother. 8 To be short, Schimmhi the son of Gera be in thy
remembrance, which cursed me, with a most bitter curse, what day I went
Machanan^m, who descending to meet me, to Jordan, Ihaue sworn unto him by the
Lord, saying: I will not slare thee with the sword: 9 But now discharge not
him being guilty, seeing thou art a wise man, but know what thou shall do
unto him, that thou may bring down his white head unto the grave with
blood. 10 After David slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David. Gene. 49. 30. Then he commanded and charged them, saying: When I shall be
gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers in the cave which is in the
field of Hephron the Chittite.

Hitherto of the first part of householders, which concerns the government
of the same by the Superiors in it.

Now follows the duties of the inferiors.

The inferiors are those which are under the rest in the household, and are
called of Peeter, those of the household or household fellows.

Their duties are toward The household governors. Or others.


Tim. 1. 6. If any be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, having
faithefull children, which are not slaundered of riot, neither are disobedient.

Toward the householde governors, to Be helpefull to them in outward
behavior. Be in subjection and obedience.


Luc. 2. 51. Then he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was
subject to them.

The first is, by outward behavior to acknowledge their authority, such as
shall be prescribed unto them, as of cappe, leg, manner of speaking.

Contrary to this is, vnmannerlines, answering again, giving cutted
aunsweres. etc. 1. Tim. 6. 2. And they which have believing masters, let
them not despise them, because they are brethren, but rather do service,
because they are faithful and beloved, and partakers of the benefit. Tit. 2.
9. Let servants be subject to their masters in all things, not answering
again. 10 Neither pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness, that they
may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. 1. Pet. 2. 18.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good
and courteous, but also to the froward.

The second duty of obedience is in all commandments concerning the
forenamed duties of the Superiors toward them, willingly to perform them,
and to submit them selves to rebukes, to admonitions, corrections, and such
like, with meekenes. Pro. 4. 1. Hear O children the instruction of the Father,
and give ear to learn understanding. 2 For I give unto you good discipline,
forsake not my doctrine. 20 My son attend unto my words, and incline thine
ear to my speech. Numb. 12. 14. And the Lord spoke unto Mosche: If her
Father had spitte in her face, should she not have bin ashamed 7. days?

The duty to be helpefull is by their example and persuasions one to another,
and by revealing things, which by admonition will not be amended, to be
helpefull to the Superiors in the former duties.

Contrary to this is, evil example, evil persuasions, hiding things which
ought to be revealed. Gene. 37. 2. Joseph being 17. year old, fed the
flock with his brethren (for he was a child) with the sons of Bilhah, and
with the sons of Zilpath the wives of their father, and he brought unto his
father their evil report. Genesis 27. 44. And when it had been told unto Ribkah
all the words of Hesau her eldest son, she* sending called Iaacob her
youngest son, and said unto him. etc.

The duty toward others is, Amongst them selves. Toward other besides
them selves.


Amongst them selves that with peace and quietness. They have their mutual
equality, bear with one another, and help one another as far as is
lawful. Contrary to which is, unquiet minds, pride, iarres, lifting up above
others, not keeping the place or difference made by the chief of the family.

Toward others is, that they so order them selves toward all, as they are
taught out of the commandments, and toward Ghestes and strangers: ritche
and poor, high and low, as they be taught out of the fifte commandment: And
thus of the common duties of all inferiors of the family, and this is proved
by the commandments and sentences going before. Gene. 45. 24. And setting
his brethren go, he said unto them: be not me^ued or stirred one against
another in the way.

Inferiors in the family are, Children. Servants.


Childrens duty is from their beginning to their ending, to be subject,
obediente, and helpefull to their parents.

Contrary to this is, the rejecting of these duties at some years. Luke 2.
51 and he descended with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.
10. 19 26. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple standing whom
he loved, he said unto his mother, woman, behold thy son. 1 King. 2. 19. And
when Bath shebah came unto the King that she might speak unto him for Ad^n^ah,
the King ^ose to meet her, and bewed him self unto her sitting in his Throne,
he commanded a throne to be placed for the mother of the King, which sat at
his right hand. Genesis 47. 29. And when the days of Izraell drew night that
he should die, he sent for his son Joseph, and said unto him: If new I have
found savor in thine eyes, put I pray thee, thine hand under my thighe, and
exercise this kindness and says toward me, bury me not in Egipte, but when
I shall riste with my fathers, carry me out of Egipte, and bury me in their
sepulcher: Which said: I will do according to thy word. Gene. 49. 29. After
he willed and commanded them, saying: When I shall be gathered to my people,
bury me with my fathers, in that cave which is in the field of Hephron the
Chittite. 30 In that cave which is in the field of Macpela, which is on the
other side of Mamre in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the
field of Hephron the Chittite, for a possession to bury in.

The proper or especial parts, of this duty is in their proper Obedience.
Recompense which they must make.


The proper obedience is that which springs from a cheerful, natural,
continual and childelike love and reverence.

Contrary to this is, disobedience, unnatural behauiours or affections. etc.
2. Tim. 3. 2. For men shall be lovers of them selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
evil speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, profane. Colos. 3. 20.
Children, hearken unto your parents in all things, for this is acceptable unto
the Lord. Ephe. 6. 1. Children give ear unto your parents in the Lord, for
that is just.

This obedience must show it self especially in being governed by them in
the matter of calling, and marriage, according to the rules prescribed in the
word of God, and all such matters of weight and momente. Chiefly until by
the fathers authority and consent, more full power be given to their
children, because of their years and discretion. Numb. 30. 4. When a woman
has vewed a vow unto the Lord, or bound her self by a bond at her fathers
house in ^er youth. 5 If when her father hears her vow or the bond, when
with she has bound her self, and her father hold his peace concerning her,
then let her vows be established, and every bond wherewith she has bond her
self, let it be established. 6 But if her father shall make her to break it,
in what day he shall hear it, let none of her vewes or bonds wherewith she
has bound her self be established, and the Lord shall forgive her, because
her father has made that she should break it. 1. Cor. 7. 36. But if any man
think he has committed some uncomely thing against his vngin, if she pass
the flower of her age, and that so it ought to be done, let him do what he
will, he sins not. Let them be joined in marriage. 37 But he which abides
firm in heart, neither is driven by necessity, but has his own will in his
power, and has decreed this in his heart, that he may keep his virgin, he
does well. 38 Therefore he that gives her in marriage does well, but he that
gives her not in marriage, does* better. Genesis 24. 51. Behold Ribkah is before
thee, take her and go thy way, that she may be a wise unto the son of thy
Lord, as the Lord has spoken.

Laban the son having the government of his father being old, was the
chief in this business. Genesis 24. 55. And the brother of Ribkah and her mother
said, let this maid tarry with us a few days, at the least ten, afterward
go thy ways. 57 Then they said: Let us call the maid, and ask of her mouth.

Their especial recompense is, to relieve and maintain them, or any other,
which is knitte unto them in any especial care and duty, as far as their
ability or duty toward the wife, and care of the family will suffer.

Contrary to this is contempt of your parents, greeuing of them, neglecting
to help and succor them. etc. 1. Tim. 5. 4. But if any widdowe have children
or Nephews, let them learn first to show godliness toward their own
house, and to recompense their kindred, for that is an honest thing and
acceptable before God. Mat. 15. 4. For God has commanded, saying: Honor thy
father and thy mother: and he that curses his father or mother, let him dye
the death. 5 But ye say, who soever shall say to father and mother, by the
gift that is offered by me, thou may have profit. 6 Though he honor not
his father or his mother, shall be free, thus have you made the commandment of
God of no authority by your traditions Gene. 47. 12. And Joseph nourished his
Father, and his brethren, and all the household of his father with meat, as
putting it into the mouth of children.

The especial duties of servants is to do all things which their master
shall according to Gods will give them in charge Col. 3. 22. Servants be
obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh in all
things, not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart,
fearing Goda Luke. 17. 7. Who is it also of you that habing a servant plowing,
or feeding cattle, would say unto him by and by when he were come from field,
go and sit down at the table. 8 And would not rather say unto him, Dress
where with I may suppe, and girde thy self, and serve me till I have eaten
and drunken, and after eat thou and drink thou. 9 Does he thank that
servant, because he did that which was commanded him? I trow not.

Contrary to which is, that some will do one thing only at this time, and
which pleases him.

The manner of doing this, has two parts, Diligence. Faithfulness.


Tit. 2. 9. Let servants be subject to their masters, and please them in all
things, not aunswering again: neither pickers, but that they show all good
faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

Their diligence is in a single heart, as to the Lord, not only by labor and
travail, but prayer, religious care, and all good means to perform the
things laid on them.

Contrary to this is, eye service, Col. 3. 22. Servant be obedient unto them
that are your masters according to the flesh in all things, not with eye
service, as men pleasers, but with singlenes of heart fearing God. 23 And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. Ephe. 6. 5.
Servants be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh
with fear and trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, a^ unto Christ. 6 Not
with service to the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
dooinge the will of God from the heart. 7 With good will serving the Lord and
not men. Genesis 24. 9. Therefore the servant putting his hand under his thigh,
swear unto him concerning this matter. 10 Afterward the servant took ten
Camels of the camels of his masters, that he might go on his journey: (for he
had all the goods of his master in his hand) And rising he went unto Siria
between the rivers unto the city of Nachor. 11 Where causing the Camels to
rest without the City beside a well of water, in the evening, at what time the
woman came forth to draw. 12 And he said: O Lord God of my Master Abraham:
bring to pass I pray thee, that it may come to pass unto me this day, and
show this mercy unto my master Abraham. 26 And he inclined his face to the
ground, and bowed him self to the Lord, saying: Blessed be the Lord of my
master Abraham, which has not left his mercy and faithfulness toward my
master.

His diligence also appeared greatly, when he said, I will not eat till I
have spoken my words, or matter, ver. 33. and in making speed he said, Stay
me not, seeing the Lord has prospered my way. Send me back that I may go
unto my Lord. etc.

Faythfulnes is in their labor and ^darges, to seek the uttermost they can,
the commodity and benefit of their Masters.

Contrary to which is, picking, turning an other way, in banketing, feasting,
riotte. etc.

This appears most lively in the description which Jacob does make of his
faithful service to Laban This is the twentieth year since I have bin with
you, thy sheep and thy goats have not left their young, and the Rams of
thy flock have I not eaten. The torn I brought not unto thee, but made it
good my self, at my hand thou did require it. Likewise the stolen by day,
and the stolen by night. I was about my work when the heat consumed me by
day, and the frost by night, and sleep departed from mine eyes, Gene. 31. 38.
39. 40.

And thus much for the order of Household, which is prescribed by the word of
God.
The resolution and interpretation of the Lords prayer, out of Mat. 6. 9. and
Luke 11. 2.
Our Savior Christ being both desired of his Disciples to be taught how to
pray, and having reproved the abuse of unnecessary and vain repetitions of
one and the same thing: gives his Disciples commandment to pray as he taught
the^ in this prayer: Saying pray thus, and when you pray say, Our Father.
etc. that is, let the things which you require and give thanks for, the
difference which you make of the things, and the affections wherewith you
pray, be no other then are contained here. This form or pattern, or rule of
prayer has two parts.

The first is, An entrance or preparation to the same. The second is, The
prayer it self.
The entrance does conteyne such a description of God, as is meet for us,
whenever we adresse our selves to prayer, to have feeling of in our hearts.
It is disposed in an Axiom or sentence copulative or coupling. The first
reason is from the adioint of relation Our Father, which is adorned with that
manner of exclamation which utters a familiar affection, as My Father, my
son! Genesis 22. 7. So that we must in the assured feeling of faith according to
the spirit of adoption and sanctification cry unto God as our merciful father,
through Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 13. 14. 15. Gal. 4. 6. more ready then any
father to grant that we ask according to his will, and therefore must be
waited on in request and suit, till we obtain. Lu. 11. 5. to the 14. ver. The
second reason is, from the subject Which art in heaven, that is, full of all
majesty and power, Heaven the throne, or seat, or place of Gods Majesty, and
power, where this is most clear and manifest, Psalm. 113. 4. 5. And 115, 3. 16.
Esa. 66. being put for the power and Majesty it self, by a Metonomie, or
change of name, where the place or subject is put for the thing placed or
adioint: so that, our reverence must bring forth such cogitations, desires,
and words in such manner as may become his Majesty, because he is in heaven,
and we in earth, Eccle. 5. 1. In the first is shut out infidelity, doubting
whether we be heard, in patie^cie, in waiting Gods leisure. In the second,
rashness or multiplying words, thoughts, doubting of Gods power, wandering
thoughts, and all earthly imaginations.

The prayer it self has two parts, The form of request. The confirmation of
it, co^tayning a thanksgiving.


Because our requests must be made manifest with thanksgiving, Phil. 4. 6.
And thanksgiving for a benefit received does greatly confirm our faith in
requests, as Jacobs example does show, Genesis 32. 10. 11. etc. The form of
requests is set down in a copulative axiom, which numbreth up six several
petitions, where the bond or couple of the axiom is left out, as the manner
is where one does earnestly, and because of the earnestnes speedily require
of will a thing, as Genesis 18. 6. 7. Dan. 9. 19 And this declares and utters
the proper affection or feruencie of petition, which is as beggars, which
feeling of our wantes by the work of the holy Ghost to crave with unspeakable
sighs and groninges. Romans 8. 26. 27. Iam. 5. 16. This shuts out, none or
very little feeling of our want, coldness, and dulnes in prayer it self.

The petitions are of two sorts. The first which beggeth concerning God only
in the first place, as the place and end of every request shows. The second
which require concerning our selves


This teaches that first and chiefly we must desire these things to Gods
glory above our own salvation, and that the other must be asked to that end
as depending on it, and no further then as it may serve to his glory, which
is undoubtedly true of our salvation, because of God his decree, Ioh. 12. 27.
28. Mat 26. 42. 2. These. 1. 10. Romans 9. 1. 2.

The first sort also is double, First for the right use of Gods name. The
second for Christ's kingdom, and the fruit of it, as the Apostle wills to
pray that the word have passage, and be glorified, 2. These. 3. 1.


The first is set down in a simple axiom of the adioint hallowed, and the
subject thy name, coupled by the form of praying or desiring, uttered by us in
the word be: where sanctified is a metaphore or fines of speech noting a
comparison taken from things dedicated to God or the Temple, and signifies
that Gods name, (one kind being put for the whole by a Sinechdothe, the
titles, which is, his name and memorial whereby he is known for his works,
word, Sacraments, and mysteries, etc.) be put a part from all profane
abuses, unto the right use prescribed in the third commandment. For all which
see the quotations on that commandment. This is chiefly to be prayed when we
see our selves or others given to any abuse of Gods name.

Thy kingdom come, the second sort has 2. petitions: the first is disposed
in a simple axiom of the subject and adioint, that the kingdom of God which
he exercises by his son, may daily come, that is, be set up in glory, fit
for it: this having 2. parts, his administration here, by all means of his
honor, and the last judgment, unto both these must be referred the heads of
our requests, ae praying for that which is commanded in the 2. com. So that
when soever we want any office of Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacons, or the
right calling or execution of it, in exhortation, doctrine, watching,
ecclesiastical censure, or the order of them, or the gifts fit for them, and
the power of them, we must beg them according to the first head, Mat. 6. 33.
1. Co. 12. 6. and 5. 4 and 12. 28. Romans 2. 6. Ephe. 4. 11. Tit. 1. 2. Cor. 10.
5. 6. Mat 9. 36. etc. In the second head we ask that all things being
performed, and all enemies overcome, Christ, the resurrection, and his
judgment may come quickly, Mat. 24. 32. and 25. 1. Cor. 15. Apo. 22. 20. The
next is also disposed in an axiom simple of the adioint and subject, that the
will, that is the revealed will of God in his word, may be fulfilled, Deuteronomy.
29. Which has a declaration drawn from the comparison of the like: For as
does not note equality here, but likeness, notwithstanding it be here with
great imperfections, as 1. Pet. 1. 16. 1. Ioh. 3. 3. The propoundinge
proposition is, as Angels do in heaven, with peace, joy, willingly and
readily: for by heaven is meant the Angels in heaven, as by earth the men in
earth, the place being put for those in it by a change of the name of the
subject for the adioint This must be prayed when we feel any repugnancie to
Gods will in the deed or manner of doing. For here we request by one all the
fruits of the kingdom, righteousness, joy, peace, etc. Romans 14.

The other sorts of request have this general, that we pray in common for the
whole church as members of one body, having one life and happiness in Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 2. 3. etc. Therefore in every one we say, Give us, forgive us, Lead us
not. etc

They are of two sorts, The first concerning the things of this life, first
dispersed after the manner of the Scripture, as the shortest, wherein as
children we clime unto higher things. The other two of things of this life to
come.


The first is disposed in an axiom simple of the subject, and the adioint, God
his giving occupied in providing bread, saying thus: Give us that which is not
in our power and whereof we are unworthy, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. even bread, that is by
a Sinecdoche, all the commodities of this life both for necessity and
christian delight, Esa. 3. 1. Psalm. 104. where the consequent is declared by
two arguments. First the subject ours, that is such as we in Christ be heirs
of, to use, being sanctified by word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Cor. 3. 22 The
second by the adioint, such as is both apt and able by his blessing to
nourishe us, seeing we may have money and put it in a bottomless pursse, and
eat and not be satisfied, and drink and yet not be refreshed, Hag. 2. For the
word signified bread to our substance, daily, such as may give daily
nourishment. The antecedent is declared by the adioint of the time this day,
that is one kind of time being putt generally for that time wherein we are,
according to God his promise to ask it, as Solomon says, The thing of the day
in the day: that is, every thing in his time, as S. Luke expounds according
to the day, that is, as the time requires. For in joy the time requires one
blessing, in affliction another, that we might hang on God every moment, 1.
Tim. 6. 6. etc. Mat. 6. 31. etc. To the other two this is general, that there
is a Sinechdoche where one kind is put for all of that sort, and the means
of them, as faith and all other good graces, and the instruments begetting,
nourishing, relieuing them, as preaching, exhortation, Sacraments,
corrections, etc. as they tend unto this.

The first of these is disposed in an axiom simple of the subject and adioint,
Father remit us our debtes. Where is an allegory of a Metaphor, the similitude
being borrowed of debtes, which is drawn from the obligation of works, wherein
we were bound to continue to do all the law, unless we would be accursed,
Col. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 10. Now by remission of sins is meant, justification,
peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, deliverance from the wrath to
come, and all such of that kind, Romans 5. And this petition is when we are
troubled, terrified in conscience, and through dulnes have not feelinge of
these. This is confirmed by a reason drawn from comparison of the less, and
is concluded in a Sillogisme connexiue or knittinge, in the first kind both
parts being contained in one, the assumption in the proposition. Seeing even
we forgive our debtors, which have not a drop of thy infinite mercy in us,
Do thou much more forgive us: for so S. Luke shows it should be interpreted
in express words, and I see not why it should not so be translated, for the
greek phrase does well bear it. So this is for our comfort, if we feel this
readiness in us, otherwise we can have no assurance. Luke 11.

The second is disposed in the like simple axiom, adorned with a metaphor
taken from war, where men are leadde captive: Lead us not, that is, though
we daily deserve it, yet seeing we have begged the forgiveness of sins, give us
not so over unto the temptation of the Devil, the world, or our own
corruption, as that with the temptation thou give not an issue, 1. Cor 10. 13.
2. Cor. 12. 7. 8. 9. This is declared by the contrary, but loose us, that is
by a Metaphor taken from the water pente up, set us free more and more, from
all that whereunto concerning the flesh, we are captive, Romans 7. 13.

The reason of the requests is drawn from the efficient cause which may move
God to yield to our petitions, because we give it wholly to him. The reason may
be concluded in a connexiue of the first kind: Seeing we give it all unto
thee, grant our request. But the first we do therefore. etc. the proposition
is wanting, the assumption is contained in an axiom copulative, which
numbreth up the parts, where again as above the couple is left out to note
out the joyful and fervent feeling and melody of the heart in heapinge up
praise unto God, Ephe. 5. 18. 19. Colos. 3. 16. The parts are, first, that
the kingdom, that is the ordering of all things in heaven and earth
appertains to him. Secondly, the whole power whereby they are done:
Thirdly, the whole praise and glory, as in the Chronicles, from whence our
Savior took it, 1. Chron 29. 11. and in Iud where it is so interpreted, Iud.
25. And thus much for the parts, the property of the whole is noted out by
AMEN, which is the force and certainty of our faith, in the whole work, as in
a thing immovable. 2. Cor. 1. 20.

The Epistle to Philemon.
The inscription or title. Prayers.


The inscription sets down The persons which do write. The persons to whom
it is written.


The first person which does write is Paul the principal writer, who is
described by the adioint captive: which adioint is declared by the cause
Christ, that is, by a change of name of the cause for the effect, Christ
leading him to prison by his spirit. And the second person which does write is
also declared by his proper name, Timothy: and an adioint of relation, a
brother, that is, by a Metaphore one of the same Christian Religion.

The persons to whom he writes, are First The husband. The wife.


Second The Minister. The Church.


The man is described by his proper name Philemon: by his adioint beloved, and
by his effect, worker together with us.



The Minister is also described by his proper name, Archippus: and his adioint,
a fellow soldier: that is, by a metaphore, a fellow Minister.

The Church is declared by the subject, which is at thy house.

The salutation. Thanksgiving.


The salutation is set down, first by the matter of it, which he wishes to
them whereof the parts are, grace, that is, full favor of God, peace, that is
by a Sinechdoche of the special for the general, all prosperity both of
soul and body. Secondly, by the form, from God the Father, and from Christ.
All which is disposed in a coupled axiom.





is declared by the adioint great: by the form, in Christ, by the subject,
that which is thy duty. The second diverse is declared by the moving cause
for loves sake: and by a comparison of the greater, rather I pray thee. The
last part of the consequent. Onesimus is described: First by the relation of
the cause to the effect, my son, that is by a metaphore one brought to the
faith by my ministry: which is declared by the formal cause, whom I begotte:
that is by a Sinechdoche of the part for the whole, and a metaphore, whom God
by me did effectually call, which is declared by the subject of the place, in
my bands: that is, by a Sinechdoche of the special for the general, in
prison.

If I have great joy and comfort in thy love: then I may pray thee for
Onesimus: But I have great joy and comfort in thy love, Therefore I may pray
thee for Onesimus.
The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 7. verse, and it is
confirmed by the effect of that love, wherein it does rejoice, because the
bowels of the Saints have been refreshed by thee: And it is concluded in a
less plain Sillogisme of the second kind, affirmative special.

That love that does refreshe the bowels of the Saints, is to be rejoiced in:
But this love does refreshe the bowels of the Saints: Therefore this love is
to be rejoiced in.


If I have sent him for that purpose, receive him: But I have sent him for
that purpose, Therefore receive him.


The first diverse is declared by the mouinge cause, That in stead of thee he
might minister unto me in the bands of the Gospel, that is by a Sinechdoche,
in the afflictions which the Gospel has brought me.

The second diverse is also declared by the mouinge cause, That thy benefit
should not be by necessity: where necessity is declared by the contrary,
but willingly or freely.







If we have fellowship together in any common blessings, then receive him: But
we have fellowshippe together in common blessings: Therefore receive him.
The proposition is in the 17. verse, the assumption is wanting: the conclusion
is made manifest by a comparison of the like, receive him as me.





If thou do owe me thy very self: then much more thou may forgive him
this debte for my sake: But thou owe me thy very self: Therefore thou
may forgive him this debte for my sake.
The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the end of the 19. verse.



If by this I shall obtain fruit of thee in the Lord, and if thou do
refreshe my bowels in the Lord: then thou should receive him: But I shall
obtain fruit* etc. Therefore thou should receive him.
The proposition is wanting, the assumptio^ is in the 20. ver. and is garnished
with a crying cut of a wishing, yea my brother, I would I might obtain*

Here is an answering of an obiction, which might be made against the whole
Epistle. The objection is wanting, and must be thus supplied: Why write you so
earnestly. The answer is from the cause, The persuasion I had of thy readiness
to obey it, caused me: which is proved by a comparison of the less to the
greater, in a connexiue Sillogisme of the first kind.

If thou would do more then this: then thou would do this. But thou
would do more then this: Therefore thou would do this.
The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 21. verse. and is
confirmed by a testimony of Paul his own knowledge, I know it.



If I hope to be given unto you by your prayers: then prepare hostage: But I
hope to be given unto you by your prayers: Therefore prepare hostage.
The proposition is wanting, the assumption is in the 22. verse.







And this is the particular resolution of this Epistle.

The general follows.

This Epistle has two parts, The entrance The description in the 1. 2. verse.
Prayers, 3. 4, 5.
The rest of the Epistle.


The rest of the Epistle, The chief matter Concerning Onesimus, from the 7. to
the 22. verse. His own hostage 22. verse.
The shutting up of it, The salutation from others, 23. 24. v. From him self.
25. verse.



FINIS.

