A BRIEF Description of the Ports, Creekes, Bays, and Havens, of the Weast
India: Translated out of the Castlin tongue by I. F. The Original whereof was
directed to the mighty Prince Don Charles, King of Castile, etc.



Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1578.

To the right worshipful Sir Humfrey Gilbert Knight.
THere came to my hands of late (right vvoorshipfull) a notable piece of
work, of the Ports, and of diverse rare things both of the East and VVeast
Indians, written by Martin Fernandes Denciso, about Anno. 1518. then
Dedicated to Don Charles King of Castile, and after called in about twenty
years past, for that it revealed secrets that the Spanish nation was loath to
have known to the world. And finding in the same work the Longitudes and
Altitudes of many Islands, and of the Ports of the tracte of the firm land
of America, I thought good to translate out of Spanish into English some part
of the same Calling to mind, that your worship was the first man of our
nation that gave light to our people for the finding out of the northvvest
straight, and that now you mean in proper person, and that at your own
charges, to take some noble voyage and discovery in hand, to leave behind you
renown to your family, and honor and profit to your country: I could not
but honor you in heart. And to make some show of my good will, I desired
much to present some thing to you, and was sorry that I had no notable work
of matter of Navigations to Dedicate unto you, meet for your so great
worthiness. But yet such as this is, I dedicate it unto you, besechyng you
most humbly to take the same in good part, and to way the good will of the
giver, as very great persons of high honor have done, when little trifels
have been given them by others of lovv degree. And Sir, albeit this small gift
(in respect of ministering any knowledge to you your self) may seem nothing,
in that you do understand the tongues, wherein this and many other
knovvledges of high value, lie hid from our Seamen, although not from you: yet
this may for our mere English Seamen, Pilotes, Mariners, etc. not acquaynted
with forrayne tongues, bring great pleasure (if it fortune our Mariners or
any other of our Nation, to be driven by vvinde, tempeste, currents, or by
other chance to any of the Islands, Ports, Havens, Bays or Forelandes
mentioned in this Pamphlet,) and so it may also in the voyage, be a mean to
keep them the more from idleness, the Nurce of villainy, and to give them also
right good occasion by way of example, upon any new Discovery, to take the
Altitude and Latitude, to set down the tracte of the Islands, the natures of
the soyles, and to note the quality of the air, the several benefits that
the Soyles and the Rivers yield, with all the discomodities and wants that
the same places have, and if our Country men fortune the rather to be avvaked
out of their heavy sleep wherein they have long lien, and the rather hereby
be occasioned to shun bestiall ignorance, and with other nations rather
late than never to make themselves shine with the brightness of knowledge,
let them give Sir Humfrey Gilbert the thanks, for whose sake I translated the
same. And thus committing your worship to the great Neptune, the great God
of the Christians that rules land and Sea, I leave you to your voyage, and to
the government of that mighty God, who never planted in any man so hie
courage, with so much desire to great attempts, but to some great end, as
heretofore in many has been seen, and as the sequel in your happy successes
no doubt shall be found, as England and the whole world shall out of
question witness. From London the xiiij. of May. 1578.

Your worships at commandment John Frampton.

A brief description of the Ports Creekes, Bays, and Havens of the Weast
India.
FRom the Island called Fierro, unto the Island of saint Nicholas, are two
hundredth leagues: the Island of saint Nicholas lies South Southweast, and from
thence to the Island called Fuego are.xl. leagues: that Island lies directly
South, and from thence to the Cape of S. Justin, which stands in the other
side of the Equinoctial line, are four hundred leagues. The cape of S. Austin
lies South Southweast, with the The cape of saint Austin.
Island called Fuego, and stands in eight degrees on the other side of the
Equinoctial toward the South: and from the Cape of S. Austin unto the gulf
and river of S. Francis are The river of saint Francis.
forty five leagues, the coast lies southweast: the river of saint Francis
stands in ten degrees toward the south: this is a good port and it has a
good river. From that river unto the The Bay.
Bay of all Saints are seventy leagues: the Baye lies Southwest, and by
south, in.xiij. degrees, and there remains in the midst port Royal,
which is a good port, and has good rivers. The Bay of al Saints has within
it certain little Islands, and within these are two good rivers. In the
direction toward the coast, the land lies low, and the people are naked,
and eat bread of roots. It is a baren country. From the Bay of all Saints
to the port called Seguro are.lxxx. leagues, the coast lying south and by
weast. Port Seguro stands.m. xvij. degrees, this is a port and a River, and
it is a good port. From port Seguro unto the cape which is beyond Golfo
Formoso, that is to say, the fair gulf, are one hundredth and ten leagues, and
the coast lies south southweast: and between these two are many dry and
shallowe places, which lies on sea board.xx. and.xxx. leagues: and passing
them, you shall find near the land bars, and sholdes, which have upon them
three or four fadome water of deapth, and near toward the end of the
sholdes, stands the gulf of Saint Thome, whereunto adioyneth the gulf of
Barrosas. Saint Thome.


And passing those shallow places, there lies cape Formoso, that is to say,
the fair cape, in.xxij. degrees and a half: and being paste the fair cape,
there appears a gulf between two lands, and it seems to have a league in
breadth, and three or four in length: and at the end thereof is the river
called Delgado, this is a good port, a good country, and good people,
although that they be naked. From this gulf to Cape Frio, that is to say, the
cold cape, are.xvj. leagues: cape Frio stands in.xxiij. degrees and a half,
this cape has before it an Island adjoining, and the fair cape an other, and
between these other little Islands. From the cold Cape the coast does turn to
the Northweast and by North.xxv. leagues, and from thence it turns Northeast
other.xx. leagues, and makes the Cold cape like to an Island: and between him
and the land there is a good gulf, with many small Islands in the Cold Cape.
midst: and from this gulf unto the gulf of the Mangues are xx. leagues.
That of the Mangues has two Islands at the end of it, and it is great, and
has.xx. leagues at the mouth. From this gulf unto the river of S. Francis
are.lxxv. leagues. And that of saint Francis lies Southweast in.xxv. degrees,
and before that of saint Francis lies the river of the Cananca, which is a
good river, and in the midst of this coast lies the cape of saint Sebastian,
which enters four leagues into the sea, and toward the East part of it,
stands the port of Saint Sebastian.
Gregorio: and to the weast part lies the port of Terrerias, which is a good
gulf, and bath an Island in the midst. All this coast has many little Islands
before it. From the port of saint Francis unto the river Delas Bueltas, that
is to say, the crooked river, are.lx. leagues, the coast lies South, the crooked
river stands in.xxix. degrees, and near to the river of saint Francis toward
the land lies an Island, which has in length xxv. leagues, and toward the
land he seems in circle oblique: and round about the same is the Sea, and
has (...) leagues in breadth: and toward the ^^rme land lies the gulf and
river called Reparo, and the river of Bayadas. From the crooked river unto the
Cape saint Mary are.lxxx. leagues. The cape saint Mary stands in.xxxv.
degrees, and a little past this cape, enters in a river more than twenty
leagues of breadth, where be people that do eat man's flesh. This coast is al
full of sholdes. And before cape saint Mary are certain small Islands. In all
these coasts from cape saint Mary unto cape saint Austin grows much Brasill
and little other thing of any profit in it.

And seeing that we have spoken of the coast that lies from the cape of saint
Austin toward the pole Antartike: let us return to speak of that which is
toward the part of the pole Artike, which is called the North pole. I say
that from the cape of saint Austin unto the river Marauon are three hundredth
leagues: Marauon lies weast, in seven degrees Marauon.
and a half, it is a great river, and has more than.xv. leagues in breadth,
and right leagues within the land. It has many Islands, and in this river
within the land.xl. leagues, there is near to the said river a Mountain,
whereupon grows trees of Incense, the trees be of a good height, and the
bows be like to Plum trees, and the Incense does hang at them, as the yet does
at the tyles of a house in the winter season when it does freese. In this
river were taken four Indians in a small boat called in the Indian language a
Canoa, that came down by the river, and there was taken from them two stones
of Emeralds, the one of them being as great as a man's hand* They said that so
many days journey going upward by the river, they found a rock of that
stone. In likewise there was taken from them two loa^s made of flower, which
was like to cakes of Soap, and it seemed that they were kne^^ed with the licour
of Balsamo. All this coaste from the cape of saint Austin unto Maranon is a
clear coast and deep, but near to the river are certain sholdes toward the
East part. And by the weast part the river is deep, and it has a good
entry. From this river Maranon, unto the river which is called the Sea of
fresh water, art.xxv. leagues: The Sea of fresh water.
this river has.lx. leagues of breadth at the mouth, and carries such great
abundance of water, that it enters more than xx. leagues into the Sea, and
mingleth not it self with the salt water: this breadth goes.xxv. leagues
within the land, and after it is divided into parts, the one going toward the
southeast, and the other toward the southwest. That which goes toward the
southweast is very deep and of much water, and has a channel half a league of
breadth, that a Carrake may go up through it: and the tides be so swifte, that
the ships have need of good cabels. The river of this port is very good,
and there have been some that have entered fifty leagues within it, and have
seen no Mountains. The Indians of this country have their lips made full
of small holes in four parts, and through those holes be put small rings, and
likewise at their ears: and if any man ask of the^ where they had their
gold, they answer, that going up by the river so many days journey, they
found certain mountains that had much of it, and from those mountains they
brought it when they would have it, but they made no great account of it, for
they neither buy nor sell, and amongst them is nothing but change. In this
country they eat bread of roots, and Maiz, and they eat certain roots
which they call Aies and Batatas, but the Batatas be better than the other
roots, and being raw they have a smell of Chestnuts: they are to be eaten
roasted. These Indians do make wine of ye fruit of Date trees, which fruit is
yellow in color, and is as great as a little Doves egg, and being in season is
good to be eaten, and of him proceeds good wine, and is preserved for a long
time. These kind of people do make their houses with upper rowmes, and they
sleep in them, as also all their habitation is in the upper rowmes, and that
which is allow, they leave it open: and also they use certain mantels of
cotton wool, and these they tie at the ends with ropes, and the one end of
the rope they make fast to one part of the house, and the other end to the
other part of the house: and in these they lie, and be their beds, and these
kind of beds be used in all the Occidentall India, and there is not in any
part of India any chambers that the people do use to lodge in aloft from the
ground, nor they make any high rowmes, but only in this part of India, and in
all other places they make their houses without any loftes or chambers, and
they cover their houses with the leaves of Date trees, and of grass. And from
this fresh water Sea unto Paria, the coast lies weast northweast, and all full
of sholdes that the ships can not come near to the land. There is from this
river to Paria two hundredth and fifty leagues. In this fresh water sea, the
tides do ebb and flow as much as they do in Brytayne, and stands in six
degrees and half. Paria stands on the other side of the Equinoctial toward
the North, in seven degrees: In Paria Paria.
the sea flows but little, and from Paria toward the weast the sea does
not flow. From the entery of the gulf of Paria unto the cape that litth
toward the weast, are thirty five leagues, and from thence the coast turns
toward the northeast, other.xxxv. leagues, and from thence the coast turns
toward the weast. Before this gulf stands the Island The Trinity.
of the Trinity, and toward the weast does appear the gulf of Paria like
to half a round Circle, after the fashion of a Diametre: and at the end of
this circle is the entery in of Paria, and at this entry there is between the
land and the Island right leagues, and on the other side there is but little
space between the Island and the land, but it is deep, and has a good
entry: this Island of the Trinity has in length.xxv. leagues, and as many in
breadth, and stands in. viij* degrees, and is inhabited of many people, and
as yet not under subjection. Here the Indians do use to shoot with bows, and
arrows which are of a fadom in length, made of reeds, which grow in that
country, and at the end of them is artificially wyned a piece of wood very
strong, unto the which piece of woodde at the end of it, they put a bone of a
fish, in place of an arrow head: these kind of bones be harder than Diamo^des
and every one of them be three or four fingers long, and they are taken out of
a fish that has three of these bones, one upon the back, and one under every
wing: but that which grows upon the back is the strongest and the greatest.
In this Island the people says that there grows gold, and in this Island
and in Paria grows reeds so great, that they make staves of the^, and carry
of them into Spain. Likewise there be Popingayes very great and gentle, and
some of them have their foreheades yellowe, and this sort do quickly learn
to speak, and speak much. There be likewise in the gulf of Paria pearls,
although not many, but very good and great. Paria has many Islands toward
the north part of it, until you come to the Island of saint Christopher, and
from saint Christopher, to the Island called Espanola, be other Islands that
lies toward the Northeast. The names of these Islands are as follows: The
first and nearest Island to Paria is called the Island of Mayo, this is but a
small Island: there is a fruit growing in it that the caske of it smells
like to Beniamyn: The Island of Mayo.
likewise there is Rosine in certain trees, which they use for Incense, and
Aimasticke. This Island stands in ten degrees and a half: the Island of Tabaco
in ten: Santa Lucia and the Assention in xj. degrees and a half: the Baruada
in.xij. degrees: Martinino in.xij. degrees and a half: the Dominica in.xiij.
and a half: Gwadalupe and the Deceada in xv. degrees: Monserate and the
Antigua in.xvj. degrees: Baruada in.xvij. Baruada is compassed about with
sholdes: ^andes.
the Redonda in.xv. degrees and a half: saint Christopher in xvij. degrees and
a half: saint Bartolome and saint Martin in xviij. degrees and a half:
Sombrero in xix. and a half: the Anegada in.xx. the Virgins in.xix. and.xx.
Sancta Crus in xviij. and a half: saint John in. xix and xx. and in.xx. and a
half. From the Trinity to saint John be two hundereth and forty leagues. All
the other Islands which I have named, be in the midst of these two, and be
all Cannibals, a people which eats man's flesh, and they go to the sea in
small botes Canibal^.
called Canoas to make war, one of them with an other, and as many people as
they take one of an other, they carry to their own Islands, and if they be men
they eat them, and if they be women they serve them as slaves: and if any of
the men that they take one of an other be lean, they put them to fat, and
when they be fat they eat them, and they say that which is sweetest to be
eaten in a man is the fingers, and the thinnest of the belly: these do use to
shoot with bows and arrows, and if they go to make war, and do understand
that such as they go unto, be stronger than they, then they leave that place
and go to another. In all these Islands they say there is gold: in that of
Gwadalupe has been gold found and gathered, but by reason they be not in
subjection, there is no certainty of it. The Island of saint John is a good
Island, and Saint John.
it has two good ports: one of them stands toward the north, which is
called port Rico, and the town that is in it is of Christians, and it is a
good town, although that it is not great: and the other is called saint
German, in this Island is gathered much gold, and all is fine gold: this Island
is xxx. leagues long and lies East and Weast, and in breadth twenty. From
this Island to the Island called Espanola are xvj. leagues, and the Island
called the Mona, stands well near in the midst between both, which is a
little Island. The Island called Espanalo.
At the beginning of the land called Espanola is the Cape of Higuei, which
stands in.xx. degrees: from this cape of Higuei, unto the cape of Tiburon,
which is the cape and end of the Island, are one hundredth and sixty leagues:
they lie east and weast: from the cape of Higuei unto the Saona, which is
near to the entering in at the port of Higuei, are.xv. leagues. Higuei.
The Saona lies southweast in. x^x. degrees and a half. Saint Catherine
stands in as many. From the entery of the port of Higuei unto the entry of
the port of saint Domingo, the coaste lies weast. and are.xxxv. leagues: and
from saint Domingo to Acuia are twenty: Acuia lies weast. From Saint Domingo.
Acuia to the Beata are twenty leagues. The Beata stands from Acuia
Southweast in xix. degrees. From the Beata to Yaquimo are five and twenty
leagues. From Yaquimo to the Cauana are forty leagues. Yaquimo and the Cauana
lies in twenty degrees. From the Cauana lies out a cape from the land into
the Sea toward the South, cyght leagues, and from thence the coast turns
Weast Northweast unto cape Tiburon. There is from one cape to the other.xxv.
leagues. Before the Cauana stands an Island which is called (...) and between
it and the Cauana is should, and the channel lies near to the land, and an
other lies at the end of the Island. From the cape of Tiburon the coast turns
toward the East unto Yaragua three score and ten leagues, until it come
near to the Island of Guanabon. In this three score and ten leagues the Island
called Espanola has not in breadth more than twenty or two and twenty
leagues. From Yaragua the coast turns toward the Northweast and by North,
unto the cape of saint Nicholas. There is from Yaragua to the cape of saint
Nicholas fifty and five leagues, and the cape of saint Nicholas being doubled,
the coast turns toward the east unto port Royal: and from the cape of
saint Nicholas to port Royal be fifty leagues. This port Royal is the best
port of the Island saving that it is out of the way of all trade, and
therefore they go not to it. From port Royal to the port of Plata, are five
and thirty leagues: from the port of Plata to the Cape de Cierpe, are forty
leagues: the coaste lies East Southeast. From the Cape of Cierpe unto the cape
of Higuei are eight and twenty leagues. And from the Cape of Higuei to the
cape of Tiburon are one hundredth and eighty leagues, and that is the length of
this Island. It has in breadth from the Beata to port Royal ninety leagues:
the South part of it stands in.xix. and.xx. degrees: the North part
in.xxiiij. This Ila^d is inhabited with Christians. There is gathered in it
much gold: there comes every year from this Island to Castile, 400000.
Castellanos and more, every Castellano is worth.vij. shillings of our money of
England. It is a country of much flesh, and also of much fresh fish: the
cattayle do multiply much, because there is no kind of vermin that do hurt
them. In all this Island the Kine and Mares do bring forth young ones, once every
year, and the young Mares and The manners of the Island called Espanola.
young Kine be with fool when they be but a year and a half old. The grass
is always green and never waxes dry: the trees be always green, with
their leaves as they be here in the month of May and June. They eat bread of
a root which they call Casaui. There be other roots like to Turnips, which
be called Aies, and also Batatas, but the Batatas be better, and there be
fields full of them as be here of sown fields. There is also a fruit which
is called Pinas, which be of the making of a Pine apple, but they be greater:
the trees that bears them be like to the Canes or stocks of Lillies, and
Flure de Luces. When they be in season they turn yellow like to wax: the
smell of it is so much and so sweet, yt it smells in all ye house where they
be. It is of a marvelous goodly savor although that the taste of it be somewhat
egre. There is also an other fruit of trees which is called Mameis, which is as
great, and like to a Doves egg, of a tawny color, being within three kernels,
the meat of it is like to a Peach, somewhat red. The people of this Island
were Idolaters and naked, although that now they be turned Christians. The
women do wear a kind of apparel, which they call there Naguas, made in such
sort, that it covers them from the waste to the knees: and they which be
Virgins, go naked as they were borne: and when any woman has lost bir
Virginity, immediately she does cover her self, and if she have no Naguas, she
puts before her a leaf tied on with threedes made of Cotton woll, wherewith
she covers her Secrets, and that leaf they call there Pampanillia. and when
any of these women are with child, or give suck to any child, there is no
man that will company with her for any thing in the world: they say it is
sin to company with her at that time. And when any woman is with child, her
husband takes an other until his wife be delivered of her child, and as long
as she gives suck: and when any man dies that is of estimation, they did
make a great hole in the ground, where they used to put him in, and they put
him in sitting: and put in also with him both meat and drink, and they cover
the hole with timber and with earth, and left open a straight mouth, where a
man might go in: to these came their wives, and such as loved them well, and
went in to him, and put in meat, and after that they were entered in, the
mouth was covered with timber and earth: and so they were left all within, and
they said that they went to bear him company to the other world, where they
should have better cheer and more pleasure. And now there is in this Island
many towns of Christians, the principal town is Sancto Domingo, where is a
good port and river: and likewise there is the best trade of all the Island:
and this is toward the south part: and at the north part is the port of
Plata: but the town is little, and the port is not very good: and by this
means the trade is little. In this Island be many mountains of Salt, and
rocks of Salt. From the cape of Saint Nicholas to the Island of Cuba are.
xiiij leagues: the Island of Cuba lies west, it has in length two hundereth
and twenty leagues: and in Cuba.
breadth by the cape de Crus fifty leagues, and by the other parts by some
ways thirty leagues, and other some twenty. It is a good Island: and in it is
much victual, and much wild foul, Pigeons, Geese and Partriche, and many
Popingayes. The country is full of Mountains, there is gathered in it much
gold, although that it is not so fine as that of the Island called Espanola.
The people be idolaters, the one part of it is inhabited with Christians. The
end of the land which stands next to the cape of saint Nicholas is
in.xxiiij. degrees and a half, and that which lies toward the weast, is
in.xxvij. degrees. The point of the cape de Crus is.xxiij. degrees. Cape de
Crus.
This Island of Cuba has at the north part of it above two hundredth small
Islands, and they be all inhabited with Small Islands.
people, which people be not very black, and be of a good growth both the men
and also the women: but there is no flesh to eat in these Islands: their meat
is fish, roots, and bread made of roots, and the blades of grass: and if
any of the people be carried to other places, if they do give them flesh to
eat, immediately they die, if the flesh which they eat be not very little in
quantity. Toward the south part of Cuba, is the Island called Iamayca, and
this of Iamayca, lies weast from the cape of Tiburon. There is from the cape
of Tiburon, which is in the Island of Spanola unto Iamaica. xx. leagues, and in
the midst Iamayca.
between both lies the Nauaca, which is a little small rocky Island, being
plain and unprofitable. Iamaica lies East, and Weast, it has in length
fifty leagues, and in breadth.xxv. it is a fruytefull Island, and has much
corn growing in it, and has all kind of victual, such as they use to eat,
which suffiseth their necessity, and grows upon the same Island: there is
much cattle, and many trees of cotton wool: they gather much Cotton wool in
it, whereof they make store of cloth, but there is no gold: there is also great
abundance of Fish. And there be a certain kind of little beasts, that have
the snoute and tail like to a Ratte, and the body like to a Coney, and these
be called Hutias, whose flesh is good to eat, and there are multitudes of
them. From the end of the Island of Cuba toward the Northweast, has
appeared a great country, it is thought to be a firm land. And seeing that we
have spoken of the Islands, let us return to the coast of Paria, Paria.
where we began to speak of the Islands: I say, after that you go from Paria,
the coast of the land turns toward the Weast: there is from the mouth of the
gulf of Paria unto the cape that stands upon the gulf of Aliosar seventy
five leagues: the gulf of Aliosar lies Weast and by North, in nine degrees
and a half, and there remains in the midst the gulf of all Saints: near
to the gulf of all Saints toward the weast there enters a cape of a land
into the Sea three leagues: and near to this Cape toward the North eight
leagues into the sea, there be Islands and rocks called the Friars, which be a
company of small Islands like to rocks. And toward the Weast part from the
Friars is the Island called Margarita, which is an Island that has xx.
leagues from the East to the Weast: and from the North Margarita pearls.
to the South.xij. Round about all this Island are fished fine pearls, in great
quantity. And in the gulf of Aliofar, they fish pearls also, but in this
Island be more quantity, and greater, and toward the South side are most
and greatest: and the Cape of Aliofar being doubled, a gulf of Sea does
return between two lands toward the East, more than five and twenty
leagues of breadth: in this gulf be fished many pearls, and much Aliofar:
the shelles wherein they breed be like to Cockle shelles, but they be greater
and brighter within them, like to the self same pearls, but without they be
of the color of cockles: they fish great quantity of them. From the end of
the gulf Aliofar unto the Cape which stands upon the port Flechado called
Tucuraca, he sour score leagues: Tucuraca stands in nine degrees and a
half, and there remains in the midst the cape of small Islands, and before
it is the port called Solo, and the port called Canafistola, and after him is
port Flechado, and has many Ila^ds before him: all this coast is of much
fishing, and in it are trees of Canafistola, which does bring forth there Canes
so great as a great Lance, and are very good. And as it has abundance of
substance, it does putrify sooner than that which we have here. The ports
Flechado and Canafistola stands in eight degrees. This country has much
victual: Cana fistola.
there is in it many Popingayes, Pearls, and Aliofar. The Indians of this
country do use to shoot with bows, and their arrows be a fadom long: there
are growyng great recdes as big as a good staff. From Tucuraca to the cape of
saint Roman are xlv. leagues. The cape of Saint Roman stands Southweast and
by South, in.xj. degrees: the cape of saint Roman enters into the sea.xx.
leagues, and the land is not past three or four leagues broad, and toward
the cast lies the port of Coriana: and toward the weast port of the Pico,
they be good ports. There are from them to the cape twenty leagues, they are
in ten degrees. From the cape of saint Roman unto the cape of Coquibacoa are
three small Islands Trianglewyse, between these two capes is one gulf of sea
in shape four square, and at the cape of Coquibacoa enters in from this
gulf an other little gulf within the land four leagues, and at the
Coquibacoa.
end of him near to the land there lies a great rock, which rock is
plain upon the top, and upon it stands a village of houses of Indians
which is called Veneciuela, and it stands Veneciuela.
in ten degrees. Between this gulf of Veneciuela and the cape of Coquibacoa,
the water turns within the land toward the Weast, and in this turn
stands Coquibacoa. Here has been found wayght, and touch for gold, in the
Town, which is great: and the Indians do say that they bring the gold from
within the land, xxv. leagues, and when they go thither they carry with them
the weight and the touch, whereby they know what they bring. In all the Weast
India has not been found weight, but in this place. The town of Coquibacoa is
great, and a good town, and of good peaceable people. In Veneciuela be people
of a tall growth: and there are goodlier women than are in any other part of
that country. There are good Pearls, and well grown, although not so many as
in the Margarita. Here the Indians do use Lau^ces of.xxv. foot long, and
things to shoot withal like to darts. From the Cape of Coquibacoa, unto the
cape Dela Vela are.xl. leagues. The cape Dela vela lies weast northwest in
Cape Dela vela.
xij. degrees and a half and near to this cape Dela vela is a good port, with
a little Island before it, which lies weast: and being past cape Dela vela the
coast turns south and by weast, and lies low, and likewise all the land
from the cape Dela Vela is low land. From the cape Dela Vela to Tucuraca
are.xxx. leagues: Tucuraca stands in.xj. degrees and a half, and is a good
port. From Tucuraca to Sancta Marta are.xxv. leagues: Sancta Marta lies weast
in. xj degrees and a half, and is a good port: Tucuraca.
it has a small Island before it, and is the best port of all this coast.
This country of Sancta Marta is a country that is watered by sluices, and the
corn and things which they sow Sancta Marta.
and plant, they do water, with their own labor: it is an open ground, and
has hight mountains, and without any thing growing in them. The sand of the
rivers is altogether stony sand, of the color of gold, and it shows as
though that it were al gold. There are in this Island many Hogs, and much
Dear. There is found in the power of the Indians, much gold and coper, and
also much gilt Coper. The Indians do say that they gilte the Coper with an
herb that grows in that country, which being stamped, and the juice taken
out, and the Coper being washed therewith and put to the fire, it turns to
the color of most fine gold, and it rises more or less in color, according
to the quantity of the herb that is put to it. The people be fearce and
warlike, they use bows, and their arrows be little bigger than quarrels,
which they annoint with an herb that is so full of poison, that it is a great
chance (when they hit any man) if he escape, being wounded with that herb:
one of the things wherewith they make that herb, are certain apples which be
in that country, Appels of poison.
and are of the greatness and color of the wild Apples of this country. The
tree that does carry them is like to a small Pear tree of this country. As soon as any man has eaten one of the^, immediately it turns to worms within
his body, which grow so great and eat so much of the body, that they kill
him: this is known to be so by reason. I caused it to be experimented, in one
that was given to a Dog to eat, which within four hours was turned all
into worms in the body, and so we found it when we caused the Dog to be
opened, for to see the effect of the Apple. And if any man do put himself
under one of these trees in the shadow, immediately his head begins to ache:
and if he do continue there long, his face begins to swell, and to trouble
his sight: and if by chance he sleep under the tree, immediately he loses his
sight: all this I have seen by experience. Before you come to Sancta Marta
there is Yaharo, which is in the side of the snowie mountains. Yaharo as a
good port and stands in a good country: and there Yaharo.
be Orchardes of trees of diverse sorts of fruytes to be eaten, and among them
there is one like to Oringes, and when the fruit is in season to be eaten it
turns yellow, and the meat that is within it is like to butter: It has a
good savor, and has the taste so good and so soft, that it is marvelous. The
mountains that lie full of Snow, begin from Sancta Marta: and near to
Yaharo is the highest part of them, and they show upon the tops as white as
if they were Snow, and from thence they reach to Veneciuela, and so into the
country within, it is not Mou^tayns with Snow.
known how far, for that the country is not yet in subjection, nor the
Indians do give any more reason of them, but that they reach very far into
the country. This Mountain is upon the top plain, and there be many towns
of Indians upon it, and many lakes of standing water. In Sancta Marta is
gathered much Cotton wool, and the Indians do make store of clothe of it,
which is a thing to be seen, and they make it of many colors: they do make
of Popingayes feathers, Pecocks and of other birds which be in that country,
certain things like to Diademes, very great, that the ge^tlewomen do put on
their heads, which things hang down upon their shoulders in one piece unto
their girdle: like to the ends of a bishops Mitre: and this is so well wrought,
that it is marvel to see the diversity of the colors, and the work, and the
art thereof: and as the colors be natural and of themselves, they show so
well, that no artificial work of such as is wrought here, is so good nor so
acceptable unto the sight. From Sancta Marta the coast turns south.xx.
leagues: and in the turnyng cape of Sancta Marta stands Garia, where be a
naughty kind of people: and right before this wild country enters into
Garia.
a River very great, which goes from the Mountains that lie full of Snow:
and he is so great, that this water enters a great way into the Sea without
any minglyng of it self with the salt water: and from thence the coast lies
Weast, unto the port of Zamba. Zamba is a good port, and stands in eleven
degrees and a half. From Sancta Marta to Zamba be five and twenty leagues:
the land of this coaste is plain, and low without Mountains, and it is all
very fair medowe ground, and a country well inhabited: the men have their
hear cut, the women go covered from the waste downward. They are good
people and burte no body, but such as do hurt them first. Zamba has
toward the Weast part of it four Islands of sands, which lies near the
land, and round about them be sholdes: they reach ten leagues into the
Islands of Sands.
Sea, but between them and the land where the Cape De Loyo delo gato
stands, there may pass ships from Zamba unto the Cape of Canoa which is
two leagues. From Carta gena be twenty leagues, and they be all sholdes of the
Islands of sands. Before the Cape of Canoa there is a rock which ryseth a
little above the water, which rock they call Canoa, but by reason it is
seen, it is not dangerous. And a little before about two leagues from
thence, are the ports of Carta gena The ports of Carta gena have an Island The
ports of Carta gena.
in the myddest, which stands not out of the compass of the other land,
and by the one and the other side of this Island, there is a port, but that of
the East part has the better entry, the Island is called Gnodego: he has
two leagues in length, and half a league in breadth, and is well inhabited of
Indians being fisher men. The people of this Country be tall, but both
men and women go all naked as they were borne: they are warrelyke people,
and use bows and arrows: they shoot all their artowes with a naughty herb,
and the women do likewise fight as well as the men. I had prisoner a gyrle
of eyghten or twenty years of age, who did affirm that she had killed eight
Christian men before she was taken prisoner. In this place grows the
herb Iperboton, Iperboton*
wherewith they heal the wounds of the herb which is poison, and with this
Herb they say that Alexander healed Ptholome. In this Country and toward
the Weast parts the Indians do eat bread of the grain of Maiz, ground:
and they make of it good bread, which is of much substance: and of the self
same meal of Maiz being sodden in kettels and great tinages in much water,
they make wine to drink: and it is wine o^ much substance, good, and of a
good savor. The Indians do use to drink a great cup full of it when they
rise in the morning without eating any thing else with it, and therewith they
go to their daily labors, and be there labouryng the greatest part of the
day, without eating any other thing. The Christians that are in that Country
do use the like, and they say that it is there in that Country: and a man
endures to labor with it all one day without eating any other thing, if he
drink two times thereof.

The herb Iperboton wherewith they heal the herb that is poison, they say
that the juice of his toote is as good for the sight as for to heal the
herb of poison, and that there is of it in Carmania, and in the Mountain
Atalantes, which are in the coaste of Getulia. In this country of Carta Gena
is in the power of the Indians much Copper* and there is likewise gold, but
not much: and they say that twenty leagues from that Country toward the
Southweast is much gold, and whosoever will may go thither for it.

From Carta gena to the Islands of Caramari which lies Cara^^^^.
Weast, are eight leagues, these Islands be all low, and no ship can pass
between them. From the Islands of Caramari, unto the Islands of Baru be ten
leagues: between these of Baru and the land may pass ships if they be not
very great, and being paste these Islands of Baru, more toward the Weast is
the port of Cenu, which is a great Baye, and has his entry by the East part,
and it is a good sure port. There is Cenu.
from Carta gena, to Cenu. xxv. leagues: Carta gena lies East in ten degrees
and a half, and Cenu toward the Weast in ix. degrees: in that of Cenu they
make much Salt: the people be strong and warlike: they use bows, and their
arrows be set with poison. Ill men and women go naked. When any man of great
authority dye, or any child of his, they take their guts out of their
bodies, and wash them with certain things, and annoint them, and upon them
they put Cotton wool, died with diverse colors, which they put again into
the body, and being colored therewith, they put them into a bed made after
the fashion of the beds of that country, and they hang him up in the house,
near to the place where they make their fire: and so they keep him It
happened to me, that I took a town called Catarapa, where we found more than
xx. that were hanged after this sort in the houses. In this country of Cenu is
much gold in the power of the Indians, and very fine, and it is myngled and
has his foundation of Silver, and there is no part of it Copper, which the
Indians do say they bring from certain Mountains, from whence the river of
Cenu does come forth, from certain places that they call Mocri, and an other
Cubra, and an other Cud^: and the earth that they have in those places is
somewhat read, and An earth of gold.
they gather it in rivers and valleys: and when it rayneth they cast nets
overthwart the rivers and valleys, and as the water increases, it brings
graynes of gold as great as an egg and they remain in ye nets: and in this
sort they gather the greatest graynes: and yt which they gather, they bring to
the town which is called Cenu, being.x. leagnes from the Sea upon the river,
and there they work it, and do what they will with it. I took an Indian
Gentleman prisoner, yt said to me, that he had gone to this place three times,
and had seen it gathered after that sort, and also that he himself had
gathered it. This country of Cenu has great store of vittayle grown in the
Country. Their bread and Wine is made of the meal of Maiz, as it is in Carta
Gena. Likewise there be roots, whereof they make bread, as in the Island of
Cuba, and Iamaica, and the Espanola, but it is of another quality: for that of
the Islands is naught, and if any do eat of it, he dies, as though he had
eaten Arnike: and also if any beast eat of it, or drink of the water that
comes out of it, he dies. And to make bread of it, they grate it, and after
they press it, and when it remains as dry as powder, they make bread of it:
and that which grows in this City of Cenu, and in all ye Country
heereabout, they eat them raw, and roasted, for they are very good to be so
eaten, and of a good sauoure.

A Protestation.
I Did require two Indian Gentlemen of Cenu, in the behalf of the King of
Castile, that they should be subject to the King of Castile, and that he
would give them to understand, that there was one God alone, which was three
persons in one, and did require them, that they would leave unto him that
Country, seeing that it did apperteyne to him: and if they would live in it as
they were, that they should give to him the obedience, as unto their Lord, and
also should give him in token of obedience, some thing every year, even so
much as they themselves would name, and if they would this do, the King would
give them rewards and gifts, and help against their enemies, and would put
among them learned men and Priests, that should show them that which does
apperteyne to the faith of Christ: and if any of them would not turn
Christians, they should not be compelled by force, against their wills, but
they might remain as they were before, and they answered me to that I said
that there was but one God, and this God governed the Heaven and the Earth, and
was Lord of all. It lyked them very well, who said, yt they thought it to be
true: and they said, that they were Lords of their own Country, and had no
need of any other Lord. Then I required the^ again yt they should do it, and
not doing it, I would make war against them, and would take their Town, and
would kill as many as I took, or would keep the^ prisoners, and sell the^ for
slaves. They answered me, that first they would put my head upon a staff, and
they labored to do it, but they could not, for we took the town by force,
although they shot at us an infinite number of arrows, and al poisoned with
herbs, wherewith they wounded two of our men, and both dyed, although their
wounds were but small. After I took prisoner an Indian Gentleman, of those
which I spoke of before, that had declared to me of the mines of Vocri, whom I
found to be a man of much truth, and kept his promise in all things. And after
this sort are all the wars of those Countries. From this river of Cenu, unto
the Gulf of Vraba, are. xxv leagues. The gulf of Vraba lies toward the
Weast in.viij. degrees. All this Country is full of Mountains, and a naughtye
kind of people: they are all Canibals, and eat man's flesh. They use to shoot
with bows and arrows which are poisoned. Five leagues from the River of
Canibals.
Cenu toward the West, is an Island called the stro^ng Island, welnecre a league
from the land. In this Island is much salt made, and nearer the Gulf is
another, called the Tortuga. The Gulf of Vraba has. xiiij leagues of length
within the land, and The Gulf of Vraba
of breadth in the mouth an entry.vj. or.vij. leagues, farther in five, and
near the cape four. At the entry toward the East he has certain sholdes,
which enters in more tha^ two leagues into the Sea athwart of the mouth and
entry, and they go welneere over the one half of the entry toward the
Weast part of the Gulf. And there is five leagues within the Gulf, the
Darien, which is inhabited with Christians, and there they gather fine gold in
a River that descends from certain high Mountains. In these Mountains be
many Tigres and Lions, and diverse other beasts, and Cattes with long tails,
and be like to Apes, but that they have great tails. There are also Swyne, and
many great beasts as great as kyne, fat, which be of a gray couloure, and
have their feet like to kyne, the head like to a Moyle, with long ears, their
flesh being good to eat. There be also many other beasts. I took that Town,
which was the first that was taken in that Country, and I saw all these
beasts, and it was told me, that they had seen Ownees. I saw none, but I saw a
river yt passes by the town of Darien, wherein were many Lyzards that were
great, and so gross in the body as a Calfe: and if they see any man, dog, or
pigge near the water, they come out of it, and fall upon him, and if they
catch him, they carry him into the water, and eat him. I happened to kill ye
first that was killed, and I saw cast at him more than ten Lances, and as
they struck upon him, they rebounded, as though they had stricken upon a Rock.
And after that, a servant of mine went athwart of him, and thrust him at one
blow into the midst of his body, and then we killed him, and being dead and
taken on land, we found that he had upon his back from his neck to the tail
a shell that covered him all, which was so strong, that no Lance could pass
it: and under that from the middle of the body downewarde near to the guts,
he was as other Lyzards are, and by that part of his body he was thrust in
with the Lance. His mouth was three spannes long from the snoute to the lower
end of ye teeth: he had in a side two rewes of teeth, the most fierce that I
have seen, or had bin seen by any of them that were with me. He was fleyne
and his flesh was eaten, it was white and good, and smelled like to musk, and
good in eating. I saw also ye flesh of Tigres and of Lions. I saw certain me^
kill Lions alone by themselves. Lions.
The Tygres are greater of body than the Lions are, and Tygres.
their feet are very strong, and of great force, but they are heavy, for
they run slowly and are of little courage. It happened yt a Tygre went after a
man a league, until he came to a town, and the man never went but his
accustomed pace, and the Tygre after him.iij. or.iiij. spears length bebind,
and in a league yt they went together, he durst not to fasten with the man. The
Lizardes in Lizards.
the month of January and February do breed in this order fellowyng When the
Sun is hotest in the day, they come for the of the water into the sands, and
with their four feet they make a hole, and there lay their eggs, and after
they be laid, they cover them with the sand, and with the heat of the Sun.
The Lizardes be engendered in those eggs, and after they make a hole in them,
and they come forth of the eggs into the sands, and so they go into the
water. The eggs be as great as a Goose egg, and greater. They have no
shelles, but certain skynnes. They be good to eat, and of a good sauoure, and
every Lizard does lay at one time lx. or lxx. eggs. Likewise there be others
called Yaguanas, which be great, and like Yaguanas.
to Lizards, and these have round heads, and from the forepart of the head to
the tail, he caryeth brustels of hear, standing up very fierce. They be of a
russet color, and somewhat in colors: these go into the Mountains. The
sight of them is fearful, but they hurt no body, by reason they take them
alive, and kill them with staves. These are good meat, and their flesh is
much esteemed in that country. Their eggs be of a good taste. In these
Countries is much wild foul of diverse sorts, which are good flesh. There are
abundance of green Popingeys, and some great ones of many colors, red,
blewe, black, and green, which are fair to behold. Their flesh is good
and sweet: and others that are as little as gray Sparrowes, which be green
and fair. In this country are great fishings of good fish: and also there be
Date trees that do carry fruit as great as a Doves egg, some yellow, and
other of the Rose color, but they have great stones: their taste is somewhat
sharp. In this Country are little beasts like to Pigges of a month old,
these have their feet and heads like to a little Horse, with little ears, and
they be all covered with a shell from the ears to the tail, and be like to a
Horse covered. They are fair to behold. They feed like to Horse. In this
country are Conies and Partriches, and many goodly birds. And the bread and
Wine of this Country is made of Maiz, (as it is said:) The people are tall of
growth, and Idolaters. There are some of them that believe, that there is no
other thing, but to be borne* and to die. There be among them Lords, whom they
honor much. And he that is a great Lord, they call Tiba, and others that be
not so great, Quin^s. Before this River of Darien, enters in another River
very great in this gulf of Vraba, and he enters in by six or seven
months, A great River.
although they be but should, and no ship can enter in at the^, if they be
greater than small boats: but within the mouth he is great, and fifteen and
twenty fadome deep, and a mile broad, and has abundance of water, by reason
that xl. leagues within the land there joins with him great rivers, which
comes from the East part of the Mountains, where the River of Cenu
springs: and the first river that joins with him, is that of Dabayne. In
the springs of this River, and of another which is before this, they say that
there are great mines, but the truth is not known, but the Indians do say
it. And there has bin taken in the power of India^s, pieces of fine gold,
that wayed seven and eight hundred weight. In the little rivers of this great
river, are many places drowned up, and in them are many Indians, and have their
houses and habitations upon trees, for that under them is al water, and they
live by fishing. This gulf of Vraba has on the other part of the Mountain
of Darien toward the South, another gulf, called the gulf of Saint Michaell,
and there is from the one to ye other xxv. leagues and more. There is this
difference between the^: The Gulf of S. Michaell.
in the gulf of Darien and Vraba, the Sea does not flow one palm, and in
that of Saint Michaell, it flows as much as in Britain. And of this coast of
the gulf of Saint Michaell I will speak hereafter. And now I do return to the
gulf Vraba, and do say, that from the entrye in of the gulf of Vraba, unto
the port De Careta, are fifteen leagues. Careta lies Northweast, Careta.
Nombre de Dios.
in nine decrees and half. From the Port Perdido, to Nombre de Dios, the coast
lies West North West. Nombre de Dios stands in ten degrees and half, and
there are in the midst Conegie, Pocurosa, and the baye of Saint Blase. There
are from the port Perdido to Conogie seven leagues. From Conogie to Pocurosa
ten. From Pocurosa to the baye of Saint Blase, five. From the baye to Nombre
de Dios six. In all this country Pocurosa.
they call men Omes, and the women Iras. The men go naked, and they use to
bring tied at their middle with a small cord certain Snayles shelles of the
Sea, and into these shells they put their members, and some do carry a thing
like to a fonnell of gold, wherein they put their members. The Women go all
covered from the wast downewarde with wast coats of cotton woll, and wear
rings put through their ears, and many other things, and cheynes of gold.
There has bin found amongst the Indians much gold, although that much of it
is course, and in valewe of ten and twelve kuyllats and less, and they call
this Giamin. In ye South part of this country is found gold in the Rivers,
and as it has not bin much sought till now, it has not bin known. I have
seen a grain gathered in a River, which wayed seven Ducates. From Nombre de
Dios to Veragua, are five and thirty leagues. Veragua is Veragua.
toward the Weast in ten degrees. And near to Nombre de Dios is Port
Bello, which is a good Port. It has at the entry of it a little Island, and
in the midst another. The Country of this coast is full of sharp
Mountains, and barren. From Veragua the coast turns North to the cape of
Gracias Adios, threescore leagues. The cape of Gracias The cape of Gracias
Adios.
Adios stands in fourteen degrees. And near to Veragua is the Furmia, and
after Corobora, and after that certain Islands, compassed about with sholdes:
and from the cape of Gracias Adios the coast turns Weast* to the cape of
Caxines, where is an Island, and is thirty leagues distante. And from the cape
of Caxines the coast turns toward the North threescore and fifteen leagues,
unto the cape de Lagar, and all these threescore and fifteen leagues be
sholdes, and enters into Sholde^.
the Sea toward the East threescore leagues: and from this cape to the cape
of the Island of Cuba, are one hundred and twenty leagues. The cape of Cuba
lies North. From the cape of Lagar, unto the cape of Fondura, are five and
thirty leagues. The coast lies West. The cape of Lagar, and that of The cape
Lagar.
Fondura, stands in.xvj. degrees, and being past the cape of Fondura, is a
Gulf that enters.xv. leagues within the land, and in the entry it
has.xviij. leagues of length, and farther in xxv. From this cape, to the bay
of S. Thome, are.lx. leagues, and the coast lies Weast. And near to the bay
enters one end of The bay of S. Thome.
the la^d into the sea.xx. leagues toward the Northweast, and at the end of
the land is the entry of the baye of S. Thome, and ye bay does return upon
the cape Southeast.xlv. leagues, and carries in length and breadth.xv. leagues.
And at the entry in of this gulf toward the Weast, appears another little
round gulf full of small Islands. From the mouth of this gulf, to the Port of
the Figueras, are.xxx. leagues. The coast lies Northweast, and it is all
sholdes. The entry of the Gulf of S. Thome stands in.xix. degrees and
half. It enters in at the East part, for by the Weast part it is all sholdes.
The cape of the Figueras stands in.xxj. degrees, and from this place the
discouerers The cape of the Figueras.
returned, and past no farther: and they found in this Country trees of oak,
with acornes like to ours, and many birds different from those of this
Country: and hens as great as Geese: and they found tokens and shows of
much gold, for they found great pieces of gold in the power of Indians. And
now I do return to the Gulf of S Michael, and to the coast of ye other The
Gulf* of Saint Michaell.
side toward the South. The Gulf of S. Michael lies Northeast and
Southweast, with yt of Vraba, there are.xxv. leagues of land between the one
and the other. That of S. Michael is toward ye Southweast, and it has at the
entry in.x. leagues, and of length.xxv. And toward the Southweast lies the
Island of Perles. There is from the Gulf to the Island ten leagues. An
Island of Pearls.
This Ila^d is plentiful of vittaile. There is in it many birds, and so many
conyes, that they enter into the houses to breed. And round about it on every
side, is much fishing of great Pearls, and very fine. I saw one of the
fashion of a little pear, the best and greatest that I have seen. The entry
of the Gulf of Saint Michaell, stands in six degrees. From the entry of
the Gulf of Saint Michaell, the coast lies West, seven leagues unto the
Cacike Tamao. The coast lies.xxviij. leagues toward the Northweast, and by
Weast, to the River of Tubanama. Tamao.
This River of Tubanama has at the entry an Island Tubunama
in triangle, which causes him to have two mouths: it is a good River, and a
good Country, well inhabited, and of much vittayle, and great fishing: there
is in it much gold. In this coast the Sea does ebb and flow much. From this
River to Panama are twenty leagues, and the coast lies Weast, and there is in
the midst the River called Chapanere, and the Panama.
River Pacora, which are in a good country, and where as is Pacora.
gold, and the people are good. Panama has an Island toward the Sea near ye
land. From Panama to the cape of Chiru are.xx. leagues, and the coast lies
Weast and by South, and there is Chiru.
in ye midst Perequete and Tabora. From Chiru toward the West appears a
gulf oblique, in the midst whereof dwells the Cacike Paris, an Indian
Gentleman of great power, and the richest in that coast: and there remains
in the myddest Paris.
Nathan and Estora, which are good towns. All this coast from the Gulf of
Saint Michaell to Chiru and Paris, be from six to seven degrees. The country
is plain and good, and of much vittayle of all sorts, and in all that
country is much gold. From Paris lies a point of the land into the Sea
twenty leagues, and being past the point, the coast turns to the Northeast,
until it come hard to the cape of Gracias a Dios, and all the Country is
fruitful, and a rich Country of gold, whereas are many good towns. In this
Country they do compass about the towns with timber, for fear of Tygres,
and Lions, that they come not by night into the houses. From the Gulf of Vraba
and Saint Michaell, to the end of the cape of Gracias Adies, are two hundred
leagues: and all this Country has not in breadth more than thirty, and
where it is most forty leagues, and all are good people and rich, and a
fruyteful country. There they use no bows, nor herb of poison, but Lances
and Darts. And there are in this Sea toward the Southe many Islands, where
is as much gold and Pearls, as the Indians do say. And they say that there
is a country where the people that do inhabit it, have books, and do write
and read as we do.

Now seeing that we have spoken of that part that is from the Island of Fierro,
toward the Weast, and Northweast, let us speak of one piece of land
which is in this second part toward the North, which land is called the
land of Labrador. This land of Labrador stands in.lvij. degrees: it
stands Northweast from Calizia, and East and Weast with Scotland. This land
of Labrador has toward the Weast part of it the country of Bacallaos,
which is a country of much fishyng, and a great country: and the Bocallaos
stands Weast from Galizia, and part of them Weast and by North, and this
country has many ports, and good: Much of the country is inhabited, and
there are many Islands before it, all inhabited. They say there is in it great
quantity of Furs, and very fine. The land of Labrador is toward the North
from the Acores. There is from the Acores to the land of Labrador three
hundredth leagues, and from Galizia to the land Labrador three hundredth and
fifty. And there is from Galizia to the land of Cauallaos five hundredth and
thirty leagues. The land of Cauallaos stands in forty nine, and in fifty
degrees.

FINIS.

