THE PARTICVLAR STATE Of the Government of the Emperor, FERDINAND THE SECOND
As it was at his decease in the year 1636.

Translated out of Latin by R. W.

printer's device? VERITAS FILIA TEMPORIS

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Thomas Nichols, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Bible in Popes head Alley, 1637.

THE PARTICVLAR STATE OF The Government of the late Emperor, FERDINAND the
second, etc. As it was in the year, 1636.
CHAP. 1. Of the reasons for which the Emperor FERDINAND, the second, has
always kept his Court at Vienna.
IN treating of the State, of the late Emperor FERDINAND the second, It is
first of all to be considered; that his Imperial Majesty, from the beginning
of his reign to the end of his life, did ever keep his constant Residence in
the City of Vienna; as well for the commodious Situation, and pleasantness of
the place; plenty of food, and all other necessaries for man; and the
adjoining Forests and Woods, most fit for hunting, and other neighboring
places of pleasure; the chief of which are, Brater, Begelhoff, Newgebew,
Caterburg, Ebersdorff, Laxemburg, Wolckers dorff, Orth, Closter Newburg, or the
Monastery of Neoburg, Newstat, etc. As also (chiefly, since these long, and yet
continued, wars in Germany,) by reason of the strength of the City, and that
his Imperial Majesty being there was in a manner safely compassed by the rest
of his hereditary Kingdoms, and Principalities, from whence he might, in case
of need, with more convenience derive assistance: And lastly, for the benefit
of the two navigable Rivers of Ehu and Danube, by which all necessaries for the
Imperial Court, may from other places of the German Empire and from Italy, be
the more easily furnished and brought thither.

CHAP. 2. Of the Situation, circuit, and fortification of Vienna; of the
Danube; of the Garrison, Suburbs, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Bishop, the
University, Civil and Politic governmen, the Lieutenant; and of the Castle
of Vienna; in which the Emperor keeps his Court.
THe City of Vienna, is the Metropolis of the Lower Austria, as the Town of
Lintz is of the upper. In both which places now, almost every year, and
sometimes (when necessity requires) there are often in one year held
Assemblies of each province, in which as to the lawful Prince and Lord of the
Country, when he does fairly ask it, are often granted and presented by the
subjects many hundred thousand crowns to his Imperial Majesty.

The City it self is seated in somewhat a pleasant plain, and in a soil
which is naturally most fruitful and good for Corn and Wine, and all other
kind of Food and fruits, upon the banks of the Danube; which although indeed
it be but a branch of the maine Danube, yet at the season of the year, when
the River is high, it is capable of good ordinary vessels. But when the River
decreaseth, the ships are forced to stay above at Nusdorff, a league from the
City, and sometimes two leagues higher, at the Monastery of Newburg. About
half a quarter of a German league from the City, toward Moravia, are likewise
three other streams, and for the most part, large and navigeable arms of the
great River Danube; over which are laid five bridges, which for the greater
security of the City, if need require, may be taken down.

On the South side of the City there is a little River, or rather a Torrent, of
the name of the City, called Vienna; which rises out of the Western
mountains, and is subject to sudden overflowing by rain and Landwaters: it
drives some Mills, and falls into the Danube, not far from the Town ditch.
Toward the South and North, it runs like an arm of the Dannbe, and on the
West, it leaves behind it the hills and mountains looking toward the Upper
Austria.

The City is in compass about half a German league, and is beautified with
many fair and spacious places, and markets, and with other less, and it has
some fair streets, with many goodly and stately buildings, which
notwithstanding are commonly more for show than convenience.

For the fortification of the City, it will suffice in this place briefly to
declare, that it is strengthened and fortified with six principal Gates, and
ten great Bulwarks; The greatest part of which Bulwarks, and some of them at
the expense of the Empire, are built up a good height of Brick, and filld
within with earth; and some also toward the East and South, (whereby the City
might be the more defensible) have good Casamats, well raised and repaired.
About ten years since, his Imperial Majesty caused a very great entire
Bulwark to be raised of earth, almost right over against the Imperial Court,
or Archducall Castle, for the greater security thereof, because the Castle
heretofore, had been in that place but weakly fortified. Two years since,
the former Bulwark, which looks toward the South, and toward the West, was
strongly new built.

The Scottish Bulwark cast up of earth only, is now well lined with a strong
wall, and made equal to the rest of the Bulwarks.

Toward the East is a gate, commonly called Strubenthor: Toward the South,
the Carnithian gate; and the Castle gate, called, Burgthor; toward the West,
the South gate, and the new gate; toward the North, the gate of the red Tower,
called in Dutch, der Roche Thum: The Castle gate, the Carinthian gate, the New
gate, and the gate called Strubenthor, are the strongest, all arched, very high
and stately, with large passages; the other two are are only Towers.

To compass the City from the Gate called Strubenthor, to go to the gate of
the red Tower, you must pass first near a Bulwark built of Freestone, with
two high and battel'd Casamats, the higher of which does almost touch the
Dominicans Temple, the height whereof exceeds this Bulwark and Casamats.

Thence you come to another Bulwark strongly covered with a Bricke-wall, which
(as the former) is environed with reasonable deep ditches.

From this Bulwark, on the left side of the town, are seen some little and
low double Walls, reaching to an outward Gate; but on the right hand, near the
town, does run the Danube, on which is built a bridge of wood, commonly
called Schlagbruck.

This outward Gate leads to a broad street, where the City is somewhat naked:
For on the left hand there are very low Walls only, and on the right hand
nothing but the Danube, which one may sometimes ride over; and some
fortifications, which are built on the banks thereof, toward the red Tower,
and further toward the other outward gate, near which the street is narrower.
From this Gate, the City is encompassed on the left hand, with long strong high
Walls, on which these little watch-houses are built, which reach to the Armory,
and thence to the next Bulwark. It has also a drawbridge. The third Bulwark
is great and stately, (but wants ditches and water) and a good part of the
middle of the upper Wall is fallen down and wants repair.

Thence to the New gate, which has broad but shallow ditches, without water,
Henry Matthew, the elder Count of Turn, in Anno 1619. would have planted a
petard to this Gate, and with his horse which then lodged at Ebersdorff,
attempted to take the City.

Thence to the fourth Bulwark, which likewise wants mending and repair. From
this Bulwark, the Rampire is very high, with a little Wall upon it, toward
the Scotch gate, and there the Towne-ditch is very deep, but without water.
Thence the same kind of Rampire and ditch extends unto the next fifth Bulwark.
This Bulwark was only cast up of earth, but now of late is built up from the
ground with a Brick wall, and is reduced to an orderly form and proportion,
and by that means the City is the better fortified in that place. The Bohemian
foot Regiment of Tieffenbach, who were then commanded by the said elder Count
of Turn, remained not far from the City in a Village called Hoernals, if the
design had taken effect and had not been discovered by a Patriot, by this
Bulwark should have entered and taken the City.

This same high Rampire lined with Brick walls, in the ditches, at that place
very deep, but without water, passes along toward and behind the sixth
Bulwark, over which the present Governor of the Town, Baron Lobell, has
caused a little garden, with a house of pleasure to be built, according to the
bravery of the time. And because this Bulwark was lately renewed and better
reformed than the other, it excels the rest in beauty. Behind, it has a
Casamat with Brick walls, like the former. Thence the Rampire with a low,
mean, and in some places but a weak Wall, built thereon, extends it self,
even to the Imperial Court, or Archducal Castle, where by the raising of the
outward highway the ditches are made deeper.

Thence to the Castle gate, in Dutch das Burgthor, where stands the vast
seventh Bulwark of earth, which behind has a less Bulwark also, like a
Casamat, not built high, but completely walled.

On this side a Bohemian soldier, under the command of the elder Count of
Turn, did shoot some bullets, from the suburbs of St. Vbris, into the
Imperial Court or Archducall Castle, and even into the great Chamber of the
Knights and Nobles, and into the Antichamber; and drove his Imperial Majesty,
then King of Hungary and Bohemia, out of his own Chamber.

From thence the Rampire, with a Wall above, and Fortifications below, extends
it self with very deep ditches almost to the Carinthian gate; before which is
a strong, great, stately and fair Bulwark, all of Brick, the eight in
number, joining to the Gate, behind which and above the Gate, there is a
Casamat raised. And over the Gate, the Captain of the City watch has a fair
lodging.

From this Carinthian gate, instead of the Rampire, are Brick walls, almost of
one height with the Bulwarks, the ditches are there of good depth, but (as the
others) without water.

Then follows the ninth, which as the former is a very stately Bulwark; with
an Aquaduct into the town, and hitherto the ditches are dry; but about this
Bulwark, the Aquaduct, which serves both to bring in necessary water, and in
time of need, furnish the dry ditches with water, and rendereth them somewhat
wet and marish, but from the corner thereof and lower, they are deeper, and
more filled with water.

From thence runs the Rampire, to the tenth Bulwark, commonly called Obere
Stuben Pastey, which is most exquisitely fair, large, lofty, and strongly
faced with brick, and the corners of Freestone, with a magnificent inscription
in golden letters, on tables of stone. This Bulwark was built and perfected by
the Emperor Ferdinand the first.

These three last Bulwarks are of one height, and walled alike, and each of
them have a several inscription, with golden letters, in Tables of stone.

Of these ten Bulwarks of the City, three only stand in water, which is drawn
from the Danube, and some certain veins which run into the City, and all
the rest are dry.

The ditches of the City are are very unequal and unlike.

About the City are great and spacious suburbs, in which are diverse fair and
pleasant gardens, with houses of pleasure, and store of other considerable
dwellings, whereof many, especially before the Castle gate called das Burgthor,
and the Carinthian gate: toward St. Vlrics, and the little River of Vienna;
for about three hundred paces together, as well to enlarge the way and streets,
as for the greater safety of the City, were purposely demolished; and others a
few years since were burnt by accident.

The garrison of this Town consists at this present of about one thousand
foot, in eight companies, of which the Baron of Lobel Collonell, is Captain,
and one of the Emperors Counsels of War, and Vice President of that
Counsel. About some eight years since the arms, which had been taken from
the Citizens when Archduke Leopald was Governor of the City in the year
1619. were restored unto them again, the Citizens being for the most part
Protestants, and there being a suspicion conceived of some secret intelligence
betwixt them and the Bohemians, but especially with the elder Count of Turn:
The Magistrates fearing some attempt of the Protestants against the Roman
Catholics, had caused the Protestants to be disarmed.

The Burgmaster, by the command of his Imperial Majesty, as lawful Prince of
this Archdutchy of Austria, heretofore did choose out and raise four Companies
of foot of Citizens, of three hundred a piece. These selected men have been
used on urgent necessities for the defense of the City, as was lately practiced
in the time of the last Hungarian seditions and rebellions, under the direction
of Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania. For when part of a garrison was sent
to defend the Castle of Presbury, the selected Citizens were forced to serve
four months together, for the defense of the Town. The pay of the garrison
is six florins a man by the month, but for want of due payment they are often
seen to beg in the streets.

In time of war and danger, some Cornets of horse use to be taken into the
suburbs; at other times the guard remains unaltered.

Some think that the City of Vienna is so populous, that it contains, within
and without, some threescore thousand souls, but the certain number is hard
to be known.

The suburbs on the other side of the Danube are inhabited by Jews, as an
Island a part, and in the Town they have a place of commerce, where by day they
sell their commodities: but it is not lawful for them to lie all night in
Town. But because they bring great profits to the Imperial Court, and for
other causes and reasons, they are not only tolerated in this City, but they
enjoy many great privileges and liberties.

The Evangelicall Lutheran Religion, or the confession of Augsburg, being
heretofore brought into this City, did afterward so increase under the
Emperor Maximilian the second; that the said Evangelicks, amongst other
privelidges, had the exercise of their religion in the City it self, even in
the Minimes Temple, at the Provincial House. And although the Emperor Rodolph
the second, and before him Ferdinand the first, did resolve to their power, to
abolish the exercise of that religion; and began likewise a great reformation,
and advanced the business so far, that under the Emperor Rodolph the
second, the Evangelicall state of Lower Austria lost the exercise of their
religion in the City of Vienna; and it seemed as if an universal deformation,
and a total suppression, and extirpation of all the Evangelicks, in those
Countries, would have followed: Yet the Emperor Matthias the first, for diverse
great causes did most graciously grant the Evangelicall state of Lower Austria,
the exercise of their religion in the Village called Hoernals, about a quarter
of a German league from the City, and granted them his high Imperial and
Archducall Protection; notwithstanding the Catholics, especially the Clergy,
(whom the exercise of that religion did vehemently offend) persuaded
themselves, that the sermons of Cardinal Clozel, would have enduced the
Emperor again, to prohibit the exercise of the Evangelicks at Hoernals: And
that he would not permit them Evangelicall Matrimony, nor the administration of
the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

But when the Emperor Ferdinand the second took the raines of the Roman
Empire, and had taken the City of Prag; a Priest did seriously inculcate to his
Majesty, that whereas since the states of the Evangelicall Provinces had been
permitted the exercise of their religion in the Village of Hoernals, by the
Emperor Matthias the first, they had so multiplied that in that congregation
there were sometimes twenty, thirty, even forty, or fifty thousand persons, and
therefore he earnestly petitioned that the exercise of that religion might be
abolished by public command. And thereupon it came to pass, that a
reformation of religion was direct^d in the City of Vienna, by an Imperial
Mandate; and the exercise of the Augustan confession in the Village of Hoernals
(which was afterward given to the Cathedral Church of St. Steven in Vienna)
was quite suppressed, upon a pretext that the Baron Helmhardt Iorger, who was
then in prison at Lintz, had no right of patrinage in that Village, and all the
Evangelicall Preachers were forbidden to enter the City upon grievous
punishments. But yet in Austria they were suffered, for their persons, as
heretofore; and some of the Citizens and inhabitants had leave to go out of
the Town, unto Sermons and Sacraments after the Evangelicall manner, at
Intzerrdorff, belonging to the Lord Geyer of Osterburg, a Mile from the City.

But at the last, Anno 1627. his Imperial Majesty severely required all
Ecclesiastical Evangelicks by public Imperial, and Archducall Proclamations
and Mandates, to void by a certain time, all the Country of Austria and all
other his Imperial Majesty's hereditary Dominions, with prohibition under his
highness pleasure and unpardonable punishents, never to return, or to remain
there upon any terms.

In Ecclesiastically matters the City of Vienna, acknowledges the Bishop who
has spiritual jurisdiction over all the Bishoppricke of Vienna. And the
Bishop has his Officiat always in Vienna.

The Cathedral Church, which is dedicated to St. Steven is of a costly, great,
high and large building, set off on one side, with a very high spired and
excellent fair steeple, in which there is a very great and goodly Bell. A like
steeple was on the other side begun and brought to some perfection, but was
never finished; this (they say) the Bishop will perfect, and make it answerable
to the other, and it is thought that in four years space it may be finished.

The present Bishop has likewise caused all the old Bishops house to be pulled
down, and is building a large magnificent Palace in the place, to which
purpose he has obtained of the Emperor, a hundred thousand Rixdollers, which
was the price of the Duke of Meckelburgs reconciliation.

This Church was raised to a Cathedral by Pope Paul the second, at the
mediation of the Emperor Frederick the third. The Bishops revenew amounts but
to 8000. florins; which is but 1200 pounds sterling. The present Bishops name
is Antony, who has gained the Title of Prince from the Emperor: And he holds
besipes the Bishoppricke, the wealthy Abbey of Crembsmunster, of St. Bennets
Order in Upper Austria. He is also a Privy Counselor to his Imperial
Majesty, and the first of the Counsel. His predecessor was Cardinal Clozel,
who dyed at Vienna, in the year 1630. There are sixteen Cannons of this
Cathedral, but by reason of the small revenue of the Church, their stipends
are but slender. They all dwell about the Cathedral.

There are also diverse other Churches and Cloisters within and without this
City.

The Emperor Frederick the second founded the University at Vienna, in the
year 1237. and endued it with very great privileges and immunities, which
were afterward renewed, and amplified by Albert the third of Austria.

This Emperor Ferdinand the second, about the year 1622. gave this Academy to
the Jesuits, with the adjoining and appendant Burses and Colleges or Convents,
where now they teach and breed their scholars. His Majesty also granted them
the liberty of prefessing Theology and Philosophy, but upon condition that the
chair should be free for any of the Dominicans, Franciscans, or Minimes to
profess or dispute.

The Lawyers and Phisicians continue their ancient combination, and every six
months, they choose a new Rector. When they think fit to call a Counsel for
the good of themselves, or any other of the united persons of the University;
it is chosen, and consists of sixteen of those faculties. The Rector of the
University has jurisdiction over all the persons and members of the University.

The civil government of the City is ordered by the Senate, which consists of
eighteen Citizens and Senators, to whom all businesses are propounded,
concerning the particular or common good of the Citizens or City, and by them
they are deliberated. The chief of these is the Burgmaster. In criminal
matters, the Burgmaster has his Assessors and Assistants. But the civil
government is not absolutely in the Senate, but does depend on the Lieutenant
of the Lower Austria. And at all Colleges, and consultations of the Senators,
an Imperial Minister is always present in person.

The Office of Lieutenant is now exercised by Baron Sigfrid Christopher
Preunez, one of his Imperial Majesty's Privy Counsel, and president of the
government of Lower Austria, who has chief cognizans in matters which
concern the Cities, and civil government; and in the absence of his Imperial
Majesty the government is solely in him.

The Arsenall of Vienna is completely furnished, not only with ships and
Vessels useful for the place; but also with Arms, all warlike preparation,
and with great and small Ordnance, which are there kept. The present Master of
the which is Count Xantelier, by Nation a Lorraine; but because his Father
brought him to the Imperial Court when he was young and he has long performed
his office well, he is now esteemed a German.

The Court of Caesar, or the Archducall Castle; in Dutch das Burg; has no
singular splendour or magnificens, and is somewhat straight for so great a
Prince and stately a Court. It contains in it a great Court, on one side
whereof, is the Imperial Chancery; on the other side is the Inner Castle, or
the lodgings of the Emperor; and on the third side is the Rampire of the City,
with a gallery upon it. And on the fourth side is the new Castle commonly
called die Newburg, and the Court in the midst.

In this Imperial Palace there is a Waldrope, and a Gallery with several
chambers, which they call the Treasury, wherein are kept great store of all
sorts of most precious variety of gold, precious stones, and pearl; with
pictures and other things of curious workmanship, and with many rare pieces of
nature and art, worth many millions. Amongst other things, which are most
worthy of note, is the Imperial Crown and Scepter, and the Imperial Globe;
most richly adorned with gold, and rich oriental Dyamonds, valued at a mill on
of gold; made by the Emperor Rodolph for his own sacred person. Item a round
globe, seven spanne in compass cut out of one entire Agate, with the
Inscription of JEHOVAH, made by nature it self in darker caracters. Then a
Unicorns Horn of twelve or thirteen spannes long of which two last, the
value is inestimable, because their like in form, beauty, quality, and
quantity, are not to be found in the whole world. To this same Palace in which
the Emperor himself does lodge, there belong two pleasant gardens, the one
bigger than the other, into which his Imperial Majesty has an eary an
commodious passage out of his own lodgings.

In this Court of the Castle, called the Burgplatz, near the Emperors
lodgings, is a company of Foot, and at the entry to the inner Castle, under the
very gate, near the Drawbridge, ten of the Guard, called Frabauten, do
commonly watch; and keep their station there all day, with their Halberds, but
at night they draw up the bridge, and watch within, until they be relieved by
others of their fellows. And before the chambers of the Emperor and Empress,
there are other Guards which wait with Javelins, called Hartschierer, and
these are ever ready to attend and follow the Emperor wheresoever he goes,
as well in Iourneys as when he goes to walk, as the ordinary horse guard of
his body.

CHAP. 3. Of the person of the Emperor Ferdinand the second, and of his
Imperial virtues and qualities, his devotion and piety, his works of
humiliation, and of his dispatch of business, recreations and meals.
THe Emperor Ferdinand the second, was son to the Archduke Charles of
Austrin, who lived at Gratz, and Grandchild to the Emperor Ferdinand the
first; and had as his heredetary countries the Dutchies of Stiria Carinthia,
and Carniola, with other appendent Provinces. But when the two Lines of the
Austrian family; that of the Emperor Maximilian the second of Vienna, and that
of Ferdinand the Archduke of Infbruck, were both failed. And that the Archduke
Albert, who lived in the Low-countriess, was grown old and weak, and had
retained the government of the Austria^ Provinces; His Imperial Majesty,
partly by succession, and partly by agreement and consent, (but chiefly, by his
being chosen and Crowned King of Bohemia and Hungary, which was a strong
foundation of his future greatness) obtained the possession of all those
Provinces. And after this on the 28. of August, Anno 1619. (the Emperor
Matthias the first being dead,) he was elected and crowned Emperor at
Francfurt on the Maine; At which time reigned these Kings and Princes in diverse
Kingdoms of Europe, JAMES the first, King of Great Britain; LEWIS the
thirteen, King of France; PHILIP the third King of Spain; CHRISTIAN the
fourth, King of Denmark; GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS, King of Sweden; SIGISMVND the
third, King of Poland; and in the East, the Sultan Osman.

Now for the person of his Imperial Majesty, he was of fifty nine years of
age, of a midling stature and corpulent, of an excellent complexion, strong and
healthful; his hair and beard somewhat gray, of a graceful presence; of a
kind, meek, bounteous, and liberal djsposition, and of a singular
understanding, eloquence and memory; temperate in meat and drink, and
moderate in sleep; he seldom went to bed till ten at night, and sometimes
not till one; and he ordinarily did rise at four in the morning, and on his
bended knees commend himself by prayer to God. On festival and solemn days
principally on the Apostles days, he did confess and hear Mass. The
thursday before Easter he used to receive the holy Sacrament from the hands of
the Popes Nuncio, in company of the Empress, the King, and Queen of Hungary,
the Archduke, and the Archdutchesse, and other principal persons of the Court,
according to the rule of the Church of Rome. Before his Imperial Majesty went
to Church, he did appoint two Masses to be said in the chapel or closet, one
for himself, another for his late wife; who was sister to Maximilian the
present Duke of Bavaria; and sometimes at the same time he did receive the
Sacrament: And then he went to Church, where he commonly did hear a Sermon in
Dutch of one of the Jesuits, who is the ordinary preacher of the Court, of
about an hour long. The Sermon ended, high Mass is celebrated with great
devotion, and most sweet Music, which lasts at least an hour. After dinner
he did use to hear an Italian Sermon by the ordinary Court Italian Preacher,
and after that the vespers, which are sung with great solemnity. And in this
manner his Imperial Majesty spent almost the whole Sunday or holiday. And
sometimes he did visit other Churches, both within and without the City; as the
Dominicans the Capuchins, the Jesuits, or the Carmelites, and in these
Colleges and Convents he sometimes did dine.

In the time of Advent, his Imperial Majesty did commonly rise very early, to
frequent certain Mattins, like singing Masses, called Rorate; because at his
entry is sung the said Rorate coeli, which is followed with Music of
instruments and voices, almost an hours space, which time the people employ in
their prayers and devotions. The same Office is likewise solemnly celebrated
with great concourse in all the Churches.

During the time of Lent, his Imperial Majesty was most diligently wont to
hear Sermons, in his Court chapel, and in the Augustines Church which is
near the Castle; and on Holidaies in the Chapel of the Minimes, especially
in the time of the penitential processions; and every day in Lent are sung the
Vespers at large in the Imperial Oratory.

On Maundy thursday before noone, his Imperial Majesty publicly, and before
all there present, did wash the feet of thirty poor men, then feed them and
serve them in his own person, at table. After he gave to every one a gown,
and a piece of gold of the value of a double Hungarian ducat.

At the same day and time, in another place apart, the Empress performs the
same, out of humility, to thirty poor women.

The last Sunday before Easter his Imperial Majesty was wont to visit all the
Churches of the Town on foot after the Catholic Roman manner, and to pray
before the Tombs erected in them. This last year a coach did ease his feet of
that penance.

During the week of holy Cross, beginning from Sunday to the feast of the
Ascension of Christ, his Imperial Majesty was used to be at the accustomed
Processions, at which this year his weakness has not suffered him to be
present.

On Corpus Christi day, when the great Procession is celebrated, his Imperall
Majesty did use to assist with all the Court on foot, bare headed, and to pray
on bended knees at all the altars by the way. And the sunday following, he was
used to attend the Procession of the Jesuits: and the next sunday to be
present with great devotion at the general Procession, which is very populous,
and continues from morning until noone.

For this cause the Popes Nuncio Cardinal Palatto in his relation made to Pope
Urban the eight; does testify (to the great commendation of his Imperial
Majesty,) the Emperor Ferdinand the second may well be styled a holy Prince, a
man after Gods own heart, as was King David, and that for the candor of his
conscience, and his firm faith in God, the protection of the Almighty has
been so constant, on his Imperial person, that as the Lords anointed he
never has or could be oppressed, or hurt by any. As plainly appears by his
Imperial magnanimity, in the very beginning of his reign, and some following
years after, when the three Regal Offices and Counselors of the Kingdom of
Bohemia being thrown out of the window at Prag, in the year 1618. the 25. of
May (the Emperor Matthas the first being yet alive) all his hereditary
Provinces and Countries were destroyed with fire and sword, and his sacred
person (as it were) in the midst of his enemies, having nothing remaining, but
only the City of Vienna, it was not possible to force him from his Residence,
but on the contrary he was always most miraculously preserved by God.

The same Nuncio reports also, that his Imperial Majesty, has said, in
greatest dangers; that the divine providence had abundantly manifested its
strength and power in his sacred person, above the reach and understanding of
man.

And for matters of religion or conscience, when his Imperial Majesty did
depute a Counselor or Commissioner to that end, he did not precipitate a
ratification, but first remit all to his Confessor, who is most acute and
prudent father, whose counsel and a judgment his Imperial Majesty (as the
sheep his shepherd) did constantly follow with a willing and ready mind and
heart; and to clear himself from all scruples of conscience, he did refer
unto him all, even the least things.

On other days, (except the Lords day) having heard two Masses and dispatched
his private consultations, for every day, or at least every other day, he did
hold a Counsel, unless there were something of greater moment to dispatch,
his Imperial Majesty used to go out of town to take the air, or to hunt (in
which kind of exercise he did most delight) and commonly returned not till
night: whence the proverb grew, that his Imperial Majesty in three things was
indefatigable; to wit, In devotion, in counsel, and in hunting. And although
sometimes he did return somewhat late and tired from hunting; yet did he
never refuse or forbear to sign with his own hand forty, fifty; or
threescore or more several things at one time, concerning the business of the
Empire, and other matters, and without the least show of displeasure or
impatience; and then he did sit down to meat. So that his Imperial Majesty
did never return from counsel, from hunting, or from audience (as they term
it,) without prescribing or signing somewhat, or reading memorials, or being
otherwise employed. And forasmuch as his Imperial Majesty by reason of the
many businesses of the Empire, and others of great consequence, could not
himself read the least part of them; if there was any thing presented to
himself, or to the master of his chamber, he did command it to be sent by a
waiter or huisher of the chamber unto the Counsel proper for the business,
that it might be speedily dispatched.

His Imperial Majesty was most of all delighted in hunting (as is said) and in
Music; and did keep all kind of dogs, and strange birds, for hunting and
hawking. Of Huntsmen and Falcners, he had about 150. But besides these, his
Imperial Majesty, in all his hereditary Kingdoms, and Provinces, had a chief
Huntsman with diverse others, and dogs without number.

He did use a piece very skilfully; but his chiefest pleasure was to moose his
game, and with his own hand to kill wild boares, which he afterward sent for
presents of honor to foreign Ambassadors and Agents, and to the officers of
the Court. And he was wont to keep a catalogue of the annual number of the
Dear he killed, and sent to the Electour of Saxony.

His Imperial Majesty was likewise very curious to get exquisite Musicians,
and to these two kinds of men, Musicians and Huntsmen, he did give very
liberally, and spend much money on them. Music, he said, is profitable, and
fit for the praise and honor of the Almighty; and to make the heart of man
merry.

His Imperial Majesty did ordinarily dine in his Antichamber, but most
commonly sup with the Empress. Two years since, his Imperial Majesty, with
the Empress, King and Queen of Hungary, and the Archduke and Archdutchesse,
on solemn and great feasts, (as at Christinas, Easter, and Whitsontide,) used
to eat in public in the Chamber of the Knights and Nobles, before a great
multitude; where there was commonly most exquisite Music of Instruments.

The Emperors Table is usually attended by the Ordinaries of the chamber,
Sewers, Cupbearers, and such like Officers, and sometimes also by Princes,
Earls, and Barrons of the Empire, who having waited about an hours space,
withdraw themselves. For no Prince is admitted to fit at the Emperors table in
his Court at Vienna; but elsewhere, and in the Country, he sometimes, though
seldom at his residence, causes some to sit at table with him, according as
they are great and eminent either by their birth and quality, or in his grace
and favor.

It is worth the observing, that Christian the elder Prince of Anhalt, being
reconciled to the Emperor, presented the towell to his Imperial Majesty after
washing, and after waited bareheaded; but when he had received his investiture
and feudalities from the Emperor, and stood likewise bareheaded before the
Imperial table; the Emperor considering it, would not admit thereof; and
thereupon by the chief Marshall of his Court, (which then was the Earl of
Lozenstein,) commanded him to put on his hat, which he did; and withal to sit
at the table with him, which he did also in the Castle of Vienna.

When his Imperial Majesty sits at the table with the Empress, in stead of
Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, the Imperial Ladies and maids of the
Empress serve at the table, and then there is most exquisite Music;
otherwise there is no music at dinner, unless it be on festival and
holydaies.

The meats which are served on the Imperial board, are neither costly nor
dainty, nor any way superfluous in splendour or magnificence, for so great a
Prince.

According to the time and occasion there are Iesters, which make sport and
tell merry tales. Amongst these Jonas is the prime for sudden jests, but they
are never so free as when the Emperor is abroad, or hunting.

CHAP. 4. Of the manner of the Emperors going to the Church or Chapel, of
his attendants and of the carriage of the Ambassadors and Agents at those
times, and how his Imperial Majesty is served returning from Church or
Chapel, and what he then used to do.
WHen his Imperial Majesty goes to the Church, the King of Hungary being
present, goes next before him, in a Coach alone; and then follows his
Imperial Majesty, either alone, or with the Empress. When the Queen of
Hungary is present, the Empress and she, and the Archdutchesse are most
commonly carried in one Coach, and follow next after the Emperor: and after
then the Ladies and Gentlewomen in diverse Coaches. The Archduke goes before the
King, and before all these on foot go the Courtiers, Knights, and Imperial
Ministers of all sorts and condition. On both sides walk the Guard called
Hartschierer and Trabanten bareheaded, which indeed is a brave sight and makes
a great train.

A troop of Soldiers on foot follow the Ladies, which attend and wait on
the Emperor from his going out of Court till he return, to dine at the Court
or any where else, be it in a Monastery or College, or any other place
wheresoever.

The Popes Nuncio and other Ambassadors, never appear before his Imperial
Majesty; till after divine service, or other public acts be done; and then
they present themselves to his Imperial Majesty, and wait upon him to his
Coach, and then they presently retire.

When his Imperial Majesty is in the City, out of the Court, the City gates
are all shut, and locked up.

The great Master of the horse, does use to go with his head covered on the
left side of the Imperial Coach, but abroad he sits in the Coach over against
the Emperor.

When the Emperor goes out of his chamber to Church or Chapel, and returns
again by the Knights great chamber and antichamber, the Pages of honor, the
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen of the chamber, Counselors, Barrons, Earls,
Princes, and other Officers of several conditions, follow them. After the
Princes follow the Ambassadors, if any be present, then the Popes Nuncio, the
Archduke, the King of Hungary, and then his Imperial Majesty; and after him
the Empress, the Queen of Hungary, the Archdutchesse, every one with his h of
master, and last of all, the Ladies of honor. The Guard of both sorts wait
till the train be passed, and until his Imperial Majesty be set at dinner,
within and without the Knights chamber even to the antichamber. On Sundaies and
festival days, the Trumpets use to sound in the Court of the Castle called
Burgplatz.

CHAP. 5. Of the Imperial antichamber, and of the Knights and Nobles chamber,
etc. and what is usually done there.
THe Barons and Knights, Counselors and principal Officers, Agents and
others, who either have had audience of the Emperor, or who otherwise have
access thither, until it be time to return home; use to wait in the
antichamber or chamber of Knights. In the room where his Imperial Majesty
gives audience, no man may put on his hat, but an absolute Prince, or a Prince
of tht Empire, a Cardinal, the Popes Nuncio, and Kings Ambassadors.

Here it is also to be observed, that when his Imperial Majesty is to pass
the Knights chamber, and comes near it, one of the huishers with a key raps
the door twice, for a sign of his Imperial Majesty's coming. When the
Emperor passes the chamber of Knights, diverse petitions and memorials are
frequently presented to him; and withal, he is admonished and put in mind of
the necessity and importance of the business, which his Imperial Majesty most
graciously receives, and gives ear unto every ones petition, although
sometimes it be very long with great patience and equanimity, without
displeasure or anger.

When his Imperial Majesty sees any foreign Knight of special qualities, or
any who is lately returned to the Imperial Court, whom he had known before,
he gives him his hand to kiss. He willingly hears propositions made unto him,
and most graciously answers them, and sometimes of himself he moves and
asks some gentle and pleasing questions.

He receives all writings and memorials with his own hands, and carries them
with him into his own chamber, and never gives them away, until he come
thither. He usually speaks German or Italian, and sometimes also Latin, and
that very readily and correctly; but never speaks French or Spannish, no not
with the Spannish Ambassador himself.

CHAP. 6. Of the yearly revenewes of the Kingdoms, and hereditary Provinces
of his Imperial Majesty.
IT is difficult to speak certainly of the yearly revenewes of his Imperial
Majesty, out of his Kingdoms and hereditary Provinces; because those
Countries, as well by reason of the ordinary and extraordinary contributions, as
for other causes are changed much from the ancient state, and are very
uncertain.

His Imperial Majesty has a very great revenew, from the Hungarian mines of
gold and silver, but does expend it all, and much more in preserving the places
bordering on the Turk.

The Duke of Bavaria has long possessed the Upper Austria, for twelve millions
of florins paid at Ratisbone, in the year 1622. and still by that agreement it
remains engaged unto him. And this at the present is much depopulated in
diverse places by the insurrections of the boores.

The Marquisate of Upper and Lower Lusatia in the year 1636. was granted to
the Electour of Saxony, for some millions in hereditary propriety.

The revenew of Bohemia and Moravia, besides the ordinary and extraordinary
contributions and other impositions, some few years since, amounted about some
three millions yearly.

The revenew of Silesia has been uncertain of late years, but the yearly
impost on Beer only, is far above two hundred thousand florins.

But the revenewes of Lower Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, etc. are of
all others the most certain, safe and ordinary, and these according to report,
amount unto about two millions of florins.

The faithful subjects also of his Imperial Majesty's dominions, do yearly
send to the Imperial Court some hundred thousand florins. The provincial
Dyets do likewise help him to much money. And besides all these, the goods
which were confiscated by reason of the many rebellions in Bohemia and Moravia,
and in the Upper Austria, and somewhat in the Lower, have brought above three
and forty millions of florins to the Imperial Treasury, since the year 1618.

CHAP. 7. Of the Empress, King FERDINAND the third, the Queen MARY, Archduke
Leopald William, and the Emperors daughters.
ELeonora the Roman Empress, daughter of Vincent, the elder Duke of Mantova,
and sister to the late deceased Duke Vincent of Mantova, is now thirty seven
years of age, of a perfect stature, gentle countenance, and wise; a good wife,
liberal, merciful, and meek. She had for her dowry from her Ducall house,
about three hundred thousand crowns: And his Imperial Majesty has given her
lands in lower Austria to above that value in exchange. When she was crowned at
Presburg, the Hungarians presented her a hundred thousand Rixdollers: and in
the second provincial Diet of Hungary eighteen thousand Rixdollers, and
another time also, thirty thousand. His Imperial Majesty allows her commonly
every month two thousand florins, (which in English is no more than three
hundred pounds sterling,) and a Country house commonly called Favoritenhoff

Her habit is almost Spannish, she is pious and religious, and entertaines
Ecclesiastical persons with great love and honor, and chiefly Capuchins and
Carmelites.

His Imperial Majesty has left four children living, Ferdinand the third,
King of Hungary and Bohemia; Leopald William, Archduke of Austria; Maria Anna,
wife of Maximilian Duke of Bavaria and; and Cecilia Renata, who is yet
unmarried: all borne of his Imperial Majesty's first wife, who was his cousin
german, and sister to Maximilian Duke of Bavaria.

King Ferdinand the third is now of nine and twenty years of age complete; he
is well favored, of an heroicke countenance and fashion, of a taller stature
than his father, black hair and beard, becoming his royal face, and giving
it a manly form; he is wise, prudent and serious, careful of his reputation,
silent, and in many things like the Duke of Bavaria. He pays his debts duly,
but withal, he knows well how to practice the proverb, Ne quid nimis, or
rather as the Dutch, Near reckoned, well paid; yet will be wanting in nothing
which is just and decent. His studies (in which he has well profited) are fit
for a King, as well necessary in war as in peace, chiefly the Mathematickes,
and art of war and fortification, he speaks many Languages, German, Italian,
Latin, Bohemian and Spannish. He is devout, and religious: and he has a
particular Court of his own.

The Queen his wife is the Infanta Mary, sister of Philip the 4th. King of
Spain, whose dowry (the same with the Queen of France) was five hundred
thousand crowns, every crown valued at thirteen ryals. The King her brother
also was at the care and charge of her transport even to the furthest parts of
Austria.

Archduke Leopold William, Bishop Strasburg, Bassan and Halberstadt, is three
and twenty years of age, tall and of a strong complexion, a lover of hunting;
he has put on the habit of a Churchman. But it is said, that he will not
continue in this Ecclesiastical state, but intends to marry.

The Archdutchesse Mary Anne, who is now married to the Duke of Bavaria her
uncle, of the age of twenty eight, well bred, devout and virtuous, prudent and
industrious, of black hair and eyes, of a most sweet countenance, well skilled
in German and Italian. Vadislaus the now King of Poland should have married
her: but, they say, the marriage was hindered by the States of Poland, and by
the Kings Counselors; she was afterward intended for the Cardinal Infant,
the only son also of the Prince Palatine of Newburg: Albert Duke of Bavaria,
as also Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania by the example of Sigismund Bather
desired to have married her; to which effect the Transilvanian sent his
Ambassadors to his sacred Imperial Majesty at Newstat. But at last her uncle
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria carried her.

The younger Imperial Princess, the Archdutchesse Cecilia Ranata, is five and
twenty years old, fairer faced than her sister, godly, virtuous, and very well
brought up, but speaks her Mother tongue only German, and although she
understand Italian, she speaks it not. The common opinion and conjecture is,
she shall be married to the Cardinal Infant.

These two Imperial Princesses are of a perfect proportion and stature, and
somewhat of a strong complexion.

CHAP. 8. Of the four chief Officers of the Imperial Court, the High
Steward, the High Marshall, High Chamberlain, and High Master of the Horse,
and of those of the Chamber, and of their Aids, Pages of honor, Guards as well
horse as foot, Court Chaplains, and Imperial father Confessor.
THe highest and chiefest Office of the Imperial Court, is the high Steward; a
grave man, stately, and now aged, who heretofore under the Emperor Matthias
was high Chamberlain.

The high Marshall of the Court is a great and profitable office of authority
and reputation, whose jurisdiction extends it self not only over all the
Courtiers, Officers, and others belonging to the Imperial Court, but also over
foraigne Agents, Residents, Ambassadors, and Deputies; soliciting and
negotiating affairs and businesses in the Imperial Court: and over all that
have any employment at Court, workmen, Jews, and such like. His office also
is to assign lodgings to every one according to discretion: when the Emperor
removes his Court elsewhere, except at the Electorall and Imperial Dyets, for
there the hereditary Marshall of the Empire does exercise his jurisdiction. The
said Court Marshall has his Quartermaster, and other inferior harbingers
(commonly called Furriers) under him; who have the charge of billetting and
lodgings. And his Imperial Majesty being absent, the chief Marshall of the
Court is his Vicegerent.

Under the jurisdiction of the high Chamberlain, are those of the chamber, and
all others serving therein. He conducts all Kings Ambassadors, and other
Princes, Lords, and Knights, unto their audience with his Imperial Majesty. He
receives all letters of credence from all Agents and Soliciters, as well of
foreign Princes, as of those of the Empire, and all others sent to the
Imperial Court, directed to his Imperial Majesty, and signifies the prefixed
time of their audience by a huisher of the Chamber. He often watches whole
nights himself before the Imperial Chamber, he wears a guilt key of the
chamber, as do the rest of the chamber, tied to a black silk string, which
is a sign they are of the Chamber to his Imperial Majesty. Those of the
Chamber receive themselves the golden key from the high Chamberlain, and going
from Court, they are bound to deliver it up to him again; and returning back
to the Imperial Court they receive it again, and wear it as before. Their
monthly stipend is forty florins (six pound sterling) with their diet at Court,
as also have the other twelve of the Chamber in ordinary.

There are diverse others also of the Chamber, who receive neither wages nor
diet, nor ought else, except the guilt key, with the title and honor.

Two of the twelve of the Camber in ordinary, every week by turns lie and
watch all night before the Imperial Chamber. When the Emperor eats in the
antichamber, they take the assay of the meat, which is served thither. If any
one be to be made of the Chamber, he must take an oath of his allegiance to his
Imperial Majesty, before the high Chamberlain, and give security.

In the absence of the high Chamberlain, the eldest of the Chamber supplies
his Office. When his Imperial Majesty sits publicly at table, the Sewers,
which are truly Nobles and of ancient families (some of them being Barons and
Earls) serve and wait at Table, and so do the Cupbearers and Pantlers, and
over them all is a certain Officer (commonly called Obrister Staebel meyster)
who is otherwise one of the Chamber, who bearing a black staff, ushers the
dishes which are brought to the Imperial table; neither has he any certain
wages, besides his diet at Court. He uses always to attend his Imperial
Majesty in traveling, and has a horse, or a coach room appointed for him. Of
these and the like Nobles and Courtiers, there are about threescore which have
only their diet and accommodation, as they call it, in traveling; and who
remain in Court in hope of some better preferment, which they seldom or never
expect in vain, unless sometimes their fortune be slow and too long coming.

His Imperial Majesty has also some servants of the Chamber, who are by their
places to hearken after common discourses and rumors, and these use to make
relations of what they conceive will prove acceptable. They are honored with
Nobility and have their diet at Court, and have also horses or coach room for
travel allowed, and sixteen florins wages by the month.

And as his Majesty's Imperial liberality and innate bounty toward his
faithful Servants and Courtiers is inexhaustible: so he does sometimes
according to the quality of the service, reward them very liberally, besides
their ordinary wages, that afterward they may more patiently expect, until
God shall further favor them; remembering (as it were) that the rich man who
entertained his servants always with that comfort, to reward them largely
after his death, was admonished by this inscription: Give thine whilst it is
thine, which after death is none of thine. Whereupon his Imperial Majesty
about two years since said to the Jesuits, be taking Fathers, you shall not
have always with you Ferdinand the second.

There are likewise hiushers of the chamber, who wait at the door of the
Antichamber, and suffer none but those who are allowed to enter there, these
have a monthly stipend of twelve florins.

The great master of the Horse has authority and command over all that belong
to the Stables. He helps his Imperial Majesty, when he gets on horseback.
When he rides out of Town, he sits in the Imperial Coach with his head
covered. But when he goes to Church, he goes on foot on the left hand of the
Coach, also his head covered.

The expense of his Imperial Majesty for the Stables, is great; for he keeps
some hundreds of horses, of which many are spoiled by hunting: and besides
these in his hereditary Provinces, he has many and stately Stables.

Part of the Pages of honor are Germans, part Italians, and Belgians, seldom
of other Nations. They are brought up in study and the exercise of the body,
and are afterward preferred to the offices of Sewers, Cupbearers, or the like,
as also some to more eminent offices, as their qualities deserve. They hold the
torches in the Churches or Chapels behind the Priests, while Mass is
celebrated; their livery is of three colors, yellow, black, and white.

Of the Guards, some are horsemen or lanciers, (commonly called Hartshterer)
and of them there are one hundred, in the time of the former Emperors they
were nobly descended, some also of late have been of noble Familes, and others
expert and approved soldiers aginst the Turk, the common enemy of
Christendom, in the wars of Hungary; but at this day the greatest part are
of mean condition. In Town they wait on foot, bearing their Lances, but out
of Town as horsemen, they are clothed as Pages with a livery of three colors.

The Guards on foot (commonly called Trabauten) are in number one hundred
also. These wait only in Town with their halberds, and are, for the most
part, tradesmen and mechaniques: their coats and clothes are likewise of three
colors.

The six Court-chaplaines or Deacons are all Priests, every morning they sing
Mass, and in their turns by weeks they say grace before the Imperial Table,
they are little esteemed, they have every one their diet at Court, and three
hundred florins (or 45. pound sterling) wages yearly; and one of them who is
the chief Parochus, has four hundred florins, besides which they usually
enjoy some other Ecclesiastical benefices, whereby they may the better provide
for their necessaries.

The Emperors Confessor is Father Laimormain, of the order of the Jesuits, by
Nation a Flemming or Walloone, and an old man. He has the greatest authority
in the Imperial Court, as he who has the heart of Caesar, and his conscience
in his hands, and at his beck; his counsels and advices as well in
Ecclesiastical cases of conscience, as in politic affairs prevail before
all others, and unto him they are referred. Whosoever has this father for his
Patron, may safely effect his business in the Imperial Court.

CHAP. 9. Of the several Imperial Court Counsels, as of the Cabinet Counsel
the Imperial Court Counsel, the Chamber Court Counsel, Millitary Counsel,
Ecclesiastical Counsel, Counsel of conscience, Hungarian Counsel, Bohemian
Counsel, and confiscation Counsel.
THe Privy Councillors of the Cabinet, excel the other Counselors in
dignity, for they are employed in consultation of States matters, concerning
the peace and war of the Emperors hereditary Kingdoms and Dominions, and
the petitions and Commands of foreign Kings and Princes. To these also belong
all matters of the Chambers, and whatsoever is first debated and deliberated by
other Counsels, and concluded by votes, and referred to his Imperial Majesty.
And also, what other Counsels have before decided, the Cabinet Counsel
afterward sometimes changes or otherwise disposes of, and from thence is the
Imperial restitution to be expected in all things.

In matters of the Empire, the judgment and sentence of the Imperial Court
Counsel, grounded on strong and firm reasons, is seldom rejected or changed
by the Cabinet Counsel. And hence it appears that all things first come to
his Imperial Majesty, before their dispatch; except small matters, which may
of course be granted by the President of the Imperial Court Counsel, or Vice
Chancellor of the Empire.

All matters of grace, of what nature soever they be, are presented to his
Imperial Majesty, with all humbleness, and presently they pass and belong
unto the Imperial Cabinet Counsel; yet sometimes his Imperial Majesty
causes them to be referred to the Imperial Court Counsel, that he may
understand their reformation and judgment, before he gives his own gracious
judgment thereupon.

About two years since the Prince of Eggenberg had the direction of this
Cabinet Counsel, and was absolute Patron of Caesar's will, so that they then
had but one heart and one way; as the Prince of Eggenberg within the Court had
all the power, so the Duke of Frisland did sway in the wars.

And although he kept his bed almost continually by reason of the gout and
collicke, with which he was much afflicted, and although his house was a good
distance from the Imperial Court, yet his Imperial Majesty appointed his
Cabinet Counsel to be always assembled there, and himself past to his house
from the Archducall Castle, or Imperial Court through a long Gallery, and
assisted in his own person at the consultations. Neither did he only visit
him at times of Counsel, but other times also daily, and sometimes often in
one day. And his Imperial Majesty, and the Empress did often use to play and
sport themselves in his house. This Prnce was of an admirable judgment, a
quick understanding, a great capacity and eloquence, and framed by nature to a
most comely shape, a bigot in religion, dissembling, most happy in advising and
resolving counsels; and on that knew how to satisfy his Imperial Majesty in
all things.

The Emperor had mightily enriched him, and made him very great, as may in
part appear by the titles which he enjoyed whilst he lived. It was then a
Proverb, that the Emperor had three mighty hills; to wit, Eggenberg,
Werdenburg, and Questenberg: and three precious stones Dietrichstein, Walstein
and Liechenstein in his hereditary Kingdoms and Provinces; for that those
Families had attracted and appropriated to themselves a great part of the best
and fairest dominions in the hereditary Provinces of his Imperall Majesty.

But as this Prince of Eggenberg has still enjoyed the constant grace of the
Emperor, the favor of all the house of Austria, the esteem and praise of all
the Imperial Court, and a general respect and honor of all the Country and
Empire: Son on the other side, as soon as the treason of the Duke of Fridland
and his conspiracy, intended at Pilsen, was discovered, both the Emperors
grace and all other men's favor and respect toward him began to fail: so that
he had but even time enough, yea scarce enough (when the King of Hungary
Ferdinand the third, taking his last leave of the said Prince of Eggenberg, and
bidding him farewell, without those terms of kindness, which otherwise are
usually given to Princes of the Empire) to withdraw himself out of the Court,
and in the best manner he could, make (as it were) his retreat into Stiria.

Of the Cabinet Counsel to the Emperor were, the Cardinal of Dietrichstein,
a Moravian by Nation; the Bishop of Vienna of the Rhine; the Count of Megar, an
Austrian; the Count of Trantmansdorff a Stirian; the Count of Fugger of Suevia;
the Abbot of Lilieufield a Westphalian; the Count of Schlick a Bohemian; the
Count of Werdenberg an Italian; Count Mansfelt an Earl of the sacred Roman
Empire, who seldom comes to Counsel; Count Schlawata a Bohemian; Count
Kevenhuller a Carinthian; the Count of Morsburg a Franconian, and the Lord
Breuner an Austrian.

The Imperial Court Counsel next in rank to the Cabinet Counsel, is where
all affairs of the Empire both public and private are both considered and
decided, according to the laws and constitutions of the Empire, and according
to the grants and charters of privilege and immunities of the Electours,
Princes, and States of the Sacred Roman Empire, that every one may be
maintained and established therein; and not by any means be burdened,
contrary to the Laws.

The Counselors of this Counsel are partly Nobles, and partly Doctors. Of
the Nobles there are but six of the Empire, the rest are all borne in the
Emperors hereditary Provinces. The Doctors are many, and most of them borne
in the Empire; that is, within the Austrian Provinces. And because the affairs
of the Electours, Princes, and States of the Sacred Roman Empire are of great
moment; therefore the consultation and direction being made, his Imperial
Majesty is informed thereof in his Cabinet Counsel, and from thence his
resolution is expected. Hence the dispatches are sent to the Secretary, and
being prepared, the said Secretary first subscribes himself on the left hand
below, afterward the Vicechancellour of the Empire, in the middle toward the
right hand, and last of all his Imperial Majesty signs the cloze under the
writing, toward the right side.

The yearly wages of every one of the Imperial Court Counselors, is twelve
hundred florins, (one hundred and forty pounds sterling) and besides his
Imperial Majesty distributes and gives them gratifications, according to their
merit; and according as every one has faithfully and profitably discharged his
office on his Imperial Majesty.

The Court Counsel of war, is composed for the most part, of Knights and
Commanders. In this they do consult and make provision for the garrisons and
soldiers, how to continue the war and to assign necessary allowance to the
soldiers, money for the armies, victuals, and provision; and to supply them
with munition and all other things, directed for the good, profit, and benefit
of his Imperial Majesty, in all things which may and ought to be done.

The Court Counsel of the Imperial Chamber, has not only power and
jurisdiction in all other chambers, but also looks unto all the revenewes and
rents as well of the Empire, as chiefly of his Imperial Majesty, his hereditary
Provinces. For although every one of his Imperial Majesty's hereditary
Kingdoms and Provinces, have a peculiar chamber, yet all of them depend upon
the said Court chamber.

The resolutions of this chamber are somewhat slow and tedious; and thence it
was, that in the Diet of the Kingdom of Hungary, this amongst others was
presented as a great grievance, that the States and subjects of that Crown,
could not obtain dispatch, but were constrained at great expense and charges,
to neglect the affairs and businesses of their own family, to attend in
vain this Court chamber. The now president of this Counsel and Court chamber,
is an Ecclesiastical Prelate.

And here it is chiefly to be observed, that the President of the Court
chamber, who directs so many millions of revenewes from the Emperors
hereditary Kingdoms and Provinces, whether he be deposed or resignes his
office, is not obliged to give any account of his administration.

The Ecclesiastical Counsel was instituted by the Emperor Maximilian the
second, that Ecclesiastical matters and those which concern Religion, as well
in the Empire, as in his Imperial Majesty's hereditary Kingdoms and
Dominions, might be therein resolved and deliberated. This Counsel has
neither a President, nor a set number of Counselors; the one half whereof is
of Ecclesiastical persons, and the other of Politic.

The Counsel of conscience consists only in the meeting of Ecclesiastical
persons, which are more or less according to the occasion.

When his Imperial Majesty treated the peace of Prag in the year 1635. with
the Electour of Saxony, and his conscience was much perplexed, whether he might
any longer suffer the Evangelicks to enjoy the possessions of Ecclesiastical
goods in the Empire; for the recovery whereof, the war had so long continued,
and so much blood had been shed: This question of conscience, of so great a
consequence, was referred to the Counsel of Divines, that thereupon they might
declare their judgment. Hereupon diverse Ecclesiastical persons were assembled
from diverse places in the City of Vienna: the Counsel was composed of two
Cardinals, two Bishops, two Prelates, two Cannons, two Fathers, of every
society and order, (amongst which were also two Jesuits.) And they deliberated
and consulted thereon for diverse weeks, and at last delivered an opinion,
whereupon his Imperial Majesty did afterward agree of Articles with the
Electour of Saxony, and thereupon the peace was published.

And this Assembly of Ecclesiastiques was then called, the Counsel of
conscience; because the matter touched the conscience of his Imperial Majesty.

The Court Counsel for Hungary consists of Hungarians only, and has a
dependence on the Palatine of the Kingdom of Hungary, who is there as Viceroy.

The present Palatine is the Lord Esterhasy, Count de Gallanta, Knight of the
golden Fleece; who governes the Hungarian Kingdom in secular matters, as
Cardinal Pasman the Jesuit, Archbishop of Gran does in spiritual.

To this Counsel also belong the affairs of the Kingdoms of Dalmatia,
Creatia and Sclavonia.

The Bohemian Court Counsel, although it seems not to be a set Counsel, as
the others, because therein ordinarily are only a Chancellor, Vicechancellor,
and Secretary: and that besides the government of that Kingdom is committed to
the Lieutenant and supreme Officers at Prag: nevertheless, diverse petitions
and supplications, touching tenures, immunities, confirmations and enlargement
of Provinces, and all sorts of feudall affairs are bought to the Bohemian
Court Chancery, as well out of the City as Country, and are afterward all
dispatched in the Court Chancery.

There is also a particular Officer of tenures and fealties, who (the vassals
conveniently desiring it) does grant unto them their recognziances or
attestations that they have performed the feodatory oath, which being brought
into the Chancery, there are afterward dispatched the feodary patents. If there
happen any processes, they are first sent to the Royal Counsel of appeals
for information and report of their opinion therein; and afterward they are
resolved and decided in the Court Chancery. Other appeals also from the whole
Kingdom of Bohemia, of all the cities, towns and parts thereof are brought
thither and many times decrees and sentenses, about feudall affairs are there
pronounced and obtained. The Barons and Knights of that Kingdom seek justice
and redress (if they need) at a Court called, the royal Landtable. And
matters of debt are decided at a Court, commonly called, the office of the
Burggrave; next in dignity to the former. Reviewes or affairs of Revision are
referred out of the Chancery to the chamber, called the Green chamber. When
there happens any thing of moment in the Court, there is held a Bohemian
Counsel at the Lord Vicechancellours of the Empire, the Baron of Stralendorfs:
To which purpose, because there befall at this time diverse businesses of great
moment, concerning the affairs both of the Kingdom of Bohemia as also the
incorporate Provinces, which are to be discussed and resolved upon (which
would have been too troublesome for the Bohemian Counsel alone) his Imperial
Majesty has deputed (besides the said Bohemian Counselors) some others of the
Imperial Court Counsel, and joined them in Commission with his said
Vicechancellour Stralendorff. The confiscation Counsel consists of the Bishop
of Vienna, the Abbot of Lilienfield, President of the Imperial Court chamber,
the Count of Schlicke President of the Court Counsel of war; together with
the Secretary of the Court chamber, Hoffman of Ankerson. In this Counsel of
confiscation, was taken the deliberation and resolution about the distribution
of the confiscated goods and Lands of the late Duke of Fridland, Count of
Kinskie, and the Baron Ilaw: and since that time very lately in the same
Counsel has been consulted about the distribution of the goods of Terskie, a
great part whereof is already bestowed on others. And this cause of Terskie
being now finished, they are now busied in causes of Silesia, and diverse
others. And these confiscated goods amounted to many millions, besides the
three and forty millions already mentioned. These and the like, are the means
whereby the soldiers are partly satisfied, and appeased in their importunities.

CHAP. 10. Of the foreign Ambassadors, and Agents, and of the Ambassadors
and Agents of the Empire, now at Vienna.
THe Pope has an ordinary Nuntio to the Imperial Court, who is called the
Appertolicke Nuncio. He pretends spiritual jurisdiction, not only in the
Kingdoms of Hungary, and Bohemia, with their adherent and incorporated
Countries, and in all other Countries and Provinces of Austria; but even in the
whole German Empire. He watches also for the safety of the Roman Church, that
it may receive no prejudice nor detriment, and if he observe any such thing, he
opposes himself and protests against it.

As he did lately in the cause of Bremen, and was much displeased at the
Emperors gracious resolution therein: to whom his Imperial Majesty made
answer, that he was enforsed by the Treaty of Prag, to yield to that and many
other things, because the Pope had forsaken him.

The King of Spain has his ordinary Ambassador, and at this time almost
continually an extraordinary, the Count d' Onnate, who helps to direct and
uphold the German and Imperial Millitary forces as well with counsel as with
means and supplies of money. He has his Counsel also; his Counselors are
Father Chirova a Franciscan, the Queen of Hungaries confessor; Doctor Novara
a Spaniard, and Secretary Bodin.

The French Kings emulation, and being in competency with the Spaniard hinders
him from keeping an Ambassador in the Imperial Court. His last Agent was
forced to retire himself thence.

The King of Great Britain has an Agent with his Imperial Majesty.

The State of Venice have heretofore had an Ambassador in the Imperial Court,
but since the difference about style and title, betwixt the Spannish
Ambassador, the Count d'Onnate and Signior Pietro Gritti, Ambassador of
Venice, some thirty years since; there has been no ordinary Ambassador from
the State of Venice in the Imperial Court: but they have their Agent, who was
invited not long since to dispose the Republique, to send again an ordinary
Ambassador to the Imperial Court, with proffer to receive him with the like
honor as is given to Ambassadors of Kings.

The great Duke of Tuscany three years since had likewise his Ambassador
there, who was received with the Title of Ambassador at the Imperial Court,
and equal honor with the Ambassador of Brussels. But now he has only a
Secretary at Vienna.

The Duke of Savoy has for a long time sent no Ambassador to the Imperial
Court, because he pretends precedence, before the great Duke of Tuscany.

The Electors, Princes, and States, of the Roman Empire have some their
Residents, and others their Agents, negotiating their affairs in the Imperial
Court, but when their happens any thing of moment or difficulty they send their
Ambassadors to his Imperall Majesty.

The Popes Nuncio takes the first place in the Court before all other
Ambassadors, and before the Princes of the Empire then present. After him the
Spannish Ambassador claims and pretends precedence.

FINIS.
THE STATE OF THE IMPERIALL-COVRT of the EMPEROVR FERDINAND THE SECOND.

Wherein is treated, Of all higher and lower Officers, and Ministers, Privy
Counselors, Imperial Court, Court-chamber, Court-Millitary, Hungarian
Bohemian, Austrian, and diverse other such like Imperial and Royal
Court-Councellors, and Court dispatches, of the several Chanceries and of
their Officers.

And principally, Of the several Jurisdictions of the four chief Court
Officers: Of Ambassadors, Residents, and Agents, Artificers, Tradesmen and
Musicians of the Court, etc.

As it was MDC. XXXVI.

LONDON, Printed by ANNE GRIFFIN. 1637.

The High Steward of the Court.
THe L. Leonard Hellfried, Count of Megaw, etc.
The Cabinet Counselors.
THe L. Francis, Cardinal and Prince of Dietrichstein, Bishop of Olmuiz in
Moravia. The L. Anthony, Prince and Bishop of Vienna, Abbot of Crembsmunster.
The L. Leohard Hellfned, Count of Megaw, high Steward of the Imperial Court.
The L. Maximilian Count Trantmansdorff, high Steward to K. Ferdinand the third.
The L. John Ernest Fugger, Count of Kerchburg and Weissenhorne, Knight,
President of the Imperial Court-Counsell. The L. Ignatius, Abbot of
Lilienfield, President of the Imperial Court-chamber. The L. Henry Schlicke
Count of Parsaw, and Weisenkirhen, President of the Imperial Court-counsell of
war, The L. John Baptist, Count of Werdenberg, Chancellor of the Imperial
Court. The L. Wolgang, Count and Lord of Mansfelt, Imperial Counselor of the
war, and Governor of Raab in Hungary. The L. George Lippai of Zombor, Bishop
of Vesperin, Chancellor of the Hungarian Counsel. The L. William Count of
Schlavata, high Chancellor of the Kingdom of Bohemia. The L. Francis
Christopher Khevenhiller, Count of Frankenberg, high Steward of the Court of
the Queen of Hungary. The L. Julius Neidhard, Count of Noersburg. The L. Peter
Henry of Stralendorff, Baron, Vice Chancellor of the Sacred Roman Empire. The
L. Sigfrid Christopher Preuner Baron, Lieutenant of Lower Austria.
The High Chamberlain.
THe Lord John Jacob Khiesel, Count of Gotsher.
The high Ma shall of the Court.
THe Lord Leonhard Helfried, Count of Harrach.
The high Master of the Horse.
THe Lord Bruno, Count and Lord of Mansfelt.
The Lords of the Emperors chamber in ordinary are these following.
THe L. John Christopher of Paar Baron; general Postmaster for the Court.
Wentzel Count of Wurben. Charles Count of Portia. Georg Achat C. of Losenstein.
Szywa Count of Wurben. Frederick Cou. of Caveriani. Hierome Co. of Montecuculi.
Montauto Co. of Mountacut. George Barthol. Khiel C. etc. Frederick Co. of
Atomos. Vratislaus Co. of Furstenberg. Francis Co. of Picolomini. John Co. of
Swartzenberg. Wolf Engelbrecht Co. of Awersberg. Diolate Co. of Conossa. Simon
Lewis Co. of Dietrichstein. John Count of Trauston. George Ehrnrich C. of
Trautmanstorf. Adam Co. of Budiani. Adam Count Forgatsh. Julius C. of Salm.
Barons. Gabriel Ardedi Free-baron. John Sigismund Gayler Free-baron. Dionise
Setshy Free-baron. Stanislaus Potaizi Wolfskie Free-baron. Jacob di Negro
Free-baron. William of Tedenbach Free-b. Christopher of Ebiswald Free-baron.
John Maximilian Free-baron of Lamberg. Peter Ernest of Molar Free-baron. John
George Free-baron of Herberstein. Christopher Free-b. Teufel. Rodolf Free-baron
of Paar.
These following of his Imperial Majesty's chamber extraordinary, are all
either Princes, Earls or Lords.

PRince Christian of Anhalt. John Caspar Master of the Teutonick Order, Prince
of Mergetheim. Iules Henry Duke of Saxen Lawenburg: Colonel. Rodolf Maximilian
Duke of Saxen Lawenburg, Colonel. Francis Albert Duke of Saxen Lawenburg,
Colonel. Rodolf Duke of Lignitz. Henry Wentzel Duke of Munsterberg. Maximilian
Prince of Liechtenberg. Ferdinand Prin. of Cardenas. Earls. Anthony Gunther
Count of Oldenburg. Christian C. of Waldeck. John Lewis C. of Nassaw. Frederick
C. of Hardeck. George Lewis C. of Swartzenberg. Frederick C. of Furstenberg.
William C. of Slawata. Wolfgang C. of Mantsfelt. Bruno C. of Mansfelt. Henry C.
of Shlick. Maximilian C. of Dieterichstein. Francis Christopher C.
Khevenhuller. Iaroslaw Borzita C. of Marzin. Leonhard Hellfrid C. of Megaw.
Balthazar C. of Maradas. John C. of Nassaw. George C. of Opperstorf. Matthias
C. of Gallas. Michael Adolf Co. of Altheim. William Vratislaw C. of Mitrowitz.
Adam Paul C. of Slawata. Maximilian C. of Wallstein. Leonhard Charles C. of
Harrach. Rodolf C. of Colloredo. Octavius Co. Piccolomini. Barons. Arnold
Freebaron of Peymer. Philip Husman Freebaron. John Jacob Freebaron of Kusstein.
Ernest Freeb. of Kollonnitsh. Ferdinand Curtz Freebaron of Serftenaw.
Christopher Loebell Freebar. Sigfrid Christopher Preuner Freebaron. Julius
Neidhard Freebaron of Moersburg. William Leopald Nothaft Freebaron of
Wehrenberg. Gundacre Freebaron of Polheim. Paul Palfy Freebaron. Steven Palfy
Freebaron. Ernest Freebaron of Suys. Paul Jacob Freebaron of Starenberg. Rodolf
Freebaron of Tieffenbach. Frederic Freebaron of Thallenberg. Christopher
Thonradle Freebaron. Christopher Paradiser Freebaron. Sigismund Adam Freebaron
of Traun. Adam Freebar. of Wallstein. Charles Freebaron of Tzherotin. Peter
Henry Freebaron of Stralendorf. Conrad Baron of Steinberg. Henry Freebar. of
St. Julian. George Teuffell Freebaron. John Freebaron of the Reck. Leopold
Freeb. of Stralendorf. Ioachim Adolf of Stralendorf Baron.
The Imperial Court-counsell has two Benches, whereof the one is called, the
Bench of the Nobles, and consists of Counts, Barons and Knights, to the
number of twenty. The other Bench is called the Bench of the learned
Counselors; whereof are ten, most of them Doctors or Batchellours both of
the civil and canon Law. The President of this Court-counsell is John Ernest
Fugger Count of Kirchberg. Another Counsel, called the Imperial
Court-chamber, consists of seven Counselors, which are either Freebarons,
Barons, or Doctors: Ignatius Abbot of Lillyfield is the President of this
Counsel. The Counsel of War consists of eight Counselors, whereof is
one Duke, two Counts, and five Freebarons: and Henry Count of Shlick is
President of this Imperial Military-counsell. The Captain of the Guard with
Javelins (consisting of one hundred horse and called Hartshier) is Don
Balthazar Count de Maradas. The Captain of the foot, or Halberdiers, is Philip
Count of Mansfelt, and this Guard consists also of one hundred men. The
Master of the Staff, or the Imperial Officer, who bearing a black rod,
ushereth the meat which is carried to the Imperial table, commonly called
Stab-master, is Diodato Count de Conossa. Bruno Count of Mansfelt is now both
Master Falkner and Huntsman; the two offices of the high Hunter and high
Falkner. The general Postmaster is John Christopher Freebaron of Paar. At the
Imperial Court are always as Counselors for the affairs of Hungaria, George
Lippai Bishop of Vesperin, Court-chancellour for that Kingdom, and Thomas
Mikulich of Brukonoz Counselor of that Kingdom, and Lieutenant of the Kings
personal presence in judgment. In like manner are Counselors for the
affairs of Bohemia: Namely, William Count of Slawata supreme Chancellor, and
Adam Libstentzkie of Kolobrat, Freebaron and Vice Chancellor of Bohemia. After
the supreme Master of the staff or Stabmaster, follow the ordinary Court
offices: in which are Three Cup-bearers: the eldest whereof at this time is an
Earl, the other are Barons. There are two Masters (called Chamberlains) of the
plate, whereof the first Chamberlain is John George, Freebaron of Herberstein.
The second or under Chamberlain is Laurence Lord of Huttendorf. The chief
Master of the Kitchen is Theodore Hartman of Clarstein.
Ecclesiasticke persons.
FAther William Lamormain Jesuit, Imperial confessor: and Counselor of his
Imperial Majesty's conscience. Two Court Preachers, one for the German, the
other for the Italian. Paul Knor of Rosenroth, chief Chaplain of the Court,
and great Almoner. There are seven other Court-chaplaines. An Imperial
Library Keeper. An Imperial Historian. And there was one, but now is no
Mathematician to his Imperial Majesty. The Treasurer is Nicholas Churland.
Court Physicians of his Imperial Majesty are five.
Residents and Agents, now present at the Imperial Court, are
FOr the King of Spain, Ambrosius Reutz, who negociates also for Brussels.
Mounsier de Scarbonniere, Agent for the K. of France, did of late negotiate at
the Imperial Court at Vienna, but a few months since he was not only
prohibited, but in a few days commanded, totally to leave the City. The Agent
for the Qu. Mother, Mounsier Roverie, is returned to his Queen. The King of
England his Agent Mr. John Tailor. The K. of Polands Agent, Mouns. Gibboni. The
Agent for the Republic of Venice, John Baptist Balderino. Of Savoy, Octavius
Bolognese. Of the Republicke of Genua, Peter Panicall. The D. of Mantua has no
body at the Imperial Court. The D. of Modena negociates his affairs by
another Agent.
Under the High Stewards Jurisdiction.
ONe Controller. One Cofferer, called Fenning-master. One Hushier. Five
Heralds. One chief surveyor of the Tapestry. Two Porters of the great chamber.
One servant of the Closet. Three servants for the Plate.
The Court kitching.
ONe Cook for the month. Six Master-cookes. Ten Under-cookes. Two Basters, or
Rosters. Two helpers, or assistants. Two Broth-cookes, or for boiled meat. Two
helpers, or boylers. Eight Kitchin-boyes. Two Kitchin-porters. One Kitchen
dore-keeper. One Woodman, or cleaver of the wood.
The Court Cellar.
ONe Court Cellarman called chief Butler. One clerk of the Cellar. Two
servants of the cellar. Three coopers of the cellar. Two children of the
cellar.
The Court Larder.
ONe Kitchen clerk. Two Purveyers. Two keepers of the meat. Two carriers or
porters. One Court burcher. One Chandler.
Table Coverers.
TWo chief coverers of the free Tables. Two chamber table-coverers. Two
preparers or coverers of the Lords and Gentlemen waiters table. One coverer of
the Pages Table. Two coverers of the Officers tables.
Landresses.
ONe Landresse for the body. One for the mouth. One for the table; and One for
the Kitchen.
The high Chamberlain his jurisdiction, or those which serne in the Chamber.
Ten servants of the chamber. Two chamber doore-keepers. One fire-maker for
the stoves. Four Guards of the chamber, vulgo Trabanten. One chief Iester
named Jonas Schissel. Three other jesters or fools.
Offices subject to the high Marshall of the Court his Jurisdiction.
ONe Court Quartermaster. One Secretary of the high Marshals Court. Six
Harbingers, vulgarly called Furriers of the Court. Three Messengers, vulgarly
called Einspanninger, serving on horseback. Two guards of the office vulgarly
called Marshals Trabanten. Two Court Chirurgions. All Agents in the Imperial
Court of the Electours, Princes and States of the Sacred Roman Empire. All and
every Court negociatours, artificers and tradesmen, the number of them exceeds
one hundred and fifty. All the free Jews of the Court. One Lieutenant of the
chesse, vulgarly Provost. One Sergeant.
Under the chief master of the Horse his jurisdiction, are
Twenty Imperial Pages of honor, with their governor and tutor. One Master
Avenor. One clerk of the Avery. Two Horse-riders. Two Colt-breakers, vulgarly
called Pastin and Klepper-riders. O^e Overseer. Fourteen Court Trumpetters.
One Kettle-drummer, vulgarly Heerpaucker. One Master Fencer. One charger of
pieces, vulgarly called Buchsenspanner, who prepares the Guns to be discharged.
Two yeomen of the stirrup. Two black or horse smiths. Sixteen Footmen. One
Tentmaker* One Master of the Coaches. One Master of the Litters. One Sadler for
the Court-stables. One Boot-cleanser. Eight and twenty Grooms or Horse-keepers
in the Spannish stable. Six and twenty Grooms or Horse-keepers in the stable
for hunting nags, Ten servants of the Litters. Two Coach-men of the Emperors
Coach. Four and twenty Court Coach-men. Six and twenty Postillons Six boys of
the Stable. Ninty great saddle Horses, fit for war, and warlike exercises.
Fourscore amblers, and hunting Horses for the Emperors person. Threescore
Coach-horses. Two and twenty Mules.
Under the Captain of the Horse-guard, are these Officers.
A Lieutenant. A chief Furrier. An inferior Harbinger. One hundred Hartshiers
or Horsemen. Three Trumpetters. One Surgeon. One Blacksmith. One servant of
the Guard.
Under the Captain of the Foot guard, are these.
ONe Gentleman harbinger. One under Harbinger. One hundred Soldiers, (called
Trabanten) with Holbards. One Drummer. One Fifer. One servant of the Guard.
These following persons are joined as Commissioners to the Imperial Privy
Counsel.
THe Baron of Questenberg, and Bohemian affairs. Commissioner for Italian
D. Iustus Gebhard Counselor of the Imperial Court, and commissioner in
matters concerning the last Treaty of Prag.

Matthias Arnoldin, of Clarstein Counselor of the Imperial Court and
principal Secretary of State.

D. John Soldner Counselor of the Imperial Court, and Secretary of the
Imperial Court-counsell.

Now follows the several Chambers of the Court Chancery.
THe chamber for the Dispatches of the Privy-counsell, whereof are Matthias
Arnold of Clarstein, before mentioned; and also D. John Soldner a civilian,
etc. These have their own clerks and servants expediting the dispatches, and
if they need more, they use the help of the clerks of the Imperial chancery.
The chamber of the Imperial Court-chancery for the affairs of Germany.
ALthough D. John Soldner is Counselor of the Imperial Court, and has in
the said counsel his own voice and ordinary vote, and being most commonly
busied in more secret dispatches, for which cause Paul Thomas (who is otherwise
an Inditer of the Imperial Court chancery) serves in his stead in the said
Court Imperial counsel for enrolling: Nevertheless the direction of the
court Dispatches in the Empire remain still in his hands. Bartholomew
Immerdorffer Imperial counselor, Fiscal or Court-receiver. George Frisinger
Imperial Counselor and Taxer for the dispatches. George Dieterlin Register of
the Court of chancery. Fra. Katsemayer Vice-secretary of the Court-chancery.
Christopher Switzer enroller of the Court-chancery. Fourteen clerks and
ingrossers. One servant of the Chancery.
The Chamber of the Latin dispatch of the Imperial Court-counsell.
John Walderode Imperial Counselor and Secretary of the Imperial Court
counsel. Four clerks and ingrossers. One keeper of this Chancery chamber.
The Chamber of the dispatches of the Court chamber.
BArtholomew Shoellhard Imperial Counselor and Commissioner or Referendarius
of the Court-chamber. There are three Secretaries of this Court-chamber.
These Dispatches chiefly concern confiscated goods and now belong to the
Confiscation Counsel, wherein the principal Commissioners, are
THe Bishop of Vienna. The Abbot of Lilienfield, and The Count of Schlick. Item
one Register. One assistant to the Register. One Dispatcher of the Court
chamber. One Assistant. Seven Inditers. Nine Clerks. Five servants of the
Court chamber. One Dorekeeper of the Court counsel chamber. One Messenger of
the Court chamber.
The Chamber of the Military Court Counsel, or Counsel of war.
THere are of this Counsel four Secretaries. One Register. One Assistant to
him. One Dispatcher. One Assistant to him. Six Clerks. One porter or
dorekeper.
The Chamber of the Court Marshals office.
LEonhard Fleuner Imperial Counselor, and Secretary of that office. He has
his own clerks and servants. In matters of consequence there are joined to
him by the Court Marshall, some Counselors of the Imperial Court, with the
Fiscall of the same court. Two Guards of the Court Marshals office.
Of the Hungarian Counsel Chamber, are
LAurence Ferenskie Counselor both to the Emperor, and to the King of
Hungaria; and Secretary of the Hungarian Counsel. One Taxer for the
Dispatches. One Register, and Two Clerks.
Of the Bohemian Counsel-chamber, are
GEorge Freisleben Counselor both to the Emperor, and to the K. of Hungaria,
etc. and Secretary of the Bohemian Counsel. Wolf Henig Taxer and Register of
both the Counsels of Germany and Bohemia. One dispatcher. Two Inditers. Six
Clerks; the youngest whereof is always obliged to be Porter.
The Chamber of the Court Counsel of Austria.
THe Counsel and Chancery! of the Archdutchy of Austria is commanded by John
Baptista Count of Werdenberg. It has two Secretaries. One Register and Taxer.
One Inditer. One Dispatcher. Five Clerks.
The Imperial Court Music.
ONe Master of the Court-chappell. Two Organists. Twenty Instrumental
Musicians.
Vocal Musicians.
SEven Bases. Seven Tenors. Five Altus. Four Descants. Eleven Musical
Trumpetters. Three Trumpetters not Musical. One Kettle Drummer. Item twelve
boys and scholars with a Master. One Notist. One keeper of the instruments.
One Instrument maker. Two instrumental servants.
Besides these there are of the Imperial Music, and belonging thereto in
number about fourscore persons.

THE ORDINARY STATE of the Court of her Imperial Majesty of the Roman
Empress, ELENORA, etc. Borne Duchess of Mantova and Monferrat, etc.
How the same was kept, and served by all high and low Officers, Ladies, Mayds
of honor, Gentlewomen, Mayds, and Servants.
In the Imperial residence at Vienna, in the last year. 1636.
MAximilian Prince of Dietrichstein is high Steward of the Court of the
Empress. Lady Vrsula, Countess of Atomos She high Steward of the Court. Lady
Agnes Countess of Farensbach, is Governante of the Court Ladies. The Ladies or
Mayds of honor of the Roman Empress, are thirteen; being all Mayds, and
daughters to Earls. Urban Freebaron of Potnig is Steward of the Court of the
Archdutchesse of Austria, the Lady Cecilia Renata, second daughter to the
Emperor. Margaret Baroness of Heberstein is Governante of her Court: She has
but four Ladies or Mayds of honor, all daughters to Earls and Barons.
Servants and Officers of the Empress her Court.
One of the Guard. ONe German Secretary. One Italian Secretary. One Confessor.
Three Court-Chaplaines. Afterward. Six servants of the Chamber. One
Wardrobekeeper. One Tailor. One Apothecary. Two of the Cellar. One dore-keeper
of the chamber. One fire-maker of the chamber. One porter of the great chamber.
Two guards of the chamber Two cooks. One footman. One coverer of the Ladies
tables. Two coverers for the tables of the chamberers and mayds. Six Tailors
for the maids. Item six Chamber-maids. Two other mayd-servants. One mistress
Woman-cooke. One inferior Shee-cook. Nine Ladies Waiting-women. One
Chamber-woman. One Landresse for the Ladies.
THE STATE OF THE COURT of the Archduke Leopald William of Austria; the
Emperors second son.
SEbastian Bishop of Gurch, Privy Counselor both to the Emperor and to the
Archduke Leopald William, is also this Archdukes high Steward and Chamberlain.
Three Privy Counselors, whereof the last is a Jesuit, and his Confessor, the
two others are Freebarons. John Jacob of Daun, Knight of the Teutonick order,
is Master of his horse. There are five Gentlemen of his chamber, the one being
an Earl, and the four others all Freebarons. George Pacher Imperial
Counselor for Lower Austria, is his Court-chancellor. One Doctor of Physic,
by name, Leonhard Mulgiesser. Michael Ottho Bishop, Secretary.
Officers of his Chancery.
ONe Register. One Expeditor or dispatcher. Two Clerks. One Assistant. One
servant or chamberkeeper.
Besides.
There are fourteen Pages all children to Freebarons, Lords and Gentlemen of
quality. Six Grooms, or servants of his Bedchamber. Six Footmen. Other
officers and servants that wait on him, are (as it were) borrowed of the
Emperors Court.
A CATALOGVE OF THE PRINCES, ELECTORS, and States of the Sacred German Empire.
Anno M. DC. XXXVI. The Electors of the Sacred Roman Empire.
Ecclesiastickes.
THE Archbishop of Mentz, Arch-chancellor of the Sacred Roman Empire through
Germany. The Archbishop of Collen, Archchancellor of the sacred Roman Empire
for Italy. The Archbishop of Tryer Archchancellor of the sacred Roman Empire
for France, and Arelate.
Secular Electors.
THe King of Bohemia, Arch-cupbearer of the Sacred Roman Empire. The Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Arch-Sewer of the Sacred Roman Empire. The Duke of
Saxony, Arch-Marshall of the Sacred Roman Empire. The Marquisse of Brandenburg,
Arch-Chamberlain of the Sacred Roman Empire.
The Archbishops of the Sacred Roman Empire.
MEniz. Collen. Tryer. Magdenburg. Saltzburg. Bremen. The Bishops. Ausburg.
Aichstat. Bramberg. Basel. Biven. Constance. Chur, or Coire Cammerach.
Freysingem. Hildesheim. Halberstat. Liege. Lubech. Munster. Minden. Osnabrug.
Passaw. Paderborne. Ratzenburg Regensburg, or Ratisbonne. Strasburg. Schwerin.
Spire. Tryer. Verdun. Wartzburg. Worms.

The three Bishoprics of Metz, Theul, and Verdun were taken from the Roman
Empire by the Kings of France, and are detained to this day.

The master of the Teutonicke order, Prince of Mergetheim, is indeed no Bishop,
but an Ecclesiasticke Prince of the Empire, and takes the first place after the
Bishops.

The secular Princes of the Sacred Roman Empire.
ANhalt, Princes. Bavaria, Dukes. Brunswick and Lunenburg, Dukes. Brandenburg,
Marquesses. Baden, Marquisses. By Rhine, Palgraves. Holstein, Dukes. Hessen,
Landgraves. Lorraine, Dukes. Leuchtenburg, Landgraves. Meckelburg, Dukes.
Ostereich or Austrian, Archdukes of the German, others of the Burgundian line.
Pomerania, Dukes. Saxonia, Gullick, Cleveland, and Bergen, Dukes. Saxonia of
Engem and Westfalia, Dukes. Savoy, Dukes. Wirtenberg, Dukes. The Lithuanian and
Ratzivilian, are also received amongst them, and put in the number of the
Princes of the Empire.

The Abbots, Priors, and Prelates.
COrvey. Elwangen. Elchingen. Fulda. Gengenbach. Hirshfelt. Keysersheim.
Kempten. Merchthall. Munchrot. Murbaco. Munster in the Gregorian vale.
Oxenhausen. O denheim. Petershausen. Rittershausen. Reckenburg. Richenaw. S.
Emmeran at Ratisbonne. Salmanswile. Shlussenried. S. Vlrick in Augsburg. S.
Cornelius Munster. Stabe l Vesin or Irsee. Vsperg. Weingarten. Wettenhausen.
Wenden. Abbatesses. BVchaw on the Lake called Federsea. Essen. Guttentzel.
Gerenroda. Hervord. Heggenbach. Lindaw. The Upper Munster in Ratisbonne. The
Lower Munster at Ratisbonne. Quedlingburg. Rottenmunster.
The Earls of the Sacred Roman Empire.
BArbey and Muhlingen. Bentheim. Bruckhorst. Castle. Erbach. Eberstein.
Furstenberg. Falkenstein. Hohenloe. Hanaw of Muntzenberg. Hanaw, of
Liechtenberg. Isenburg. Lippa. Lewenstein. Leyningen. Mansfelt. Montsort.
Mandershied. Nassaw Catzenelenbogen. Nassaw Sarbrucken Neumar. Ostfriesland.
Oldemburg. Oetingen. Ortemburg. Ruepfen. Solms. Suliz. Sayn.
The four Counts of the Empire.
SWartzenburg. Stollberg. Schaumburg. Schwartzenberg. Tubingen. Waldeck.
VVittigenstein. Wildt and Count of the Rhine. Wied. Zimmern.
Freebarons, Barons and Lords of the Sacred Roman Empire.
FLeckenstein. Fugger. Griechingen. Graveneg. Hohen Geroldsegg. Hohenfels.
Konigsegg of Aulendorf and Marstetten. Limburg, hereditary Cupbearer of the
Sacred Roman Empire. Maxelrein. Pappenheim, hereditary Marshall of the Sacred
Roman Empire. Reussen of Plawen. Senisheim. Shoenburg. Schenck of Trauttenberg.
Wallburg, hereditary Sewer of the Sacred Roman Empire. Wolfstein: Winnenberg
and Peilstein. Waldbotten of Passenheim.
The Cities of the Sacred Roman Empire.
AAch, or Aaken. Augsburg. Aalen. Biberach. Buchhorn. Buchaw, on the lake called
Federsea. Bingen. Bopfingen. Constance on the Lake called Bodensea. Colmar.
Collen on the Rhine. Cammerich. Dinkelspiel. Dortmund. Donawert, which at this
day enjoyes not the liberties of an Imperial City, but is detained by the
House of Bavaria, but is to be restored. Esligen. Francfurt on the Maine.
Fridberg. Goslar. Gemund in Swaben. Giengen. Giengenbach. Hervorden. Hailbrun.
Hall in Swaben. Hagenaw. Isna. Kaufbeuren. Keysersberg. Kempten. Landaw.
Leutkirchen. Lindaw. Lubec. Munster in the Gregorian vale. Mulhausen in
Turingia. Memmingen. Norimberg. Nordlingen. Nordhausen in Turingia. Offenburg.
Oberenheim. Pfullendorff. Popfingen. Regensburg or Ratisbone. Rotweil.
Reutlingen. Ravensburg. Rotenburg on the Tauber. Rosheim. Strasburg. Spire.
Sweinfurt. Schletstat. Turckheim. Weinsheim. Weissenburg in Nortgaw. Wangen.
Weill. Wimpfen. Weissenburg on the Rhine. Worms. Weizler. Vlme. Vberlingen.
Zell on Hammersbach.
RELATION OF THE present State of the Imperial Chamber of the Sacred Roman
Empire, at Spire. Anno M. DC. XXXVI.
ONe Judge of the Imperial Chamber. Three Presidents of the Imperial chamber.
One Assessour for the Electour of Mentz. One Assessour for the Electour of
Collen. One Assessour for the Electour of Tryer. Two extraordinary Assessours
of the Ecclesiastic Electours. One Assessour for the Electour Palatine. One
Assessour for the Electour of Saxony. One Assessour for the Electour of
Brandenburg. Two extraordinary Assessours for the secular Electours. Two
Austrian Assessours. Two Burgundian Assessours. Four Assessours for the Circle
of Franconia. Four Assessours for the Circle of Bavaria. Four Assessours for
the Circle of Swaben. Four Assessours of the Upper Circle of the Rhine, two
places whereof are now void. Four Assessours of the Lower Circle of the Rhine,
all which places are now void. Four Assessours for the Circle of Saxony. One
Fiscal advocate being a Doctor in Law. Fourteen Advocates, all Doctors of
Law. One Fiscall Procuratour Doctor of both laws. Two and twenty
procuratours, all Doctors and Licenciats in Law. One chief superintendent of
the Chancery, Doctor of both laws. Three Protonotaries, the first and second
places whereof are now void. Four Readers. One Fiscall Notary. One Register.
Four Notaries. One Master of the Messengers. One Physician. Two Sergeants. One
receiver of the chancery. Four Engrossers. Two Copiers. One keeper of the
Chancery chamber. Ten Messengers of the Chancery, that serve on horseback.
Ten Foot-posts or Messengers serving on foot.
A Catalogue of all such persons, which by his Imperial Majesty (during the
time of his reign) have been created Princes, Earls, Barons or Lords.
And first he created Princes of the Empire.
ERnest Count of Schaumburg, Prince. John George Count of Hohen-zoler of
VVoldstein. Francis and Maximilian of Dieterichstein. Philip Ottho Count of the
Rhine. Stenko Adelbert of Lobcowitz. Albert Duke of Fridland.
Princes and Marquisses of the Roman Empire.
PEter Aldobrandin Marquis. Fabritius Caraffa Prince. Charles Spinelli Marquis.
Anthony Biglio Marquis. Charles Emanuel of Gore Prince. Charles Philibert of
Este Prince. Ludwig Victorius Marquis. Jerome Caraffa Marquis of Monte-negro,
Prince. Count of Contecroy Prince. Charles of Cardenas Prince. Paul Jerome
Marquis. Anthony Bishop of Vienna Prince. George Ossomilimius in Tenzin Prince.
Albert Altovite Marquis. Thomas Raggio Marquis.
Follow the new created Earls or Counts of the Empire.
THe Freebarons of Buchaim, now Earls. The Freebaron of Nachot. The Barons of
Meggaw. The Baron of Bronkorst. The Baron of Geraldine. The Lord Michna. Those
of Tilly. Those of Mittrowitz. Maximilian of Trautmanstorf. The Baron of
Losenstein. John Jacob Kissell. Balthazar of Thanhausen. N. of Taxis. Sdenko of
Shambach. Sesyma of VVr^by. Baron Rodrigo Barragan. Iaspar Bernhard of
Rechberg. Those of VValdeck. Herman Tshermi. The two brothers of Cratzen.
Burian Bercka. Adam Erdman Terzka. William Verdugo. Paul Andrew of
Wolkenstein. Henry Erbtruchsas, Freebaron of VValdpurg. William of Mihinitz.
John Jacob Erbtruchsas. Gotfrid Henry of Pappenheim. VVentzel of VVurben. Those
of VVrzowitz. Rodolf Tertzka. VVoldemar Christian of Holstain. Theodoric and
John Andrew of Aursperg. Philip Adam of Cronberg. Charles Christopher of
Brandstein. The Dorrings. William of Clenowa. N. of Konigsegg. N. of Atthimis.
John Balthazar and Sigismund Ludovic of Dieterichstein. Ladislaus of
VValdstein. Henry Holka. John Altringer. John Charles of Schonburg. Ioachim of
Mettich. John Ludovic Isolani. Those of Wolkenstein. Adolph and Charles of
Puchaim. Nicolas des Fours. Jacob Kuen. The Hutzfeldes. Francis of Vlefelt.
John Goetz. John of Ligniville. Theodore Trivultius. Francis and Baptista
Crescentii. Charles of Gaulz. Jacob Strozzi. John Baptista of Verdenberg. Henry
de Ravero. Sdenco of Collobrat. Paul Bernhard of Font aines. Vincent Cavalli.
Martin and Georg Krasichi. Ioachim of Quincey. Iaspar Ernest and Gerard of
Donhof. Maximilian of Gallian. Lupus Walter Zapata.
These following were created Freebarons: called Liberi Barons.
THe Virnemonds, Freebarons. Those of Reiffenberg. Those of Ulm. Of Wrzeswitz.
The Webers. Those of Stein. The Toettenbeckes. The Wattsen. Of Sickingen.
Herman Isherin. Kurtzen. Of Benzenaw. Spiering. Of Closen. Of Mespelbrun.
Vincent Mushinger. Of Newhaus. Otto of Nostitz. John Hersan. Of Rorbach. Of
Wansheim. Leuin of Mortagni. Of Weichs. Rodhaubt. Urban Shatzel. George
Zdiarskie of Zdiar. Of Wurtenbach. Of Degenfelt. Of Questenberg. Ferdinand
Geitzk^fler. William of Clenowa. Thomas of Lindlo. John Vlric Schafgotsh.
Ioachim of Donnersberg. Henry of Ginandis. John of Shonstein. Henry Charles of
Orscalor. Of Husman. John Charles Fuchs. John Altringer. Those of Baumgartner.
Charles of Heim. Francis Marzoni. Vlric of Ronm^g. John of Bremd. Cornelius of
Muhlen. Alexander of Vehlen. Iaspar of Gram. Of Comargo. Theodoric and John
Andrew of Aursperg. William and Werner of Bomgarten. John Vlric and George
Ehrnrich of Puri^g. John Charles, and Otto Frederick of Shonburg. Philip Hector
and Leopald of Adelshausen. Of Closen Ferdinand Rodolf Lashanskie. Henry and
Christopher Adam of Muggenthal. John Fridecick and John Constantine of
Pentzenaw. Eberhard Adolph of Muggenthall. Thobias of Haubitz. John Henry
Nothaft. Francis Maximilian of Billehe. John of Reck. George Frederic of
Standing. Jacob Brechtold. John George of Seebach. Sebastin Wietz. John Gotz.
John Rodolf of Bredaw. Reinhard of Walmerode. John Christopher and John Paul of
Ruppen. Luther of Buwinghausen. Maximilian of Goltz. Of Paar. Foppius and
Aisema. John of Leuttersheim. Corpus. John de Werth. Of Reinach. The Crafts,
brothers.
Barons or Lords.
Florian, Theodorich. Albert Clodomir Fabriani. Wolfgang William Laminger. John
Baptist Werda. Henry Baradas. Christoph. Nicolas, Andrew, etc. Orlick. Martin
Somogie. John Baptist Trecho. Leo Groppello Medici. Ernest of Suis. Joseph of
Neuhaus. Ernest of Linden. John of Merode. John William Arnold of VVachtendank.
George of Gaillard. John Cerboni. Degenhard Bertram of Lohe in VVisen. Jacob
Francis Bestacalda. Matthias Gallas. Philip and Bernhard of Areyzaga. Francis
Porta. Adrian of Enckefort. Ernest, Henry and Gotfrid of of Sharenberg. Matthew
of Vernier.
FINIS.

