A PLAIN DEMONSTRATION OF THE VNLAWFVL SVCCESSION OF THE NOW EMPEROVR
Ferdinand the Second, because of the incestuous Marriage of his Parents.
Translated out of the Latin printed Copy.

Printed at the Hage. M. D. C. XX.

(...)Uncle. But, doubtless, they will say, that this was with the
Dispensation, as they term it, of the Pope Gods Vicar upon Earth, and
therefore in no wise to be counted an incestuous Marriage. We know it was
permitted and that by the Pope, but by what right or authority we see not.
For suppose he be never so the Vicar of God, (although they shall never be
able to prove it, neither from the holy Scriptures, nor authority of the
Fathers;) yet were it not lawful for him to do all things as he list at his
pleasure. For who so does is nothing less then a Vicar, whose duty it is, to
frame himself after the mind of his Lord, and to see his commands to be put
in execution, and not at his pleasue, either to change them, or to devise new.

God, Leuit. 18. 12. 13. does expressly and simply forbid Marriage within the
third Degree: but the Pope permits this to whom he lists. Now if he can do
it lawfully, then he has right either of himself, or from God: but not of
himself, because he is a Vicar, all whose authority depends upon some other
not from God, from whose nature it is most free not to contradict himself: now
he should contradict himself, if he should permit that which he has most
straightly forbidden, yea, and that with threatening of death; we speak of
moral Precepts, and those which of themselves are necessary to obtaining of
eternal Life. Wherefore, since the Pope has this power neither of himself nor
from God, it is cleerer then the noone day, that he does it by no right at all.
This many of the Papist them selves have seen, they saw it, I say, and have
professed the same: neither need we to seek any further examples: we have
them at hand. John Fox in his Book of Martyrs, or English Ecclesiastical
History, page 957, col. 2. does tell us that the Marriage of Henry the Eight
with Catharina his brother Arthurs Widow, though permitted by the Pope, was
proved to be simply unlawful, and not to be dispensed with, by the
Theological faculties at the least of ten Universities; to wit, of Orleans,
Paris, Tholous, Erford, Angiew, Bononie, Padua, Oxford, Cambridge. And that the
determinations of all these faculties, together with the judgments of other
most learned, both Divines and Doctors, not only of the Civil, but of the
Canon Law, also contained in one Volume were published in the year 1532. or
thereabout. And that thereupon presently followed the Divorce and new Marriage
of the King. The same is avouched by Nicholas Sanders a most bitter Papist, in
his first Book of the English Schism, p. 58. where he says thus: The King
partly sent certain men to Pope Clement, to undertake at Rome the cause of his
Divorce, (amongst whom was Thomas Cranmer, who after was made Archbishop of
Canterbury) partly he sought out through all the Kingdom of France, Divines
and Lawyers, which under their hands and Seals, affirm that his Marriage with
the said Catharina, could not possible stand. And page 61. This infection (for
so that foule-mouthed Fellow terms it) ouerspred) not only the University
of Paris, Orleans, Angiew, Tholous, and Erford, but also Padua and Bononie: And
p. 62. he complains that Oxford and Cambridge adjoined themselves to the
foresaid Universities. Lo here we have the Papists themselves, as it were the
guilty persons confessing: we have among the Popes Vassals, and his stout
Champions, the judgments of so many worthy men, and of whole Universities;
Amongst which is even Bononia it self under the Popes Jurisdiction, which
together with us do take this power from the Pope.

Whereupon it is plain enough, what we are to think of this Marriage of
Archduke Charles with Mary, though judged to be lawful by the Popes
Dispensation; as also concerning their Son Ferdinand the Second, now
Emperor: to wit, that he is more then a Bastard, borne of more then an
Illegittimate, yea of an execrable Marriage: and that therefore neither by the
Law of God or man he may possess by Inheritance, so much as one foot of Land,
See ye Princes of Germany (the honor and ornament of Mankind) that you have
committed the Christian World which is to be governed by Laws, to him, to whom
God has not vouchsafed a being in this World, but contrary to all Laws.

Behold ye noble, yea, and mean persons too, that ye are oppressed with his
tyranny, who^ his very Birth has excluded out of the society of honest men.
Wey well, ye Soldiers, ye valiant hearts, that you spend your lives for the
honor and dignity of him whom Nature has not granted to be borne, but with
the greatest disgrace. Go to them: rather deliver your Country the most
flourishing Empire of the World, from this ignominy. Only be ye courageous,
and the Divine favor shall be with you. For the Lord is a jealous God which
punishes the sins of Parents upon their Children, unto the third and fourth
Generation: And he does so accurse incestuous lusts, that for them, he has
subverted and utterly defaced the greatest Cities, whole Countries and Nations:
as himself does witness, Leuit. 18. of the Cananites: saying, withal these
things (now he speaks of Incests) are these Nations polluted, which I cast out
before your face. For because the Land is polluted, I will punish the iniquity
of it therein, the Earth does vomit out the Inhabitants. The same God (no
doubt) in his due time will power out the Cup of his Wrath upon this man: and
the rather, because to the detestable wickedness of his Parents, he does add
most horrible cruelty, and the very Government of Phalaris indeed, which the
miserable people of Austria have felt, and still (alas for woe) do feel, and
have by their just complaints, made known to the whole World. Upon whom the
Lord does now seem to take pity, and to have raised up Captains to tumble
down this Tyrant from his Throne, and together with that whole Family infamous
for their monstrous cruelty, utterly to root out, which we crave and beseech
the same. One God in three Persons, speedily to perform: from whom even to you
Readers also we wish all good success. Fare ye well.

FINIS.

