A COVNTER-POYSON, Modestly written for the time, to make answer to the
objections and reproaches, wherewith the aunswerer to the Abstract, would
disgrace the holy Discipline of CHRIST.

Luke 19. verse. 40. I tell you, if those should hold their peace, the stones
would cry. AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Waldegraue.

The Author to the Reader.
IT is said of Solomon (who had no small experience in the course of al
things) that much reading is weariness unto the Eccles. 12.
flesh; but it is most true, even in our own experience, that to deal with
the untamed and untaught reason of man, is a vanity and vexation of spirit,
unto those who love the truth. For what cunning shifts and exquisite variety
of subtleties have they, to decline the mighty struck of the word of God? And
it is no marvel, if we poor dullardes be not only made blunt, but almost
worn away with encountering with such tough ware. The only comfort we have
is, that when the devil disputed, yea, continued disputing so long with the
Son of God him self, he was at the length made to retire with those mild, and
yet most powrefull words: The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Which Iud. 9.
most ancient example, as it has greatly sustained me in this toil of this
tedious time, wherein I have had occasion to go bare-foote through this
quicke-set hedge of thorns, which the aunswerer to the Abstract has set in
our way: so it does not a little grieve me, that I am jealous over my self,
that I have not followed in such measure as I ought, that moderation which the
son of God; The prince of Angels kept, when he encountered with the devil,
notwithstanding, I deal (as I hope) with a brother. My comfort is, that it
shall be manifest, that in steed of taking occasion where it was not given, I
have swallowed down that, as sweet, which is most loathsome and bitter: I have
also stayed my course within the compass of the first treatise, and the
dangerous appendix annexed to the same; partly because I suppose he will not
abuse so much the Scripture, as to wrest the defense of pluralities of Civil
offices, in Ministers of God his word, of sole excommunication (which is
already handled in this treatise by the scripture) and partly because the rest
will for the most part pertain properly to the worthy Lawyer, who has begun
this controversy, and shall by the grace of God see a good end of the same.
The Lord bring us all to be of one mind and heart in the truth.

A FAITHFVLL BROTHER to the Christian Reader.
THE FEAREFVL CONDItion (in regard of our sins) of this our age, and in this
our Noble Country, may make thee (good Christian reader) and all, who love the
peace of SION, and the flowrishing estate of this commonwealth; with heavy
soul, and deep sighs of heart, to bewail the horrible wickedness of this
land, even yet to this day increasing; if thou do but consider, that the hard
and stony hearts (being continually watered with the svveete and heavenly
dew of Gods most fatherly admonitions and forethreatnings, from day to day
dropping down by his messingers, rising earlye), is rather hardened then any
whit mollified or humbled. So that neither the fearful signs in heaven and
other creatures, as it were, by the breach of nature weeping over us; nor the
horrible howling and quaking of the earth, trembling and fearing under us, has
as yet brought forth any further sorrow of our sins, then, that being
amazed and astonished at the suddaines, woondring at the straungenes, and for a
time, while our hearts did beat, lightly sorrowing at the fearfulnes thereof,
we made a show as though we would have turned to the Lord; but alas, we soon
became like the children of Israel; who being put in fear with the great
terror which God shevved in pronouncing the Law in mount Syna, did promise to
hear and obey Moses, who being but forty days and forty nights absent from
them, and for them with the Lord: they fell away to their own imaginations.
Since this, has the Lord with strange sicknesses, at diverse times, diversely
visited us in our bodies; yea, our very hearts have been smitten with the fear
of foraine practices, yet who is it that has rightly ackovvledged the hand of
the Lord? Above all other things, this is to be soberly vvaied with the
equal ballaunce of an upright conscience: that even now, on the one side, the
common enemy to the state and Church of God among us, has very villanously and
traitorously, vowed himself, to put out the happy light of this most
peaceable kingdom, even by desperate and slauishe bloud-suckers, (allured and
besotted, with the fair and favvning face of a man hayred like a Woman, of
these Locustes the Jesuits, who have stinges in their tails, being like unto
Scorpions,) to take away the precious life of our most gracious Queen
ELIZABETH, our most dear sovereign, the joy and peace of all this Land: (the
Lord for his Sons ^ake continue her blessed days among us, and confound al
their horrible practizes:) on the other side, (like as it was in Jerusalem
when Titus besieged it) what little faith and true love, (even from the
tankard-bearer to men of high degree) he that sees any thing, must needs
behold and tremble. But O that I were able to power out my very heart: and
that rivers of waters might flow out of mine eyes, that I might sufficiently
bewail the desolation of Sion among us: yea, I could vvishe that my life
though it were by a thousand deaths, might redeem the breaches of the Church
of God among us. Whose heart does not bleed to think that in so peaceable
days and so blessed a time, under so Godly and religious a Princess, even
when the fire of our neighbors most rufull miseries, does flame about our
ears: yea, and that the Lord has almost drawn out his vvrathfull svvord
against us: every man follovveth the pride, covetousness, whoredom,
drunkenness and lusts of his own heart, and no man remembers Joseph? The
bars are filled with pleadinges, and the streets are full of the cries of
the poor: fulness of meat and contempt is among us, and who considers? Yet,
if this our sin were only against men, and not against God, there migh be some
hope; But when the mouth of the blasphemous svvearer, is not tied up, and the
hands of the idolatrous generation of Atheiestes, and profane persons be not
chained: When the most holy and precious word of God is manifestlye
contemned, the joyful and heavenly tidings of salvation, so negligently and
ungratefully trodden under foot: the true and faithful messengers pursued,
atained, and diverse ways afflicted: then if the old world for malicious
imaginations, Sodom and Gomorrha for pride, fullness of meat and
unmercifulness: If Jerusalem for abusing Gods prophets, and wilfulnes were
woefully distroyed, what may we poor careless people look for, if we do not
repent (but as it is almost universally feared) speedy ruin and utter
desolation? O ye shepherds of Israel be wise and understand, kiss the son
least he be angry, Psalm. 2.
seek the Lord whilste he may be found, make atonement with him, rest ye
on God, and follow his ways [ For the eyes of the Lord behold 2. Chro, 16. 9
all the earth, to show him self strong with them that are of perfect heart
toward him.] And you ye reverend fathers, which take upon you to rule the
stern of God his ship, to your consciences be it appealed, whether you thrust
not out of your brethren, faithful and skilful mariners, nourishing the idle
and unfit: whereby it is come to pass, that thousands of souls are like to be
drowned. Let be appeled unto your co^scie^ces, whether this your dealing, be
not the only cause that this church of England has suffered such disquietnes?
and whether you are not folowers of such as have bin disturbers of the churches
in other countries? compare I pray you, your cause with their cause, and your
proceeding with their proceeding: as namely, let the practices of the divines of
PERGA in Germany, (for the maintaining of the error of consubstantiation, and
vbiquity of Christ his body) be See admon. ad lib. concord de mod agend.
compared with your striving against the wholesome discipline of Christ [they
were few] (as namely about six) and one bare the cheifest sway: and you are
not so many, as that for your wills, all the Churches should be troubled in
England, [ they held the foundation] and so do you; [ they had to do with
their godly brethren] and so have you; [ they shrouded themselves under the
shadovve of most famons men; as of Luther and Melancthon] and so do you, even
of most blessed martyrs, and very learned fathers: [ they having tried diverse
ways to establish their errors: at length devised a subscription to a book
called (Liber concordiae,) thereby to draw a secret allowance of that which
openly they could not so well set one foote]: You after many molestations and
vexations of your brethren, even to the turning away of many good scholars,
godly affected, from the study of divinity, have at the length contrary to
allavv of God and man, offered violence to the consciences of your brethren* by
a forced subscription; [ they first won the magistrate, and made him their
pretense, where their subtilty was espied]: and I pray God it be not laid to
your charge, for your like dealing and pretenses: [ the Magistrates were
hardly drawn to like of their purpose and manner of proceding]: so am I
persuaded that yours cannot long be covered [ they pretended unity and
entitled their subscription, a Book of Concord, and by that means made great
discord and dissention] you cry out for conformity and good order, and nothing
less is the issue of your proceedings: you cry the peace of the Church, and
who knovveth not, that if you vvoulde be humble to God, and loving to your
brethren, and discharge your duetye to her Majesty, but that these stumbling
blocks and means of dissension, might long ago have been removed. For we are
assured, [ that as the Magistrates with them, did somevvhat stay their fury],
so if her Highness, of her Godly disposition and accustomed clemencye, with
her honorable Counselors, had not been some Bridle to your unwise endeavors,
there would hardly have bin, ere this time, any peace for a faithful
minister. [ But how proceeded they? and what did they obtain? Even by fear
and authority, they forced some to subscribe; some they woone by fair words:
to some they granted in secreat limitatio^, which after they in open denied:
some having subsci bed, afterward with great sorrovve and anguishe relented:
some they removed from their charges, and some they continued with long and
variable molestation: and finallye, this was the good they brought to pass,
that the people were distracted, many churches untaught, and great broiles and
confusion in many places.] So I would to God that every of those (that I may not
say worse) were not too too true in you: only let it be appealed unto your
conscience, that you suspended and deprived them, whom by law you ought to
have first resolved, or endeavored your selves to have so don; and that by
articles interrogatory you vve^t about, and indeed entangled some of your
brethren: with that pretense of law, which otherwise seemed to be vvanting.
And was this either charitable to your brethren, or agreeable to justice to
your adversary, meet in a Bishop to those of his charge, that one should be
punished before his cause be equally heard? And that he may not have a copye
of the things laid to his charge, but be driven upon an oath to answer
suddenly, and being deprived in a chamber, to be sent away without any
certain knowledge of the causes of his deprivation. Let all men judge how
this may beseme Christian Bishops, and grave fathers. But how have you made
unity and conformity? even as one would open a door to al horrible confusion
and uproar, if by the merciful providence of God it had not been staid and
prevented. It is high time therefore for you to repent and to show your selves
as true Elders, casting down your crowns before the Lamb. It is hard for
you to kick against the prick. Remember Mat. 24. 48
what is written, [ If the evil servant shall say in his heart, my Master does
defer his coming, and begin to smite his fellows, and to eat and drink
with the drunken, that servants master will come in a day, when he looks not
for him, and give him his portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.] And all ye the inhabitants of this land turn ye to the
Lord before it be too late: humble your selves before the throne of his
mercy: let every one change his heart and amend his own ways, that the
Lord may have pittye upon us, and our enemies prevail not against us. Pray
ye for the peace of this Land, they that love the Lord, cease not crying
till he have mercy upon us: And let the remembrance of our blessed sovereign
be in all your supplications, that by the continuance of her happy and
prosperous reign, his glorious Gospel may shine more and more, (as in the
days of king Josias) in brightness and beauty among us. And let this little
treatise be unto thee (gentle and Christian reader) as a light and profitable
glass from day to day to look in, that it may be a means to teach thee and
stir thee up to pray for, and to seek by all lawful, quiet and Godly
means, the refourmation of some things in our Church. For it is not the
purpose thereof, (as God knows) to minister matter of civil contention, or
that any man should rejoice in the strife of brethren, but with as much care
as could be, tendering the peace of the church, to make apparent, simply and
briefly the truth of godliness, in the things mentioned in this book,
according to the word of God. And here we desire all men, and you the
reverend Fathers of this land, and all godly brethren, to whom this may come,
to judge charitably of this work, which tends to no other end, but that
the truth being found, we might al ioin together in godly peace, and an holy
union, to serve him ioifully together, from generation to generation. The
reasons which specially did cause this matter to be taken in hand, are either in
respect of the substance of several points in question, or of the time wherein
they are brought in question. For first, considering that the question is not
(as the aunswerer would bear the world in hand, and as in public sermons, it
is every day uncharitably vpbraided) about trifles, and things of no weight,
as of variable ceremonies and matters of circumstances, which yet are to be
squared by the sacred Canons of holy Scripture; but about matters of no small
importance, even of the great and weighty cause of Christ's kingdom, by what
laws and offices, his heritage is to be governed and protected: that is, of
the whole Discipline of the Church of Christ, whether it be to be ordered by
the uncertain and deceivable waights of humane constitutions, or by the
infallible Oracles of Gods most holy testimonies. And that the aunswerer does
very confidentlye challenge (as though not only by us, but byal churches
reformed in many writings very well known, he were not already
answered): that by the word of God, we vvoulde prove a certain
government of the Church under the time of the Gospel: and that this he does
very closlye and colourablie at his pleasure, adding to, and detracting from
the question (as in the treatise shall appear,) and with smooth words and
artificial euasions, (though sometimes with more gaul then comelynes, and
more scoffing then substance,) laboring to cast a mist before the eyes of the
Reader, and to bear down the cause with swelling words of vain
ostentation. And concerning the time, seeing that now by the means of the
unadvised stir, which by the reverend Fathers is made in this Church of
England, all the faithful servants of Christ Jesus, are in some sort called
to bear witness unto the truth: and that without very good ground it
were not meet, that any reasonable thing should be refused of such men as we
be, not only to satisfy the expectation of all men, desirous to know the
truth, but also to discharge our duty, to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
and to her gracious majesty, and all her good subjects: we could not keep
the pen from paper, but were, as it were enforced to bear this necessary
witness to a truth, not so much by the reason of man impugned and resisted, as
by manifest and plain places of scripture to be approved and confirmed; and
for the daily profit of the Church, most behoosefull of every man to be
rightly understood, and in every Congregation with all reverence and
diligence, to be practiced and religiously observed. For, what man indovved
with the fear of God, and a reverent love of his Prince, continually
beholding the diligent hand of the seditious papists to wax stronger and
stronger, through the stopping of the mouths of the sincere ministers, and so
many (I might say innumerable) souls, for whom Christ Jesus shed his most
precious blood, to remain in miserable captivity and bondage of blindness
and ignorance, the very chain of darkness and iniquity, for lack of
teaching and instruction, and these non-residents and blind guides, which in
some sort make a pray of God his heritage, to be so cunningly vnder-propped
and maintained: and so many things, of so evil nature in themselves, so
pernicious to the church of God, so dangerous to the state of this common
wealth, so offensive and burdenous to all people of any conscience and
knowledge, to be so mightily backed and defended: what man I say, hearing and
seeing the daily and pitiful complaints of the poor people for lack of good
pastors, and of the reioycings of wicked and evil men, in the trouble of the
faithful Ministers, to the great dishonor of almighty God, and contempt of
many most wholesome Laws, by her most excellent Majesty set forth and
established* can be so careless and undutiful, as not to apply himself in
some sort or other, that these great enormities may be detected and removed.
Accept therefore (gentle reader) the godly labors which were employed in
setting forth this little Treatise, and think it not strange, that it
comes forth so soon or so suddenly, but take it as a stay and an help unto
thee, till some more larger discourse shall be adue^tured, wherein the holy
scripture is made the only judge of this co^trouersy, and so much as
concerns the reasons of the laws of this land is nothing at al touched, as
well because the purpose of this reply, was to instruct the conscience by the
proper means thereunto ordained of God; as because the shortness of time could
not suffer any more, and the pen which vvrote this, is of an other profession.
weigh well and examine the reasons here inserted, with the just and even
ballaunce of God his holy sanctuary, and let thine eye be single in judging,
and no doubt but (thorovv God his grace) though peradventure the style may be
somevvhat harsh, and every point not so finely adorned with the flovvers of
man's eloquence; yet the plain and simple evidence of the truth, even in her
nakedness and proper beauty, shall so shine and cast her bright beams into thy
conscience, that if thou reap not so much profit as were to be wished, at
the least wise, this cause may receive more favorable interpretation, and be
esteemed as a thing worthy of due consideration. Thus hoping of the blessing
of God toward thee, and of thy charitable receiving of the labors which
were enterprised to do thee good; I cease any further to hold thine eyes from
the work it self: most humbly beseeching God, even the father of our Lord
jesus Christ, to be merciful unto this land; to give us speedy and unfeigned
repentance, to turn his plagues from us, to ouerturne and confound the
diuilish and blouddy treacheries of all seditious, popish, and other traitorous
vndermyners of the state, to plant true and godly love among us, and to set up
the kingdom of his son according to his word, to the prosperous
continuance of the most honorable and peaceable estate, of the Queens
highness; to the rejoicing of all faithful and true hearted subjects, and to
the glory of his most holy name for ever. Amen.

Faults escaped.
Page 32. line 12. for Nicodemia, read Nicomedia. pa. 43. lin. 5. for would,
read should. pa. 56. lin. 6. for rotted, read rotten pa. 80. l. 11. for. from,
read after. p. 91. l. 11. for by, read of. pa. 92. li. 1. after God, read does
pa. 120. li. 7. for he, read they. pa. 105. li. 6. after upon, read us. pa. 128
line. 10. read exercise ceasing. pa. 131. li. 20. for commit read commute. pa.
133. li. 3. for railing, read calling. pa. 146. li. 1. for have, read his own
heart. page 157 li. 13. for truth, read. fruit.

Of the certain form of Ecclesiastical Government, prescribed by the Word of
God, and perpetual for all ages.
FOR as much as the purpose of this treatise, is with all modesty and peace to
give clear evidence to the truth; it was thought fittest for the cause, and
most profitable for the Christian Reader, to set down under certain heads,
the several assertions and reasons, which are here and there scatteringly
enforced by the answer to the Abstract, against the several branches of the
holy government, which Christ Jesus has asigned for the ordinary policy of
his Church. Amongst which, that requires the first place, which is the
ground of all the rest, concerning the certain form of government, which he
has prescribed for his Church. His words be these.

I do therefore say and offer in the name of the learned, to him or other to
consider of, that it is taken by us for an undoubted truth, the contrary
whereof, by no proof we do assure our selves can be showed, that there are
not set down in particular by Scripture, or by necessary collection to be
gathered, all circumstaunces of policy, government, Discipline, and
ceremonies necessary and uniformly to be used in every several Church: and
that the Christian Magistrates and governors, are not in the said former
points (whereof something is touched in Scripture) of necessity tied to that
precise form that is there set down, but to the general Doctrine concerning
them, to wit, that al be done to edifying, orderlye, comely, and such like,
page. 33. And again, asking whether all reformed Churches are disciplinated
alike he says, Nay; they neither are, can be, nor yet need so to be: seeing
it cannot be proved, that any set and exact particular form thereof, is
recommended to us by the Word of God, page 58. And again, page 60. To the
former assertion he adds this reason: For else how could the Primitive Church
without any prescript word, (I do not only say, have brought in a new
ceremony) but have altered the Sabbath day by God appointed at the first, and
being our Satterday to the first day of the week, in the Scripture twice or
thrice called the Lords day, and with us Sunday: or yet the time of receiving
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, being according to the institution usually
received after Supper, to have it received as it is in the morning, fasting.

In which assertions, there is so little plain dealing and so much untruth, as
of y^ one side they savor of subtletie, so on the other side they have very
small taste of sound divinity. For first, when as the Question was of
Discipline, to be administered as the Lord commanded, that is, of the
substantial form of Christ's government, he carries it to the ceremonies and
circumstances of Discipline, as if when the Apostle commands to keep the
form of wholesome doctrine: one should answer, it is not certain, because
the circumstances rites, and times of it are variable. Which also casts a
strong sent of the Romish practice, who to make a way to their additions and
detractions in the matter of the Sacrament and otherwise, fly unto the
circumstances of time, number, persons, and such like. Test. Rem. in annot.
John. 6. verse 58. the which they say the Church may alter and change. The
second subtletie is, that when the state of the question is propounded, as that
which is the difference between us, the very point of it is so obscurely and
doubtfully set down, as one can hardly attain unto his meaning. For when he
says the Magistrates are not in ye said former points tied to the precise
form, etc. He leaves it doubtful, whether by points are meant the particular
circumstaunces of policy, government, discipline and ceremonies, (which if they
be, he comes no nearer the questions, then things variable to things
certain and unchangeable): or whether he means the things themselves, to
wit, policy, government, discipline, which if he do, then he is become an
ouerturner of all the assertions of former divines whatsoever. For then, if the
Magistrate think it for order and comelines, Ecclesiastical censure shall be
administered by civil persons, layemen, as he speaks, men may be
excommunicated before they be summoned, in a private corner, not in the
Congregation: then the Magistrate may cause the Deacons form to become the
form of the Bishop, and the Biships form the form of a Deacon. Finally, then
the several members of Christ's body their forms, and specificall
differences may be altered and changed as seems good unto men: then Princes
may ordain Bishops, as Bishops sometimes annoint Princes: Finally, then the
sovereign Magistrates may them selves become Ecclesiastical officers, and
Church-ministers, which at once undermines not only the Church Discipline of
God, which we require to be exact, according to God his word, but also even
the formal destinction of offices, censures and matters Ecclesiastical, which
all other Churches and even ours have established, are made arbitrarie and
changeable, seeing they are not tied to the precise form of these things. It
is palpable darkness also which he says, that all Churches are not
disciplinated alike, because any set and exact particular form thereof, is
not commended unto us in God his word. Which if he mean of the set form of
Beza praefat. before the new Testament. Hermonia confess. page 53. gal.
confess. art. 29.
ecclesiastical government, all reformed churches acknowledge it, and either
have it or seek it, and distinguish it in all their writings from the variable
ceremonies or circumstances of the same, as appears by ye places quoted in
the margent: if he mean it of circumstances of places, times, numbers and such
like, he calls that to question, which none ever made doubt of. Now, besides
this confusion in propounding the Question, the reasons of the assertion are
full of untruth. First, the allegation of ye alteration of y^ Saboth, borrowed
from y^ Jesuits annot. Apo. 1. 10 (saving y^ they have for shame limited that
which he left at large, saying, they did it without al co^ma^-dement of Christ
which they read of) is not as he sets down justifiable by ye Scriptures:
namely, y^ they did it without prescript commandment from Christ. For seeing
the Apostles having by God his commandment, kept the Jews Saboth for the
week gone before, when Genes. 2.
the time of the alteration of the ceremony of that particular day was come,
did for observation of the moral commandment of celebrating one day in
seven, ordain and keep the next day for the week following, calling it and
making it the Lords day, as the other Acts. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2
was the Lords Saboth: it is manifest that when this cannot be altered,
without breach of the moral proportion Revel. 1. 10.
of one in seven, that therein they had direction from Christ: according to
those words: Teaching them to keep what soever I command you. Mat. 28. 20. If
it be asked where in the Gospel this is commanded and prescribed of Christ:
let him show the like of those which the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 11 2. and
cap. 14. 37. Concerning the change of the time in the Lords supper, as it is a
mere circumstance of time, so the alteration has ground in the scripture,
because one and the same time is not always kept: Act. 3. 42. Act. 20. 7. 11.
etc. Neither can that be said to be according to the institution, which being
done upon a particular cause (as all Divines agree) should not be observed where
that cause cease. Thus his assertions and reasons being touched, here
follows a plain declaration of the truth, as to satisfy his request or
challenge: Namely, that the whole substance of the ordinary government of the
church, that is to say, the vnchaungable laws of the holy things, of Offices,
callings, examinations, abdications, executio^s, and of the reason and
distinction of every one of them, is prescribed of God in his holy Word, as a
perpetual Law unto his Church: And although every particular rite and order
(which are variable according to the circumstance, be not so particulerly
mentioned) yet are they by certain general rules so limited and prescribed,
that no Church can use them Exodus 35. 36. and 39. 42. 43. 1. Chron. 13. 2. 10.
11. 1. Chron. 15. 13. 1 chronicles. 29. verse. 12. 13 2. Chron. 13. 9. 10 11. 2.
Chron. 9. 26., 2. Chro. 29. 25. Neh. 10. 29.
at their pleasure, but ought to frame the^ within the bounds set unto them of
God, which may appear by these reasons following. First, seeing under the Law,
God by the ministry of Moses did precisely this thing for the government of
his Church then, so that neither David nor Nehemias might alter any thing, but
by especial revelation from God by his Prophets, it were to make God less
careful of his Church under the gospel, and to make the ministry of Moses
more excellent then that of Christ, unless in like manner he had performed
the same. For Christ being a King, has prescribed 1. Cor. 12. 4. Heb. 3. 1.
2. 3. 4. etc.
Laws for his government, and as he is a Lord, has ordained the diverse
administrations of his Church, and in this respect, was faithful as Moses in
Heb. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc.
all his house. Again, seeing the Apostles having been taught of him by the
space of forty days, the things which pertain to his kingdom, Act. 1. 3.
that is, (as the Jesuits them selves are compelled to confess) the whole
regiment of Christ's Church, did thereuppon set down such orders for the same.
1. Tim. 3. 15, and give charge that they should be kept unblameably. 1. Tim.
5. 21. Ta leiponta epithiorthose hos ego soy dietaxamen.
otherwise then which, neither Timothy nor Titus might perfect that in the
government of the Church, which the Apostles had begun: and say, that they
which are spiritual, must acknowledge their orders in this behalf to be the
commandments of our Lord. 1. Corin. 14. 37. and will their ordinances in
this behalf to be kept, as they delivered them, 1. Cor. 11. 2. and even in
the matter of the maintenance of the ministry, would speak not according to
man, but according to the Law of God and the ordinance of the Lord, 1. Cor. 9.
8. 14. then every one that is spiritual, must acknowledge the former position
to be true. Thirdly, seeing Christ has expressly in his Word, set down
sufficient ordinary Ministeries, of Romans 12. 5. 6. 7. 1. Cor. 12. 28 Ephe. 4.
11. 1. Tim. 3. and 5. 17.
Exhorters, Teachers, Elders, Deacous, with their proper Romans 12 7. 8. 1. Cor
2. 4. 8
gifts and works, of exhorting, teaching, diligent watching, and distributing,
for the administering of the Act. 3. 42 Math. 18. 17. 18. 1. Cor. 5. 12. Luke.
21. 4. Acts. 6. 3.
holy things, as ye word, Prayer, Sacraments, censures and treasury, and has
ordained the Math. 18 17. 18. 1. Tim. 5. 17. 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Eldership, for y joint government in every particular Congregation with Acts.
15. 6. and
Synodes for matters common to many Churches: it follows, that the former
assertion is undoubtedly true. Fourthly, seeing the Apostle Paul (who received
this as y^ rest of ye Gospel by revelation) did uniformly plant ye same
government in all churches, as appears by comparing the story of the Acts with
Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Tim. and epist. to Titus, it is manifest, they had a
form prescribed the^ by Christ to follow, eue^ as Moses did all things
according to y^ pattern showed him in the mount. Again, seeing it is not in
the power of man to alter or change these offices by addition or detraction,
because they cannot give nor take away Romans 12. 4. 5 1. Cor. 12. 3. 4. 5.
members to and from Christ's body, but all the gifts are from one spirit,
the faculties from one God, the administrations from one Lord: and finally,
all Church Ministeries must be from heaven and not from earth, as Christ says,
and the Scribes them selves confess. Then is Math. 21. 25. John. 1. 25.
there in the word of God, such an unchangeable rule of government, as is
before declared? Lastly, seeing God in altering the outward face of his church
under the Gospel, diverse from that under the law, in regard of ye ceremonies
abolished, and of things according to the riches and simplicity of the
Gospel, enlarged: did as well keep the substance of the Churches
administration, (namely, in ordayning for Deuteronomy. 31. Ephe. 4. 11.
Priests, Pastors; for teaching Nehe. 8. Ephe. 4. 11.
Leuits or Doctors of y^ law, Teachers; for 2. Chron. 2. King. 6. 32 Act 13.
15. and. 4. 8. 1. Cor. 12. 28
rulers of y^ Sinagog, Churh-gouernors or Elders; for their Ne. 13. 4. Acts.
6. 2. Chron. 23
leuitical lokers to y^ treasury, Deacons, for their Ezra. 10. 8 Luke. 22 66.
Act. 5. 27, 1. Tim. 4. 14*
presbytery, the eldership). As he kept the holy things to be administered,
that is, for the law and the Prophets, together with them ye writings of the
new Testament for the Passover, and Circumcision Baptism, and the supper of
the Lord; Lu. 21. 14 1. Cor. 16. 1.
for their gifts of God, gathering for the Saints, or Churchtreasury; for
their Leu. 7 18 Ierem. 36. 5. Math. 5. 23. 1. Cor. 11. 28
suspension from the Te^ple-sacrifices, our separation from y^ Lords supper:
for Ge. 27. 14. John. 9 34. 22. Mat 18 17. 1. Cor. 5.
their casting out of y^ Synagogue and cutting off from the people, our
excommunication. It is evident that that which God kept for the time of the
Gospel, he did in perfect wisdom ordain and prescribe, and that which Christ
did enrich and enlarge, he would not have men cut of and abolish. Wherefore, if
they will still roll the stone of man's power, to alter and change this order
of God, let them show how men can take away that which God has set 1. Cor.
12. 28
in his Church: let them show how that is not perpetual, which is grounded
upon those gifts which serve for the ordinary necessityes of the church in all times and places, yea, let them show how they can more wisely instruct the
people with doctrine, feed them wirh exhortation, rule their souls with
spiritual power, chastize them with an holy rod, and provide for their
earthlye necessities: then the Lord has done, and still offers to do by
the word of knowledge in his Teachers, by the word of wisdom in his
Pastors, by the continual watch of his Elders, by the spiritual keys of his
kingdom, and by his merciful and liberal providing for the needy. And if it
be a shame to prefer man's wisdom before the wisdom of God, at the least
let them declare by what authority they will compel the Church to refuse the
strong arm of God, for the weak arm of flesh and blood. To these reasons
may be added the testimonies of the Fathers, as of CYPRIAN. IN SERMON DE
BAPTIS. CHRIST. The Christian religion shall find that out of this Scripture,
rules of all doctrine have spronge, and that from hence does spring and hither
does return, whatsoever the Ecclesiastical discipline does contain. And the
same author, DE PRESCRIPT. ADVERS. HERET. We may not give our self the
liberty to bring in any thing that other men bring of their will, we have the
Apostles for Authors, which themselves brought nothing of their own will, but
the Discipline which they received of Christ, they delivered faithfully to the
people. Which sentences, seeing they can not be understood of the
circumstaunces, must be taken of the Substantial points which we have
declared. So the same Author speaking of the like matter, EPISTOLA LIB. 1.
EPIST. 8. It is adulterouse, it is wicked, it is sacriligious, whatsoever is
ordained by human fury, that the divine disposition should be violated. To
the like effect LIBERIVS the Roman Bishop, requires of the Emperor, To leave
the truth as it is in this behalf, or else to make all new. THEODORET in the
sixeteene Chapter of the second book of the Ecclesiastical history, which
their judgment shall be most manyfestly avouched in the particular parts of
this discipline of God, which follow. And thus much for the first and most
general point, which gives both light and strength unto the rest. Now because
him self wills the particular plat to be laid and proved in the
particulers which has long ago been done in many books, and namely in the
book of Ecclesiastical Discipline, which has received no answer as yet, as
whatsoever on their side (of any worthiness) has seen the light has been
answered, it shall be very profitable both to answer him and to maintain the
truth in those particulers wherein he seeks to undermine the same: and
first of the general property of the Offices, and then of the Offices
themselves.

Of Election with consent of the people.
COncerning Election, the words of this answerer be these, Page 83. I do
think verily that in no Church the whole number of the people are permitted to
have a free Election of their Pastor, etc. Page 88. Also her Majesty, being
the head member of this church, whether she shall be allowed a voice by her
highness proctor, among the people of one parish alone, or in all parishes in the
realm, in chosing their minister, and what voice? whether a negative,
cou^terma^ding al others or no? or whether her highness shall have no suffrage
therein at all? Both which, if they be not to the derogation of her highness
prerogative royal, let indifferent and wise men judge. And a little before in
the same page: I will only put this great canonist in mind, of the 13. chap.
of the counsel of Laodicea, which does forbid these elections by the multitude
or people, which, as Origin says, is pricked forward or carried away, with
clamors, favor or reward. And to the same effect, page. 97. Item page 99. he
obiecteth thus. So that by this reckoning, men women and children (for all the
faithful be interested:) shall have voices in election of their Ministers; If
any dissent, all must be dashed if we follow that rule. Again page 100. For
his flock is but an handful in comparison of hypocrites, and many are called
but few are chosen: neither are al true believers always endowed, with such
measure of wisdom and discretion, as that they are able to sound the
aptness of a man in learning for the ministry: nor yet have all so profited
in true mortification, as that they can weane themselves from those disordered
affections, which cleave fast to every one of us, either more or less, so long
as we remain in this world, and therefore in such cases the mo that do deal in
any actio^, the more disorderly and troublesome for the most part it falls
out to be. To the second I say, it contains a promise of such quietness and
peaceable issues of this populer election, as if you turn over ecclesiastical
hystories, never or seldom has happened but the clean contrary. And a little
after. Now it had been very requisite that our Author, for the appointing of
these democratical elections the better unto us, should with proof out of
scripture for every particular, have showed whether Women or children of some
reasonable discretion, should have voices in the election of their Minister?
whether he should be chosen by all, by the greater part, or by the better part?
Whether the wives voice should be accounted several, or but one with her
husband, or whether she mght descent from her husband, or the father from the
son? Whether the Patron not dwelling in the Parish shall have a voice, or
dwelling there but a single voice? Whether the greater number of voices shall
be accounted in respect of all the Electors, or only in respect of him which
is to be chosen, having more voices then any other has? Whether all absent,
shall be accounted to descent, or to assent? Whether sick men or other
necessarily imployde that would come and cannot, may send the Proctor being
no Paryshioner, or compromit their voice to a Parishioner? Item Page 94.
Discoursing largely about the places of Scripture alleged to this purpose. He
says: that course of election mentioned in the Acts, was not undertaken for
satisfying any express commandment by Christ, but upon an especial
occasion of the mutiny of the Greeks against the Hebrews. Again in that page
94. that of the Acts, speaks of Deacons only, and is not read elsewhere in
all points to have been observed, either in chosing of an Apostle Act. 1. of
Ministers, Acts. 2. or of Bish. Titus. 1. There also the whole multitude made
choice without the Apostles, who me^t thereby to avoid al suspicion of corrupt
dealing. Which two circumstaunces, no man will I hope require, in the chosing
either of a Bishop or a Minister: especially that the Bishop and other of the
Clergy shall be debarred from any stroke in that action, seeing therein
there cannot be the like cause of suspicion. Also the Apostle calls them
together, and prescribed unto them what they should do in that point of
external policy, and that according to the present occasion offered, without
any prescript word, but only by the instinct of Gods spirit. Further, that
the Apostles set out the quality of the men to be chosen, but tied them to no
certain form of election to be observed, neither do we read what form of
election they then used. Again, that the Disciples were to look out and chose
such, as they thought fit to be trusted with the Church-stocke, but the
Apostles reserved to themselves the appoynting of them to their office, if
they should be found to be such as were described. Moreover, that the Deacons
were appointed for the further ease of the Apostles in some part of their
function. Lastly, that the disciples presented them to the Apostles censures:
who by imposition of hands did as it were consecrate and authorize them to the
function of Deaconship. Now if by this act our author mind so hard to curb up
al churches, as that he will accuse the^ to give a counterbuff to the holy
ghost, which in their ordinations do not agree herewith in all circumstaunces:
or that he will tell us that something extraordinary was here in this action
not to be followed, then must he show by direct Scripture what was ordinary
and what was extraordinary, and must reconcile other places of Scripture
concerning like action, which do not agree in all points with this. In the
first of the Acts, two were presented, one is chosen by lot and no imposition
of hands: here seven are chosen, the manner not set down by the multitude,
and being presented to the Apostles, they all appoint them and lay their hands
on them. In the 14. of Acts, Paul and Barnabas are said Chirotonesasthai
autois presbuterois, and to have fasted, but no mention is made of imposion of
hands: here all the Apostles did appoint the^ House katastesomen. In the first
to Titus, he only is willed to appoint priests, Hina catasteses presbuterous,
according as Paul prescribed unto him. Nay, let him show unto me any two
reformed Churches of diverse nations, iumpe in all circumstaunces heereaboutes,
or any one of them which permits this action, (without intermedling of the
chief Pastors) unto all the Disciples or multitude of believers in the said
Church, which yet have an interest in having a good Minister, but as I take it,
the chief swaye and moderating of such actions, are in all other reformed
Churches in such men, to whom this trust is especially recommended. And has
not likewise (for avoiding of sundry inconveniences) the whole Church and
Realm of England by Parliament (whereunto every man in the eye of the law is
said to have consented) reposed this trust in a few chosen men of
ecclesiastical function? Even M. Beza him self, concerning the place of the
Lib. confess. cap. 5.
Acts, does say, There is no cause why hereof any man should prescribe any
special rule, but if the conscience be upright, it will be easy to set down
what is expedient, according to the circumstaunces of time and places. The
reply unto the former words.

Although the aunswerer in this large and tediouse discourse, has brought no
new matter in substance, which has not already been sufficiently refelled,
so as no new encounter by public writing (as a supply) has been made against
the same, yet shall it not be without fruit to the reader: First, to note out
his tumultuous and insincere dealing, his contrariety with him self, his
agreement with the Papists, and then (having particulerly layd^ open the
nakedness of his several objections) briefly as before, to set down the
plain and simple truth out of the Scripture. His tumultuous and insincere
dealing appears, in that, pretending to have greatly sifted the wrytinges of
this controversy, and to have exact knowledge of the orders of reformed
Churches in this behalf, he is not ashamed in stead of incountringe with the
truth, to frame him self an unknown adversary, that is, in steed of
overthrowing the consent of people in Church-elections, to make war against a
mere populer Election, not governed with the fore-direction of the Elders,
which has no ground in the scriptures, and was never maintained (as him self
confesses) but by Anabaptists: and in steed of manly buckling with the
substantial points of Church-election, with the foreleading of the
Presbytery, with the due consent of the people, cowardly to betake himself unto
the changeable circumstances of the same; as who should present, the Elders or
the people; how the people should signify their consent by lifting up their
hands, or otherwise by themselves or by proctors, and diverse such other. Which
in the particular answer following shall be declared, how according to the
word of God they may upon diverse circumstances, be diversely carried. His
contrariety to him felfe is apparent by these three partie-coloured assertions.
First, that the people did chose without the Apostles. Secondly, they were to
choose, but the Apostles reserved to themselves the appointing of the^ to their
office, if they should be found to be such as were described. Thirdly, that the
people presented them to the Apostles censures. For, that he says, they chose
without the Apostles, is directly contrary to that he says, they presented
them to the Apostles Censures, so that their Election was to be disanulled and
made none, unless by the examination of the Apostles they were found
aunswerable to their description. His agreement with the papists, and namely
with the Romish Remists Testament, does notably appear, in that they
appoynting, (as he does) the fifth verse of the 1. of Titus, to the consent of
the people in the Election of their Minister, they do more breefly, but as
fully and plainly, and with more curtesy to the truth set down both his
assertions, reasons and ancient Testimonies, in these few words following.

And here it seems that he did not only consecrate them whom the people had
elected before, but him self also made choice of the persons, no mention being
here made of any other election populer, which though it were long used in
the primitive Church, yet for diverse causes, and specially for continual
tumults, partialities, and disorders which Saint Augustine much complains of
in his time, was justly taken away, and other better means of their
designement appointed. See council. Laodic. cap. 12. 13. So much the Papists.
Again, how he iumpeth with the spirit of these Jesuits (saving that still
they yield more to the truth then he) in saying, That the Apostles showed the
people what to do, without any prescript word, but only by the instinct of
Gods spirit: may appear by their words which they use upon the like occasion
of Peter, in their annotation on the 15. verse of the 1. Chapter of the Acts:
Which Peter (say they) did, not upon commandment of Christ written, but by
suggestion of God his spirit, and by understanding of the Scriptures of the old
Testament to that purpose. So far the papists: And thus much generallye of his
discourse. Now of his particular objections, the first is, that he thincketh in
no Church the whole number of people to have free election of their Pastor. If
by free election he mean the due consent of the people, either he speaks
against his knowledge, or he knows not that he pretends, seeing their
confessions other their writings and practice, do (in the knowledge of all
those which know any thing in this matter,) evidently convince him, as may
appear by the quotations in the Harmonia confess. page 43. Sect. 11. Hell. 1.
Art. 16 Beza confess. 5 point cap. 35. P. Mart. in 1. Cor. 16 Musc. in title of
the Ministers.
margent. If he mean, that the people should bear the whole swaye without the
government and direction of the Elders, he misseth the mark whereat he
aymeth. Concerning the Queens Majesty's prerogative royal, which he would
gladly oppone against the consent of the people in Church-elections: First, he
could not be ignorant but that all acknowledge that the Christian magistrate as a
principal member of ye congregation where he is, ought to have an interest in
ye election answerable to his place, as well for advise as consent. Secondly, the
supreme magistrate, according to the high authority which God has committed
unto him over all Churches in his dominions, both lawfully may and by duty
ought, not only to disanull what-soeuer election the Elders and people have
unlawfully made, but also by his civil preeminence to compel them to make a
new election according to the Word of God. Which, as it is as much as the
sole election by the Bishop, gives to the Prince, yea or rather more: so if
they can show any further thing due unto the Magistrate, all such as with a
sincere mind, seek for the reformation of the Church, are always as ready
with all humbleness to give it, as they will be willing with singleness to
show it. To the place of the Council of Laodicea and Origin, let this be the
answer. The meaning of the Council, in those words, Non populo concedendum
electionem facere, etc. We ought not to give leave to the people to make
election, is, they should not bear ye whole sway without the government or
direction of the Elders, and not to shut out the due consent of the people, as
is manifest, by the counselles going before, as shall hereafter appear, against
which, this counsel would not have decreed, unless it had repealed the same
or showed some reason, but most of all by Counselles following, who have
authorized the consent of the people: and namely, the 4. of Carthage, which was
confirmed in the sixth general Counsel at Trullum, together with that of
Laodicia, which would not have confirmed contrary decrees. The words are
these, When he (speaking of the bishop) shall be examined in all these and found
fully instructed, then let him be ordained with the consent (Clericorum and
laicorum) of the Clearks and lay men. As for that of Origin, it is nothing to
the purpose, which he says of the people, except there could be some
privilege showed that partly the same, or such like as dangerous infirmities
were not to be found in a Bishop. The next reason makes as much against the
election of Bishops as of the people, seeing they may be hypocrites as well as
the people, and in all men's judgment one man is sooner carried with ambition
and covetousness, then an whole Church of godly Elders, and Christian people
unto disorder. And if for the contentions and striuings of y^ people, ye church
may abrogate the consent of ye people in Ecclesiastical elections, the^ may she
by the same authority, disanull Synods and Counselles, which as often have
been full of rage and vprores: and of which Nazianzen says, He never saw
good issue, but that thorough merueilous ambition and desire of contention,
things out of order were not remedied but made worse. Epist. 42. ad procopt.
Neither for this cause, as the promise of God made to counsels is not lightly
to be regarded, so ought he not thus profanely to reject it when it is
brought to uphold yt consent of ye people, Further, where as he says that
Churches both of elder and later times, have for that cause abandoned such
elections, it is to be thought he can bring as much for the proof of it, as
he has already alleged, which is nothing. Whatsoever he can do, the
Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and the examples of the elder Churches is
far otherwise. For Chrysostom upon Acts 1. aunswering the Question, why
Peter communicated the election with the Disciples, says, Least the matter
should be turned into a brawle, and have fallen to a contention. For the elder
Churches he cannot be ignorant, how many have been troubled with such
inconveniences, and yet have not sought such extreme remedies; nay, the example
of good Constantine the Emperor is notable, who when the citizens of Nicodemia
had chosen an Arrian, a runnagate and a rayler on the Emperor, he did not take
away the Churches consent, but by his Letters according to his duty, moved
them to a new. Theodoret lib. 1. Cap. 19. Again, if these infirmities of the
people be a good reason to take away their liberty in the Election of their
Ministers, then the contrary virtues, which oftentimes have been found in
them, in staying the rage of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat 21. 26. Acts 3.
26. in preferring catholic persons before Arrians, and in being themselves
catholics when their Bishops have been heretics, Zozo. lib. 7. cap, 7.
Theodo. lib. 2. cap. 7. is a good reason to maintain their liberty ^till. As
concerning his questions following, which as they declare rather a mind given
to cauell at that which he cannot by sound reason avoid, so are they easilye
answered out of the course and proportion of truth in the Scripture. Women
not being in the seat of Magistracy are forbidden by the Apostle to speak in
such public assemblies, and exercise authority over men. Which rule being
spoken of y^ mother, does also bar children and such as shall be in greater
subjection, until by years and Christian knowledge, they shall by the
judgment of the Church, grow unto the liberty of Christians in that behalf:
and then if they follow the greater and better part, their sentence ought to
prevail. As for the Question of the Patron, seeing it is a constitution not of
God but of man, let the wise and skillful lawyers define, so they do no iuiury
to the holy truth of GOD and his Church. The next Question is vain and
frivolous. For first, by due authority, diverse be propounded and the Church
consent to have one of them, it must needs be, that he which is approved of
the Elders and has most voices, must receive the charge, seeing that can not
be said to be done with general consent (which thing the Scripture gives to
Church-elections) where the fewest, but where the most directed aright, do
agree. And as for them that be absent, sick, or imployde, if they have any
thing of weight to signify to the Church, the Church is to harken unto them by
whom soever they send their advise. And as it is no reason that when either
sickness or their duty to the Church, do withhold them that should
abridge that liberty: so if by negligence or wilfulness, they be absente
after competent warning, the whole Church is not to depend upon them, who do
not so much loose as cast away their interest in the election. Lastly, who
sees not that any idle brain may make these and such like demaundes, both
against the rules in the Scriptures, and the observation in the primitive
Church. Where he says, that, in the sixth of the Acts, was not done by any
express commandment of Christ, but upon the mutinye of the Greeks against
the Hebrews: as it is to be granted, that it was an occasion why the people
did present, so, that was no cause of their free consent, is manifest by the
other places, where that is maintained without any particular cause, Acts 1.
and Cap. 14. If Acts 6. speak of Deacons only, yet Acts 1. Acts 14. speak
of Apostles and Elders and their election by the consent of the people. And if
the peoples consent is not to be shut out in the Deacons, which less imports
their liberty and salvation, much less are they to be debarred in their
Pastors and Elders, upon whom, as Peter says, the flock depends. Where
he says the 1. Peter. 9.
people chose without the Apostles, it is showed already, how his own words
check him, and the truth is plainly to be seen in the Text, that neither
the people without the Apostles directing them, nor the Apostles without the
people consenting unto them, made that Election. As for shutting out of the
Bishops and Church-gouernours it is marvel why he should fear it, unless
iealousy which is fearful where no fear is, has blinded his eyes. That of
the Apostles doing without any express word from Christ's commandment, is
answered before in that alleged concerning the Saboth Cap. 1. and is further
manifest by the example of the Apostle Paul, who being not with the other
Apostles, yet followed that rule, Acts 14. That he says, there is no certain
form of their Election: he is refuted by his own words following, where he
shows out of the Text, their election to have been of this sort, that upon
the instruction of the Apostles the people in presenting them, necessarily
therewithal gave their consent, as the Apostles did in accepting them to their
ordination. As for agreement of all Churches in all circumstances of this
point, he has his answer before, but that he wills to be showed what is
ordinary, and what is extraordinary. His answer is, that the Apostles
instructed the people, and they consented, which is ordinary, as appears in
that it is kept in all Elections of the Church, Acts 1. Acts 14. and 2. Cor.
9. 19. but that which was extraordinary, was the presentation of the people,
the special cause whereof him self has declared out of the text. In the rest,
it is strange, that he requires reconciliation where there is no
repugnaunce, but all the places join hand in hand together. For ye first in
ye election of the Apostle, it lay in the liberty of ye church, only to choose
some. For the Lot being the voice of God, was to assign which of them should
be the Apostle: and this circumstance makes strongly for the truth which is
mayntayned. For, if where God is to strike the principal stroke, yet the
peoples consent is to be taken as far as may be; how much more is the
authority of the whole Church to be sought for, where the Election is only
to be done by men as the Apostle speaks Galat. 1. The objection of the
manner of the election, Acts 6. is answered before. As for the number of 7.
who is so simple, as not to know that the number is to be varied, according to
the spread and greatness of the Churches where they are: and the multitude of
causes and affairs to be dealt withal? As for no imposition of hands in the
first and 14. of the Acts, it is too simple and scarce tolerable in a
catechist, seeing such things are to be gathered out of other places:
otherwise one may think there were no prayers in the celebrating of the
Communion, Acts 20. because there is no mention of it in that place which yet
were very absurd, considering that the order which S. Luke described in the
Church at Jerusalem, proves that Acts. 2. 42.
they continued in breaking of bread and prayer. And if such seely objections
need to be answered, as enforcing diverse forms of elections, then also we
may prove diversities of Communions, some of the cup and bread together, some
of the cup alone, some of bread alone, by Act. 2. Act. 20. 1. Cor. 12. Where he
says Titus only is willed to appoint priests, belike the Jesuits translation
was before him, when he translated Presbyterous; Priests and that so dazeled
his eyes, that he could not consider the words following, that he should do
as he had set him an order, which was not to do it without the consent of ye
church, except Paul would lift up Titus above himself and Barnabas, who chose
Elders by voices. And if the answerer had been Acts. 15.
ignorant of ye use of ye scripture, which oftentimes gives y^ action to ye
principal directer, which yet belongs to many more, as Paul in one place
says, Tim. received grace by the laying on of his hands: 2. Tim. 6. (which in
1. Tim. 4. he declares to have been done by ye laying on of ye hands of the
Eldership) yet his skill in Logic should have showed him ye deceit of this
Sophism. Titus appointed Elders, therefore he appointed the^ without the
consent of ye people. Of this kind are all the reasons following: As: al
reformed Churches iumpe not in all circumstaunces, therefore they shut out the
consent of the people. In other Churches the Elders of every congregation have
the chief direction in the electione yet not without the consent of ye people,
therefore it is fitly according, to their example ordered, that the Church
should once for all, give up their interest into one man's hands, for the
continual election of many Churches. The sentence of Master Beza does very
fitly require an upright conscience, to set down what is expedient, according
to the circumstance of time and place. Which if it had been found in him at
this time, and in this matter, he would not have shut his eyes, against the
manifest light of words going before, which declare manyfestly that it is a
perpetual and unchangeable point in Church-elections, which neither Church
nor magistrate may alter, that they be made with the consent of the people. His
words in that place are these: Then therefore, not in Churches builded up,
must all things be committed unto the suffrages of the multitude, neither yet
are the Pastors to be chosen without the consent of the whole Church: But all
things are so to be moderated of the Elders and Christian Magistrates, that
neither they bring in tyranny into the Church, (which surely should be done,
if they should call any unto public function of their own will, neglecting
the consent of the multitude, neither that the popular state of the Church
degenerate into popular rule. Neither are these words of Beza, only
sufficient to show his corruption, but the title of the chap. where he takes
this objection, does minister sufficient answer, seeing it declares that
Beza in all that place, speaks not of the consent of the people, which he
made perpetual in the chap. before, but of the manner how he gave their voices,
which is but a circumstaunce. And thus much both generally and particularly,
for the unfolding of his unfit and slender allegations. Now follows a
confirmatition of the truth it self, which is. It is substantial and
unchangeable in churchelections, that they be made by the body of every
Church, the Elders directing the people, and themselves to give their free
consent. The reasons of which assertion are these. First, what soever are the
ways of the Apostles in ordinary Church-gouernement that is thus to be
followed, that which they did ordinarily and unchangeably, is ordinarily and
unchangeably to be done, that which they did upon circumstances, when those
circumstances fall out, as appears by these places 1. cor. 4. 17. Which shall
put you in remembrance of my ways in Christ, as I teach every where in every
Church. And 1. Cor. 11. 2. I praise you brethren, that you remember me in all
things, and hold fast the ordinances as I delivered the^ unto you. And Phi. 4.
9 Which you have learned and received, and heard and seen in me, those things
do, and the God of peace be with you. 2. Tim. 3. 10. But thou have step by step
attained unto (or fully known) my doctrine, and course, purpose, faith,
long-suffering, love, patience, etc. Tit. 1. 5. Appoint Elders as I have set
thee an order. 1. Tim. 3. 17. These things have I written, that thou may
know how to behave thy self in the house of God. Now that these were the vnch
hangeable ways of the Apostles in elections, is clear by the examples which
have been touched before. For in the 1. of the Acts, the Apostles by Peter
directing the action, and in the sixth by him or some other (for they could not
al direct and speak at once) what soever were the variable circumstaunces, they
kept this inviolable, that they people would give their consent in the
election: And in the 14, chap. such circumstaunces ceasing, they observed this
thing inviolable Katapolin, Church by Church. Secondly, If it were not enough
for a temporary charge to have praise in the Gospel through all the Churches,:
but as the Apostle says, such a one was also chosen by the consent of the
Churches, to be a fellow with himself, in carrying the liberality of the
Churches: then much less can it be enough in a perpetual charge of such
weight unto the Church, to depend upon the judgment of one or many without
the consent of the Church: but ye first is true. 2. cor. 8. 19. therefore the
second. Thirdly, if in every matter of great weight and importance, belonging
to the whole body of the Church, whether severally in one particular
congregation, or jointly in many, the consent of the people by the whole course
of Churchgouernment, in the observation of the Apostles was required, then the
same is to be kept in this action, which concerns the particular Church and
common assemblye as much as any other. Now that the peoples consent was so
required, is evident by this induction following. So Peter yields an account
to them of the circumcision, of his going into the Gentiles, and satisfies
them before the Church. Acts. 11. 2. 18. The Church sent forth Barnabas to
Antiochia, ver. 22. The churches of Antiochia, Acts 15. sent Paul and
Barnabas to Jerusalem, about the controversy of Circumcision. And when they
came to Jerusalem, they were received by the Church, and of the Apostles and
Elders verse. 4. And after the Apostles and Elders had come together to look
to that matter, and had discussed the same: then it seemed good to the Apostles
and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company
to Antiochia with Paul and Barnabas: then they wright the decree unto the
churches after this manner: The Apostles, Elders and the brethren. So in
excommunication their consent is required 1. Cor 5. 4. 7. 12. So in absolution,
the Church does forgive ye offense and ratify their love toward him who has
offended, 2. Cor. 2. 7. 8. So in calling upon the Minister to execute his
charge, the Apostle would not him self, but wills the Churrh to say to
Archippus: Take heed to thy ministry which thou have received in the Lord,
that thou fulfill it. Colos. 4. 17. Lastly, seeing in the judgment of all
interpreters, according to the truth, the Apostle reckoning up three manner of
callings: the first of man, that is, ma^s ordinance: the second by man, that
is, from Gods ordinance by the means of the Church: the third by Jesus Christ
that is immediate without the means of the Church, does thereby signify that the
two latter only belong unto church-elections, because that in the Church none
must take any honor but he which is called Heb. 4.
as was Aaron: it follows necessarily, that their sole-election which by
their own confession is the ordinance of man, to be unlawful; and that which is
by the consent of the people, according to the Apostles observation (as they
themselves cannot deny) to be the only ordinary full way of calling allowed
of God. This point also has such manifest witness of antiquity, as before
all equal Judges, the cause must pass on our side, For Counsels these two
following shall witness, not only themselves, but by their mouths the
Decrees and censures of the Church from time to time. 2. Tom, council. can. 8.
The council of Paris. Let none be ordained against the will of y^ citizens:
but to whom the election of the people, and of the Clearkes with most full
consent, have required. And before they say of this, it is their decree, that
according to the Canons of the decrees it be observed. Orleans. Canon. 10. 11.
Let it not be lawful to get any Bishopric by rewards, or by other
procurement: but by the will of the King, according to the election of the
Clergy, and of the people. And after: besides this according as the old
Canons have decreed, no Bishop may be given unto the people against their
will. Ignatius ad Philadelp. It is meet that you as those which be the Church
of God, should choose by voices your Bishops. Chierot^nesai.
And the Greek scholiast on the 14. of the Acts says, it is to be noted,
that the Disciples with fasting and prayers, did make election by voices.
Cyprian, having labored to prove that the Church ought not to communicate with
their Ministers which had sacrificed to Idols, because they had power to choose
new, says: God commands the Priest to be set before the whole Synagogue,
that is, does ordain and show that briestly ordinations ought not to be made,
but with Mathetai. Plebe.
the conscience of the people assisting, that the people beeinge present,
either the crimes of the evil should be detected, or the good should be
published, and that should be a just and lawefull ordination, which has been
examined by the suffrage and judgment of all men, which afterward according
to divine institutions, is observed in the Acts of the Apostles, Magisteria.
etc. Epist. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. So Gregor. Naz. in apologet. Chrisost. lib, 3.
Sacerd. So much for election, the church offices follow.

That every Minister, of divine service in the public Congregation, ought to
be apt to preach.
COncerning this point, the words of the aunswerer are these. page. 2. And as
it seems such as Paul propounds to every Minister, as a perfect idaea
which is requisite in him: which is, that he be able to teach sound
doctrine, to comfort, to correct, to instruct, to convince any error. And
page. 3. For the issue ought to have been to this effect, whether it be
simply unlawful, that one should be admitted to minister the Sacraments,
which is not sufficiently enabled Orthotomein, that is, to divide the Word of
God aright, and is also Romans 15. 4. 1. Tim. 3. 16. 1. Tim. 3. 26. Tit. 1. 9.
Didacticos Kai elegticos, able to teach the truth and convince errors, and to
correct sin, and to instruct to virtue and good life, and to comfort the
weak, or else, whether it be expedient that all the parishes in England,
either not able to sustain such a learned Minister, or for the scarsitye of
such so well qualified, not able to procure one, should be destitute of
public prayer, and administration of Sacraments, till such a Preacher be
procured unto the^ or no? And the like page 14. where a little before he has
these words. If he reply that the Bishop should not then have made him
Minister, I reioyne, that peradventure he was none of his making: it may be
also, that he was fit for the cure he was appointed unto, though not so fit
for some other populous Congregation, or troublesome people: Lastly, that if
none should be assumed to the ministry, but with those especial indowmentes,
surely all the learned of all professions in England, if they were in the
ministry, would scarce be able thus to supply one tenth part of the parishes.
Item page 25. Neither are such of them though they be no Preachers, to be
accounted dumb and silent, who in their Churches do exhort, dehort, rebuke,
comfort, and also in some degree instruct their parishioners, as their ability
serves, and occasion is offered. Which I know they may as profitablye do, as
some, who of as mean gyfes but of more audacity then they, dare take upon them
to expound and divide the Scripture by preaching upon some text, unto which
they in their whole discourse do come just as near as Iarmans lips, are said
to come together. Page 34. Further, if they have ordained some of mean
ability, it has been in respect of their slender portions of living, allotted
out in most places for the finding of Ministers, which places otherwise should
be destitute wholly, whereby the people would be in short time become as heathen
and Painims, or be as savage as the wild Irish, to the great danger of their
souls, and hazard of this state. Again page 45. But he is angry also with
their bare reading and very peremptorily assures us that they shall never be
instruments of the holy Ghost, to work faith in the hearers, but he
limiteth it with this word ordinarily, which he seeks to establishe by that
of Saint Paul: And how shall they hear without a Preacher. Truly as it must
needs be confessed, that the plain resolution and unfolding of the Word in
Scripture called Orthotomia, the right cutting thereof, and the grauing of the
due and fit allotment in season, which is performed by discreet and pithie
preaching, is an ordinarye and the most excellent means to engender faith: So
is it a great error in diuinitye, to think that God never blesses the
reading or the hearing of his Word read, but extraordinarily: for then why is
it commanded that the law of God Deuteronomy. 6.
should be rehearsed continually to our children, that we should talk of the
commandments in our houses, etc. That we should meditate therein day and
night, that all the day long our study should be in his law, and that we
should search the scriptures. Also why was Moses read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day, and they of Thessalonica commended for their reading of Scripture,
and conferring it with that they heard? shall we say that so many thousands,
as in late time of persecution were converted from idolatry, by reading of
Scriptures and divine treatizes, obtained not faith by ordinarye means? or
that without especial miracle, and by extraordinary working, none are saved in
this Church of England, where the Minister is no public Preacher? and is not
the declaring and publishing the Word in the Mother tongue, wherein (as
Augustine says) in those things that are plainly set down, is sufficient
for faith and conversation, a kind of declaration and preaching the Lords
will unto us. Page 70. Neither in vain is preaching spoken off at the first
ordering, both to put them in mind what ought to be their principal
endeavor, and to give us to know, that mere laye-men be not enabled to this
office, so is it not convenient, that a license to preach be given to any, but
to such as being in some function Ecclesiastical, have addicted themselves
to serve the Church according to their abilities in all their functions
incident to that calling. And page 63. and the 4. iniunction adds hereunto.
That if he be lisenced hereunto, he shall preach in his own person, at the
least every quarter of a year one Sermon, for the which end, the Ordinaries
in most places do require of such as be not fit to be licensed to preach,
that they procure such duty to be done by an other which is able to perform
the same, etc. Where he asks whether the meaning of the Parliament were to
have the Bishops Judge the reading of Homilies to be preaching: it may be
said that reading of Homilies, in a strickt signification can not be
accounted preaching, yet they serve to edifying, and are a kind of publishing
the Lords will, even as well as a Sermon being penned, is, and uttered forth
to the people. Page 121. Truly, I wish unfeignedly, that the gifts of Gods
spirit were doubled and redoubled upon all that function: yea, that all the
Lords people could prophecy. Yet can I not without intolerable unthankfulness
to God, and great touch of her Majesty's gracious care, for the instructing of
her people, so debase al Ministers abilities which be no Preachers, as to say,
they know not either for what they ought to pray, or that the word of God is
the only food to the soul of man: Or shall we say that none knows any thing,
nor is able to catechize, or to exhort and dehort in any reasonable measure, but
he that is a Preacher publikly lice^sed, seeing it is notorious, that eue^ in
the reformed Art. 8. des ma^iages en ta discipline du France.
churches of France, according to which our men, that have their heads so full
of Church-plots, would seem to have squired out all their frame; there be
certain Congregations tolerated, where they have no public sermons, but
prayers and certain exhortations. It has been the hope of all the godly
minded, that after the clear light had shined so gloriously, both by zealous
preaching and learned writings of many worthy men, to the manifest discovery of
the unlawfulness of an unpreaching Ministry: so that not only most of sound
religion, but also even the very impugners of this, have after a sort been
driven to an open confession of the same: that no man endued with any true care
of religion, or minding to defend a cause worthy of any account, would once
have adventured, either colourably or plainly, directly or indirely, with
protestation or without to defend, or any way uphold such a base ministry. But
seeing it is the righteous judgment of God upon all our vnrigteousnesse, but
especially upon their sin, who have admitted, tolerated, and defended such
unsavory salt, that instead of putting them to their right use, which Math. 5.
our savior says, is to be cast on the dunghill, and to be trodden under
the feet of men, they do not only not remove the stinking snuff out of the
candlestick, to place the bright-shining candle in their room: but also
having cast down a third part of the stars from Heaven unto the earth, do
still by public writing, underprop such crazed and rotted pillars: It shall
be expedient before the particular examining of his several allegations, to let
the world see, how that, while they are struggling with the light of their own
conscience, the Lord (as the Apostle says) has made ^. Tim. 3. 8. 9
their madness manifest to all men. For when as they should have been moved
with the pitiful bowels of our Savior Math. 9.
Christ, who had compassion on the people (though they came to his preaching
and had their doctors and teachers of the Law, such as they were in every
Town and Uilladge) as sheep scattered without a shepherd: they have made
themselves a laughing stock unto the profane, but a pity and heart-bleeding
to the godly, by their ridiculous aunsweres, open shiftings, contradictio^s,
assertions and by such positions as come nearer to the profane spirit of the
Jesuits, then to the holy Doctrine of any old or new writer, of whom this
question has been handled. For how unsavory is it: For, to decline the sharp
stroke of Gods word, he is feign to turn the rule of the Apost. 1. Tim. 3.
Which by Councels and Fathers, is made an ordinary rule for the examination of
those which stand to be admitted into the ministry, into a Platonical Idaea,
which should never be found in any: And to shift of the plain form of their
ordination wherein they are willed to receive authority to preach the word, he
says, that It is not in vain, but to instruct us (forsooth) that mere laymen,
are not inhabled to this office, as though there were no book to learn that
lesson, unless the Bishop taught it by giving authority to ignorant men to
open their mouths in preachiuge: which after, by a straight charge he is feign
to sow up. And lastly, (to leave out other which the wise reader may easilye
see) going about to prove reading to be a kind of preaching, he is driven
to demand, whether declaring of the Word in the mother tongue, be not a
kind of declaration. etc. Secondly, what open shifts are these, to cover the
shame of the^ who ordained ignorant Ministers? he is compelled to ask, What
if he made him not? or that the Parish were little or poor, When in his own
conscience he dares not deny, and all the world knows, such are daily made,
and as though fewenesse or poverty deserved a blind guide, that they might
both fall into the ditch. Again, how simple and naked was that, where to excuse
the cold exhortatious of the ignorant Ministers, he is forced to say, that
they are as profitable, as they who through more audacity take upon the^ to
preach, and come just as nere the text as Iarma^s lips are said to come
together; as if one to show y^ goodness of y^ pestilent fever should allege y^
commodities of the plague. Also how is this whole discourse at war with it
self? for to defend unpreaching Ministers, he challenges me^ to prove it
simply unlawful, to ordain men ministers of the Word and Sacraments, which
cannot preach, when in another place, he is driven to confess, yt they receive
authority to preach, to teach the^ that they are addicted to the same, as a
thing incident to their office. Which is as much to say; Al ministers must
receive authority to preach, as a thing incide^t to their calling, and yet some
ministers may be ordained to the ministry of the Word and Sacraments only, yt
is, must receive no authority to preach. Now, what concord there is between
him and the Jesuits, let this comparion following declare. They say upon 17.
verse. of 1. Tim. cap. 5. We may note that all good Bishops and Priests of
those days, were not so well able to teach as some others, and yet for the
ministry of Sacraments, and for Wisdom and Government, were not unmeet to
be Bishops and Pastors. He says that they may be Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, though they cannot preach. They say: Although it be due high
commendation in a prelate to be able to teach, as the Apostle before notes,
yet al ca^ not have the like grace therein, and it is often recompensed by
other singular gifts no less necessary. He says, y^ the aptnes to teach, is
an high and eminent Idaea of ye Apostle, rather declaring what is requisite in
a Minister, then what is necessarily required. They say, some times and
countries, require more preaching then others. He says, unpreaching Ministers
are fit for small Congregations, though not for populous and troublesome
people. In all which, let the reader mark whether the Jesuits be not one step
nerer the truth then he. Now, although this be be sufficent to bewray the
aunswerers halting: yet because a great muster of faint Soldiers is thought to
be a mighty army, till being incountered withal, they be severally
scattered and put to flight: it is necessary to meet every one of this valiant
host, hand to hand. And first, we overthrow his Idaea, which serves for
nothing else, but to set out the holy Cannons of the Apostle to the laughter of
all profane men, by these reasons following.

1 Whatsoever the Apostle infers upon the worthy work of a Bishop or
Ministers office, as that which must be in him for y^ necessity of that work,
or for the necessary adorning of it, the same cannot be such an Idaea:

2 But the Apostle having said, that he that desires a Bishops charge,
desires a worthy work; thereon concludes:

3 Therefore, he must be apt to teach. Wherefore seeing he says, Dei einai
didacticon, yt is, he must be apt to teach, how dare he say it is only good
and requisite, or an Idaea, which a Minister cannot attain unto? for if he can
not be so apt to teach, as is there required; the^ it follows, he must not be
apt to teach, seeing in ye government of y^ Church, a man must not be y^ he
cannot be, although in the perfection of God his Law, which was given to show
man his sin, and that man could fulfill the same, yet in the rules of the
church-gouerment, it is far otherwise, which are set down for a direction to
the Church in their trial, who are fit to such or such offices. Secondly, if
that property of being apt to teach, be an Idaea, (that is an imagination
which cannot be reached unto) then to be sober, to be Cosmios, that is, comely
in attire, to be no fighter, are so likewise, seeing that is not only bound
up by the Apostle by the same bond of necessity, but also is the only quality
which the Apostle requires: wherein a man fit for the ministry differs from
any other good and sound Christian, or from those which are to be chosen
Deacons. Further, seeing y^ Apostle requires, that he must hold fast the
faithful word, which is according to Tit. 1. 7. 9.
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort with sound doctrine and convince the
gainsayers, And therein plainly delivers, not only wherein they may, but
wherein they must be able to do these things, he directly overthrows this
man's building in the air which he thinks no man can reach unto. Lastly,

1 That which holds proportion with the proper actions of diverse members of a
natural body, y^ cannot be accounted an Idaea, seeing nature does not only
tend, but attaineth unto that:

2 But that proper teaching which is the peculier work of the teacher, and that
proper exhorting which is the peculier work of a Pastor, do hold that
proportion as is manifestly set down by the Apostle. Romans 12. 4. 7. 8.

3 Therefore much less can this aptness to teach which is common to them
both, be reckoned for an Idaea.

Now this thus necessarily concluded being granted, notwithstanding it would
follow thereupon, that the issue which he tendereth, is also therwithal
established: namely, that it is simplye unlawful to admit them to be ministers
of y^ Sacraments which cannot teach: yet to show the riches of the truth, it
shall be further confirmed by these reasons following.

1 That which is contrary to the whole course of y^ scripture, both of y^ old
and new Testament, is simply unlawful.

2 But to admit the administration of signs to such as are unfit to administer
y^ doctrine by preaching, is contrary to the whole course of the Scripture.

3 Therefore it is simply unlawful.

The 2. part of which reason, is manifest by this inductio^. Noe ye preacher of
righteousness had the building of the Ark, to Genes. 6.
which our baptism answers. So Abra ham was y^ minister of Circu^cisio^,
being 1. Peter 3 ^^
also a prophet of God. So y^ Jews were baptized unto Moses, who preched ye
law. 1. Cor. 10. 1.
So the Priests offered Sacrifices, who were commanded not to drinck strong
drink, That they might teach the children Leuit. 10. 11.
of Israel all the statutes, which the Lord had commanded them by the hand
of Moses. So all they which were Ministers of prophetical signs, were also
Prophets. So in the Gospel, the baptism of John, employed the ministry of
his doctrine. For the text says: Those Acts. 19. 5.
which heard him were baptized. So the general commission of the Apostles is,
Math. 28. Mark. 6. 12. John. 4. 2. 38
to preach and Baptize. And when they were sent to baptize in Judea, they were
also sent to preach. So in ye ordinary ministry, whatsoever Elders went further
then ruling only, were occupied in the Word and doctrine: diverse from which 1.
Tim 5. 17,
seeing he can show no worthy example out of the Scripture, the former
induction is full. Secondly,

1 It is simply unlawful, to admit such to be Ministers of the Sacraments,
which the Lord rejects from being Ministers of the Sacrifices:

2 But such as are so unapt to preach, as by that means the people lack
knowledge, the Lord rejects from y^ ministry of the sacrifices. Ose. 4. 6.

3 Therefore we ought much more to reject them from the ministry of the
Sacraments; because the ebb of knowledge under the law, ought to be full Sea
under the gospel. Thirdly,

1 If the Lord in the scriptures of the new Testament, has given no
commandment to the ordinary Ministers of the Word to administer the
Sacraments, but under the commandment of preaching the Word, then is it
unlawful to admit a Minister not apt to teach:

2 But he is not able to show any one place of a commandment of an ordinary
ministry of the Sacraments, not comprehended under the commandment of the
preaching Ministry:

3 Therefore unless he would bring into Gods harvest such an one as he has
not hired, it is simply unlawful to admit him to administer the Sacraments,
which cannot preach.

If he object these words of Christ, Do this: we answer, that it is not to be
referred only to the delivery of bread, but to all the actions going before of
preaching, blessing, and breaking, etc, and therefore the Apostle says, that
when we administer the Lords Supper, we preach Christ's death till he come.
Lastly, 1. Corin. 11.
seeing by Ephesians. 4. verse. 11. all the ordinary offices which serve for the
gathering together and the building of the Church, by the public ministry of
divine service, is either the office of a Pastor or a Doctor: it follows that
none be admitted to administer the Sacraments which can not preach, because
prophesying (that is preaching) is the work that is proper and common to them
both. Romans 12. 6. From whence also flows their several duties of exhortation
peculier to the Pastor, and of an especial manner of teaching proper to the
Doctor, Romans 12. 6. 7. To his demand following, Whether so many Churches as
cannot obtain learned Ministers, should be destitute of public Prayers and
administration of Sacraments, And to y^ after, That so they would become in
short time as heathen and Painims, or as sauadge as the wild Irish. And
again, that the French Churches, Tolerate certain congregations, where they
have no public sermons but prayers with certain exhortations. To these
jointly we answer, the church can follow no better direction then the holy
Apostles have delivered unto them in this behalf, who having by the preaching
of the gospel gathered many churches, did not ordain insufficie^t ministers,
because at the first they had not those which were sufficient, but leaving them
partly to the ministry of others, where they might find it, and partly to the
quickening of their faith, by their grave and sober meetings for prayer and
mutual exhortation, they then returned and ordained them Elders church by
church, when men were grown fit and meet for the same. Act. 14. 21. 22. 23. So
in the old Testament, when for y^ sins of ye people, ye work of preaching was
rare and precious; ye prophets of God sent not forth reading and unlearned
Levites, but rather gathered ye people to the^ on y^ saboths and new mons, to
be instructed of them. 2. King. 4. 22. and in this sense and no other, is the
constitution of the French Church to be taken, seeing they make no mention of
the Sacraments, but of Prayer and Exhortations, which in another manner may
be done with due caution of private persons in private assemblies. Which thing,
if it were so carried of the Apostles in their times of persecution and
troubles, how much more ought it to be among us in the time of peace: where
beside the daily increase of preaching Ministers, if those already which we
have, may be suffered freely to execute their office, matters may be so ordered
(till thorough the blessing of God all Churches be replenished,) that no man
need to go above five mile to hear a sermon: and for the administration of
the Sacraments, the Church with the consent of the Godly Magistrates may take
such order, (if it shall so please them) that every Parish may have the
Sacraments ministered by a preaching Minister, and so they may be still
edified in the holy faith, and not as he grosely and ungodly imagines of the
people of God, become more sauadge then Painims and wild Irish. The next is
worthy of no other answer, then is already made. But where he says, They are
not to be counted dumb and silent, who in their Churches do exhort, dehort,
comfort, and in some degree instruct their Parishioners. If he mean those
duties as the Apostle understands them, to be peculier to the man of God. 2.
Tim. 3: we grant he says true, for so they cannot be separated from the true
resoluinge and opening of the Scriptures. But if he mean, as his words import
by comparing with the rash dealing of such as take upon them to preach
being not enabled thereunto, then must we needs say, that that voice which
is loud enough in the house, even in the mouth of the Misteres of the family,
who must Open her mouth with wisdom, and have the doctrine of grace in her
lips, Is not loud enough for the Pastors of Gods church, who must lift up
their voice alowde to show Israel their sins, and Gods people their
transgressions: and that the riches of the Word, with wisdom to admonish and
exhort one another, Collos. 3. 16
which the Apostle makes common to all grounded Christians, is not competent
for the Scribe, who should Math. 13.
be prepared for the Kingdom of God, and bring out of his storehouse things
both new and old, that he may be a Pastor Ierem. 3.
according to God his heart to feed them with knowledge and understanding.
Touching the want of living in some Parishes, for which cause (he says) The
Bishops have ordered some of mean ability. If they observed the rule of the
Apostle, that at this time Their abundance might supply others 1 Cor. 8. 15.
lack, that also others abundance might be for their lack, that as it is
written, he that gathered much has nothing over, and he that gathered little
had not the less: Then that objection need not be made. In his large
discourse to salve the sore of the unpreaching ministry, wherein he labors
to disprooue the Abstractors assertion, who affirms that preaching of the
Word is the ordinary means to work faith: he has many words but no reason.
For as one well beaten, leaves him that mastereth him and turns to some
easier match, in steed of proouing out of the Scriptures, that reading of the
word is ordinarily so honored, that it should be an ordinary instrument to
work faith; he proves by many places of Scripture a clean other thing:
namely, that the reading of the Word receives some other blessing then that
which is extraordinary, which every one will grant him. For they are no
small blessings, that by public reading and private exercise of the word,
men are prepared and made fit for the public ministry: and afterward are
continually quickened in all Christian holiness, and confirmed in the public
doctrine, which is all the sense of the places which he alleges. And it is as
if one should reason: Apollo watered y^ Corinthes, therefore Paul only did not
plant the^. Where he asks Acts. 15.
why Moses is read every Sabbath in the Synagogues: we answer, to the former
ends, and more fully with S. James, that every sabbath day he might be
preached. Neither does he in any sort satiffie that which is objected out of
the Apostle, Romans 10. seeing he speaks of such Preachers as are publicly
and solemnly sent. verse 15, which we hope he will not understand of bare
reading, and of such as the Prophet Esaie, with admiration of the blessing of
the Gospel cries out: How beautiful are the feet of Esaias. 52. 7.
those which preach peace, of those which preach good things. As for his
objection, Of many thousands in the time of persecution by bare reading
converted: and that we are not to say that the people where they have no
preaching Minister, be saved by miracle: It is not worth an answer. For
besides, that the blessing of God is extraordinary, by raising up the light of
the Gospel in so palpable darkness, which had covered the whole earth: in
stead of a thousand he can not show one, who by bare reading, without the
preachinges then used in secreat, and the open publishing of the truth by the
Martyrs at their death: or by ordinary preaching going before, (as in the days
of King Edward of blessed memory,) have been truly converted unto the Lord.
In the other point he is forced to go against y^ wool. For whereas elsewhere,
though to an ill end, namely, to dazell the eyes of the people that they
should not see the plague of an ill ministry, he does worthily commend the
running of the Gospel under her Maie^^ies happy government: yet here he is
feign to as ill a purpose, far more unworthily to abase the same, as though
preaching were so scant, (as the Lord knows it is very scant, and both
Country and City do lament the rarenes of it), as that men can not have faith
but by reading only: which is far otherwise, seeing they ought to have at
the least four sermons every year: and it is as if complaining of a great
dearth, one should ask how they live that starve not? As good is his reason
out of Angust. The scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation,
therefore men may ordinarily have faith by bare and naked reading. As material
is his demand following, whether the declaring and publishing of the Word, be
not a kind of declaration and preaching of the Lords will unto us. And that
which he says afterward of Homilyes, that although in a strickt
signification they be not preaching, yet in some sense, they are as well as a
Sermon penned, is uttered forth to the people: for so it may be replied that
Psalm. 19.
the insensible creatures preach and publishe God his will, and that the
sheepehardes Luke 2.
preached, though not as he says, in a strikt signification. So women and
Children may make a declaration of the will of God, and yet not apt to preach as
the scripture requires of every Minister. Further, if he had remembered that
the Apostle makes so great a difference between his own writing and
preaching: as when he writes to the Romans, he desires earnestly to preach
unto them also: he need not have maruailed if good men make such separation
between the reading of good writings of men, and the lively preaching of the
holy word of God: especially considering he can not be ignorant, that the
one proceeds only from the common gifts of the knowledge to read, and of an
audible voice, and the other from the especial gifts of interpretation, of
doctrine, and exhortation, given by the holy ghost, as peculierly for the
Church-ministerye. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. And if he had not forgotten
the ancient question after ye reading of Demostenes oration, O what if you had
heard him self speak it, He would not have maruayled y^ God has attributed
the first fruits, or rather first spring of our faith to ye lively preaching of
the Word. James 1. which in that respect is compared to sowing. Mat. 13 to
begetting. James 1. to grafting 1. Cor. 3. This truth, that all Ministers
ought to be apt to teach, as it is most manifest and clear by the Scriptures,
so it has witness from the Church, even when it was fallen almost to decay,
but specially when-soeuer any worthy service of God flourished, as may appear
by their decrees, canons and sentences following, few only of many being
sparingly taken for breuities sake. Council. Carthag. 4. in ye rules of
examining a Bish. according to the 1. Tim. 3. amongst the other proprieties
there mentioned, it is required to be sought, If he be learned, if he be
instructed in the law of God: If he be Cautus sensibus scripturae, wary in the
sense of the scriptures: si in dogmatibus exercitatus, it he be exercised in
doctrines, opinions or sentences, meaning of all sorts, that he may be able to
put difference. And in the Canons of Pope Celestine the 1. Can. reproouing a
superstition in Ministers, in squaring their outward attire to the phrase of
certain places of Scripture, We have learned (says he) that some Priests or
Ministers of God, do serve or give themselves to a superstitious kind of
service, rather then to the puritye of the mind and faith, who being cloked,
having their loins girt, believe that they shall embrace the faith of holy
Scripture, not by the spirit but by the letter. And having showed that we must
not do the things, but that which is meant by such speeches: he says further,
We are to be discerned from the people or others by doctrine, not by garments.
Now when they have no more soundnes in faith and abilitiy to admonish, then is
required in Christians: how are they discerned from the common people and
others by doctrine? Council. Toletan. 4. Ignorance the mother of all errors is
especially to be avoided in Priests or Ministers, who have taken on them the
dutey of teaching among the people of God. For Paul does command Priests or
Ministers to read the Scriptures often, saying to Timothy attend to reading and
exhortation: let Priests or Ministers therefore know the holy scriptures, and
let them meditate the Canons: Polu sunteles.
let all their work consist in divine preaching and doctrine, and let them
edify all as well with the knowledge of faith as with the discipline of works.
And Chriso. 1. Tim 5. 17, For this is much for the edification of the Church,
and very requisite that the Elders be apt to teach, for this cause with the
rest, with this, that they should be given to hospitality, they should be
moderate that they should be unblameable, he also numbreth this saying, he must
be didacticos, apt to teach, for this he is said to be a Teacher. Which
testimony, declares evidently that aptness to teach is no more an Idaea, then
all the rest specified by the Apostle. So August. Homilia de pastor. Having
proved at large all the duties of preaching to lie upon the Pastors of the
Church, shows how by the Apostle, they must not only preach, but be instant
in it, saying. For here the Apostle says, preach the Word, be instant, in
season and out of season. To whom in season? To whom out of season? In season
to those who will, out of season, to those who will not. And thus much for an
unpreaching ministry.

Ministers fallen to idolatry from their Ministry, ought not to be received
to their ministry.
HItherto has been handled the 1. Timot. 3.
principal cause of the Ministry, as it were the proper glory of the man of
God, that he be apt to teach. Now it is meet in the next place, to maynetayne
also that truth which the aunswerer impugneth, that Ministers fallen to
idolatry, ought not to be admitted unto the ministry of the Gospel by any
ordinary authority of the Church: that so the glory which God has appointed
unto the ministry might be mayntayned, both for sufficiency, and the
authority which they should gain by being void of all suspicion of
inconstancy in that religion which he should deliver, with much full
persuasion of the truth to live and die in the same: and to be willing to deal
their own lives 1. These. 1. John. 10.
for their flock. For notwithstanding it must be true, that above all things
the Godly Ministers are to take diligent heed, that they do not in confidence
of their strength, or with a spice of free will as Peter did, boldly promise
such constancy: yea, when we are by Christ his voice admonished of our own
frailty: yet in all humbleness, trembling, and fear, (resting upon God his
promise to minister strength to the weak, and courage to the faint hearted)
they ought as the chief captains Heb. 13.
of the Lords army, and conductors of his host, not only be free from
probable suspicion of such foul cowardlinesse, yea, of execrable high Treason;
(seeing such do not only flee, before the enemies of God, but unto them, and
that betray the strong tower of God his pure and holy service, into the hands
of the devil his sworn enemy) but ought also to be examples and patterns of
al readiness to suffer for the truth. His words for the impugning of this
manifest truth are: The contrary of this Doctrine of his, may be proved by
the example of Aaron, who was an Idolater or an abbettor of idolatry in the
golden Calfe, and yet was not from his repentance put from his priesthood.
Likewise by Peter, whose revolt and temporary Apostasy in denying his Master
Christ was no less heinouse, then the sin of our idolatrouse priests, who
for the most part sinned but of ignorance in that general blindness.
Likewise Augustine, afterward a famous Bishop, was by the space of many
years, a detestable Manachy. And after he alleges many testimonies of the
Council. Meldens, and the glo. out of the Nicen, and out of Leo. And Augustine,
that Heretics as namely Nouatians and Donatistis, returning from their
Heresies may be received. And out of Viret, that From Popery, men may be
received to the Gospel. Peter Viret in dialog. la discipline eccles. des
eglises reformes du royaulme de France. page 128. 129. Now all these
allegations, although they carrye some show to him who understands not the
cause, yet to him that shall but once consider of the question, as it is before
with out ambiguitie set down, it is manifest that his allegations touch not
the questions. For the examples of Aaron and Peter were without the compass of
the ordinarye power of the Church, who being immediatelye called of God,
could not be demissed by the Church. For seeing no calling can be made void,
but by the authority which made it, that which has immediately proceeded from
God, can not be repealed but by his voice. Now seeing the immediate voice of God
and Christ, did not only not make void, but further establish the calling of
Aaron and Peter: how could ye Church meddle with that? Or how could the rule
given to the Church, for to direct their mediate elections, rule the immediate
calling of God? And if this be not plain enough to cause him to see the
difference which is as great, as that which is between GOD and his Church,
the voice of man, and the voice of GOD: Let him understand it by an other
example of like reason. It has been proved already, both by the Scriptures
and Fathers, that none should be admitted to the Ministry by the Church, but
such as were sufficiently qualified by ordinary means, or gifts given them
already of God unto the same function. Now, if to defend the Bishops, in
admitting Tailors, Shomakers, For this, if need be, we can name the persons and
prove it. Amos. 7. 14.
Weauers, Chaundlers, Harpers, being also men furnished with no gifts: one
should allege the calling of Amos, who by God was taken from the sheepfolde,
being neither a Prophet, nor son of a Prophet: would it not be a manifest
dallying in the sight of God and man? But rather as the ordinary power of the
Church can not herein imitate the Lords prerogative, because they can not, as
God with their calling power in gifts into the persons, whereby they should
be enabled to their office: So they must not follow the prerogative of GOD
in this, because they are rather to be gealouse and suspicious for the
Churches sake (though other-wyse they are bound to hope the best of a
repentaunt Sinner) over him, least he should again betraye the cause of GOD;
which in God is far other-wyse, who not only knows the hearts of men,
but also what strength he will after give him: and if he let him fall, he
knows how to turn it to the profitte of his Church. Now, as these examples
in this respect approach not unto the matter in debate. So the example of
AUGUSTINE a Manachie or such like, because the question is not of such as were
before their ministerye such, or carried away with the common ignorance before
they knew the truth: but of such as first seruiuge GOD in his appointed
service, do not only leave the holy altar and fire, but renouncing that,
betake themselves to a profane and idolatrous service and priesthood. Wherein
he receives answer also unto his allegations of the fathers and counsels,
which if they should speak of such as fell in capital points from the true
service of God, of which, sometimes they were Ministers: they should then be
directly contrary to the fathers and general counsels, which shall anon be
brought as direct and manifest on our side. The like is to be answered unto
Viret, and the example of the French Churches. Having thus aunsweared his
objections, the truth is confirmed sufficiently by the reasons following, out
of the Scriptures and ancient witness from the councels and Fathers.

1 Whatsoever God has commanded to be done in the law, to declare the honor
he has of his right service, and how he will have his Ministry beautified and
fenced, against the cauilles of all (which are perpetual equityes of such
their prescription. 1. Tim. 3. 7) that is still and perpetuallye to bind the
Church:

2 But such is the order which now we speak of, as may appear by the 1. King.
23. 9. and by the 44. of Ezech. 13. 14. 15. etc:

3 Wherefore this order must be kept holy and undefiled.

We know it will be objected, that these commandments be in the old
Testament, not in the new: and that they are ceremonial. They who shall so
object, must consider the old Testament is of equal authority with the new, and
therefore seeing God has once established this law for the Church-ministery,
they must not repeal it but by the same authority, unless they will make
with y^ Manichees, one just God for the law, and an other merciful for the
Gospel: So that unless it may be showed, either that this law was only a
shadow for a time to come, or was made for some cause peculier for that time
and those persons (which they can not do, because of the perpetual equityes
before assigned): It follows, that this must stand for an holy and enduring
constitution of God. And in truth such answer undermines at once, both the
glory and perfection of God his holy Scriptures, not only in our judgment,
but in the judgment of all writers, holy and profane, who have continually
alleged the sentences, and commandments of the old Testament, even for
the matters of the government of the Church. The Apostle proves the
mayntenaune of the Ministerye for preaching of the Gospel, by the law made
for the maintenance of the Priests, in the 1. Cor. 9. he proves women ought
not to exercise authority, by the places of Genesis. and in the first of Tim.
2. Cyprian, as all know that read him, proves the election of the people by
the place of Numbers; and that men are not to attempt further then their
calling, by the places of Dathan, Abiram, Uzza in the carrying of the Arc, and
such like. If this exception serve, how shall we any longer with the Fathers
and Godly writers of our age, stop their mouths, for the proof of the
Baptism of Children, with the reasons from Circumcision, drawn out of the
law? Nay, that they may see they can not undermine the government of Christ
with such aunswers, but they must also shake the brazen Pyllers of the Sacred
authority of the Magistrate: Let them show with what Arguments they can
stop the Mouths of Papystes in maintayning the Supreme authority of the
Prince, and our most gracious Sovereign in Ecclesiastical causes, to reform
religion, according to Gods word: to plant Church Officers by the rules of the
same, and according thereunto to depose Abiather, and set up Sadotk, to call
synodes Ecclesiastical when need is, or when the Church-gouernours neglect
their duty, other then by the examples of Ezechias, Solomon Jehoshaphat,
Josias, and by the pregnant reasons drawn from them. Wherefore let them leave
these euasions and shifts unto popish divines, to whom they appertain. But
least they should think we have but one pillar to uphold this truth: and
that only in the old Testament, let them answer the reasons following out of
the new. If Paul did rightly think It so unlawful to take Mark Exiou.
such a one as went from them from Pamphilia, and accompanied them not unto the
work, y^ he would rather be at sharp strife with Barnabas the son of
consolation, and Acts. 15. 38
be separated from so worthy a companion in all his labors, then accept Mark:
herein being justified above Barnabas by S. Luke, both in assigning of these
just causes of S. Paul's refusal, and giving Verse. 38.
the Testimony of the Church to Paul, who commended him to ye grace of Verse.
40.
God, of both which concerning Barnabas he keeps silence: Then by how much
Calvin on this place.
more right may and ought we to strive with such, as have not only left the
work of the Lord, but have been anointed with the filthy grease of the
unclean priesthood, and have received the balde mark of the beast, and have
in continual ministry blasphemed the most holy, that they should not be taken
again into the fellowship of this work and service of the Gospel. Lastly,
when as the Apostle requires y^ all Ministers must have a good Testimony of
those who are without, least he fall into the reproach and Diabolou, so taken
verse, 11.
snare of the caueller. 1 Timothy 3. 7. how ca^ they avoid this reproach, who are
to be taunted with their backsliding, with the turning of their coats, and
with high treasons against their GOD? how are not they in danger of the snare,
who have opened a way unto Satan and the world, how they may deal with them
already? Now unto this divine voice of the Prophets, we add the reverend,
(though humane) testimony of ancient time. Wherein the sentence of the
general Council of Carthage, alleged before us by Cyprian, is of most
reverend account. Cyprian, lib. 1. epist. 4. And there be other both many and
grienous faults, wherewith Basilides and Marshall are inwrapped: such do in
vain go about to occupy the place of a Bishop, seeing it is manifest that such
men may not govern the Church of Christ, nor offer up Sacrifices unto God;
Especially when of late both with us, and with all the bishops in the world,
even Cornelius also our fellow in ministry peaceable and just, and whom the
Lord vouchsafed the honor of a Martyr, decreed that such men might be admitted
to repentance, but should notwithstanding be kept from the clergy or
ministry. By which also it is manifest, y^ this Counsel was not that
provincial which concluded rebaptization, whereunto Cornelius never consented.
And how Cyprian himself mainteineth our reasons, may appear by his discourse
in the 7. Epist. lib. 1. and his words following. How dare he challenge unto
him the ministry which he has betrayed: as though it were lawful after
having been at the Alter of the devil, to come unto the Alter of God. And
again: Seeing therefore the Lord threatens such torments and punishments
in the day of his wrath, to such as obey the Devil, and sacrifice to Idolles:
how can he think, that he may do the office of the minister of God, which
has obeyed, and served the priests of the devils? or how does he think
that his hand can be translated to the sacrifice and prayer of the Lord, which
was captive to sacrilege and such a crime. These may suffice for this point:
that after we have maintained the due honor of God his Ambassadors, we should
also maintain the just, lawful and holy authority committed unto them of God.

Of the authority of Ministers of the Word.
COncerning the authority of Ministers, he speaks thus. Page. 53. And
heereuppon I would be resolved by the Author or some other, whether he
think this indowment of every Minister with the execution of all dicsipline,
admitting but not granting it to be so by law, to be a convenient policy, for
the unity and quiet of the Church? And whether he him self had not rather be
under the form now in practice, in regard of his own contentment, then under
the infinite dictatorship of his own minister? or else whether should
appellations from the judgment of the minister in this respect be allowed of?
and whether to the bishop or to whom? and whether the Bishop by this
interpretation of law, shall not retain his authority of executing the
Discipline of the Church upon every particular minister, and in every several
parish as before time, seeing the author says, as well as the Bishop in his
diocese? And if he shall, what if the Bishop upon good cause, and for abusing
of the authority, shall suspende the Minister from his jurisdiction of
executing Discipline, is he not at the same point he was before? what if the
Bishop himself dwell in the parish, who shall then have the pre-eminence? and
what if the ministers discretion serve him, upon some small or surmised cause
to excommunicate some great pear or noble counselor of his parish, whose
indignation may turn the whole Church to great mischief? or to proceed
against his Patron, who peradventure has a bo^d of him to resign. And a
little after. page. 54. The author seems to me to divide the discipline of
the Church, which he would entitle every Minister unto, into admonition,
denuntiation, and excommunication. If by denuntiation, he mean the publishing
of Excommunication done by him self, then is it a part thereof. If (as I
rather think) he mean the second degree of proceeding upon faults not public,
specified in the 18. of S. Matthew, then is this common with the minister unto
all other Christians, even as admonition is, being, the first degree: And where
the minister is the party offended, and has not prevailed, neither by his
admonition in private, nor his denuntiation before two or three, to whom shall
he tell it in the third place, where he himself has the authority to
excommunicate? and a little after in this respect he calls the Ministers
private and inferior. And again, page 59. Yes truly, as was touched before,
they do and may execute the discipline of declaring by doctrine, according to
the Word of God, men's sins to be bound or losed, and the censure of rebuking
and proving openly, those that do freeze in the dregs of their sins,
which are not the least parts of discipline: which is as much (as for
avoiding intolerable inconveniences, which otherwise would ensue) as is
expedient to be attributed to every one etc. A little after: And if no
especial preeminence might be attributed in matter of execution of discipline
to one minister above another: why is it said by S. Paul, excommunicating the
incestuous Corinthian, Absens decreui, being absent I decreed, seeing they had
Ministers of their own, and willed the denuntiation afterward to be done openly
in the Church? And at the time of his absolution Paul being absente says, to
whom you forgive any thing I forgive also: likewise speaking of the
Anathematisme of Hymenaeus and Alexander: I have given them up unto Satan, not
naming their own Minister, or any segniory. Again. fol. 61. But if he mean
the discipline passiuely, I think he and his fellows have had some wrong at
the chief prelates hands a great while. If actiuely, that every minister
without check might have the execution of all discipline in his own Parish, I
do verily believe that this man, and others, who so earnestly call for they
know not what, If they might not be them selves also Elders, auncientes, or
what you will saving Priests of the Seigniory, would be the the first weary of
it; For if I know their disposition, they are as impatient as any men, to be
at controlment, and most of all by a poor Minister.

It has always been the practice of ye subtle Serpent, who, that he might
undermine the authorye of Gods Ambassadors, and bring the Messengers of the
most highest unto disgrace, to lift up some, who neglectinge the most
essential duetyes of a Pastoure and Elder, in feeding the flocks; and being a
Pattern in their whole life and example unto them, are wont to climb into the
ambitious throne of exercising a usurped ecclesiastical Dominion, and a
Lordship over their fellow-ministers; that whilste by their place and pomp,
they might amaze the people, as being men of great learning and wisdom, and
might also by their authority make the poor Ministers as the aunswearer says,
Private Ministers, to speak when they will, write to what they list, and to be
their Commissaries crier, yt is, their ma^s man to promulgat his sentence of
excommunication at his pleasure, he might also bring to pass that which the
Prophet Jeremy complayneth of in both. The Prophets prophecy for reward, Veha
cohanim iirdu Gnal iedahem * or by their hands
and the Priests exercise dominion * by their means: and my people love it
so, and what will they do in the end? Which we see has not only won much
unto the cause of Satan in popery, but also it keeps much power unto him
amongst those, who do profess the Gospel: For by this means it comes to
pass, that they will go 5. mile to hear a Lord preach, when they will hardly
come to Church to hear their own Pastor: By this means they becomme so
irreuerent, or rather saucy with their Pastor, that they care no more for his
admonition and rebuke, then for the bleating of a sheep: by this means they
may call him before a Commissarye, a layman (as he speaks) they may fetch
out Excommunications thick and three-folde if he appear not, and so not only
not have him not to exercise dominion over them which Peter forbids, but
also 1. Peter. 5.
be Lords over their Pastor being but private persons, which the law of
reason disaloweth. Which policy of Satan, although it become odious in the
sight almost of all men, but especially of true and loving subjects, who are
grieved that some not only exercise Lordship over their fellow-ministers,
but also pearche so high, as they pray upon the right of princes, whilste they
(forsoothe) may not eat flesh in Lent, or on a Friday, but by a Byshoypes
lycense: yet this man who has given his tongue leave to revile the Ministers
with diverse slanders and reproaches, cannot content himself with that, but
must open his mouth against the due authority of the Ministers of Jesus
Christ. In which respect we account our selves bound by the Canonical
obedience, which we owe unto ye Archbishop of our souls Jesus Christ,
according to ye Canons 1. Peter. 5.
which he has made in his word: first to show how this man disordereth ye
question according to his manner, voweth consent (as it seems) with the
Jesuits in these his assertions and proofs, and then having discussed his
allegations, to confirm the plain truth by holy authority of scripture, and
worthy witness of ancient times. In the entrance therefore, the Answerer is not
content only to fly from ye issue, (whether according to the word of God, the
minister should exercise the censures of the Church according to y^ word of God,
which with us is executed by Commissaries, mere laymen,) unto another thing,
namely, what inconveniences the excommunication committed to the pastor might
bring, but also to set upon a matter never affirmed by us, that a minister
should without the rest of the ecclesiastical senate perform this thing. His
agreement with the Papists may appear manifestly by their Annotation, the 4.
ver. of 5. cap. 1. Cor. Their words are these: Though he commanded the Act
should be done in the face of the Church, as such sentences and censures be
at this day executed also: yet the judgment and authority of giving sentence
was in himself, and not in the whole multitude, as the Protestants and populer
sects affirm. Wherefore seeing his cause is that, which is between the sworn
enemies of GOD and his Church: we are not to fear, but the truth which has
prevailed so often against them, shall also carry the Garland from this new
Wrestler. His first reasons are drawn from the inconveniences, which he
thinks will come unto the Church by this means, as requiring rather (like a
Ciuilian not a divine) what is safe, then what is according to God his will:
Amongst which, he demands whether the Author had not rather be under the
form that now is, then under the infinite dictatorship of his own minister?
which I answer by another Question: why should the ministers censures
proceeding by the equal authority of an Eldership, upon causes determined by
God his word in a small volume, be more infinite then ye Commissaries, who
cannot but proccede according to the infinite and contradictorye Canons of
their Law, who can excommunicate upon non apparaunce for a matter, of 12*
pence. Is it liker that one Minister shall have many elders more tied to his will
and pleasure, then one Commissary his own affections: Again, may not their
appeal from one Eldership, to a Conference or assembly of many Ministers and
Elderships, be as safe as from the Commissary to another Bishop? And if it were
granted that the Bishop should have authority in every particular Church:
yet with the Ministers consent (unless he will iustle one law against
another) why were it not more reasonable and safe, then as it is now in the
Bishop alone: Seeing then the Minister might have more particular knowledge
of the causes in his Congregation then the Bishop, and yet if he were rash,
the Bishops wisdom might stay him. And if the Bishop should suspende the
Minister upon abuse of his authority, yet he were not at the same point he
was before, because then they which did not abuse their authority, might
exercise it still. And if the Bishop dwell in the Parish and had
pre-eminence, yet he should not draw the execution of Discipline to himself
only, but to hold it in common with him. But what do I answering his
cauelles agayuste the Law, seeing I doubt not but the Abstractor will soon
answer his cavil in this behalf. For the fountayns which are in his Book
already, are not yet dammed up by the answerer: Wherefore, I pass to his
inconvenience, which he fetches from the want of discretion in y^ Minister,
which is; What if he upon want of discretion, do excommunicate some great
peer of his Parish upon some surmized cause, whose indignation may turn the
whole church to great mischief? To this I answer, that unless the Bishops
seat above a Pastors, be so sanctified (as Hierome says) by humain
constitutions, as that it can always proceed with discretion and Wisdom,
when the Pastors seat sanctified with God, and ordained with so many precious
promises, should be subject to more follye and headiness, then the chair of
the Bishop: this inconvenience is as likelye to fall into the Bishop as the
Minister. Further, whether is more likely, that the Bishop having by reason of
his countenance and Civil authority, both more heart-burning between the
Noble Counsailers and himself, and being in less fear, as thinking him self
better able to shoulder amongst them, would be more bold in his conceit, then
a poor Minister (as he calls him) who never would for fear, but upon
most necessary and sufficient cause urged in conscience, adventure such
thing? neither if he would, could many grave Elders, without whom he could
do nothing, be drawn unto it, especially considering; that their fear would
prevail, where great Conscience of their duty should not overcome it. And
may not this man when his opinion as a Canker shall frette so far, turn all
this against the every of public rebuking, as-well as against the Mynisters
execution of Disciplyne: for may he not also demand, whether the Bishop
shall retain his authority to preach in his Diocese? and if he be in that
Parish, who shall have the preeminence? If he suspende the Minister from
preachinge: whether he be not at the same point he was before? And what if
the Minister upon some discretion would rebuke openly some Peer of the
Realm, upon bare conceyte, or some surmise: shall then the duetye of the
Minister in Preaching for such unity of the Church cease and be counted
inconvenient? If he say no, this is the commandment of GOD, and necessary
for Christian institution: so we say, this is the commandment of JESUS
CHRIST, and necessary for holy correction. In the next place he asks to
whom the Pastor shall tell it, when he does admonish him himself* I
answer for the Pastor, easily to the whole Eldership, as our savior
wills. But this question in deed clean dasheth the sole authority of the
Bishop out of countenance. For to whom shall he tell? not to the Congregation
of Elders, as our Savior commands but to the Church, which stands of
himself only as he desires* not ascending by the stayres of Christ, from one
to two, from two to many Godly Chrisost. in Math. 18.
Presidents, as Chrysostom speaks, but by the stayres of Rome, to descend
from two to one, and to take the matter wherein he is a party, into his own
hands, and proceed in censure Ecclesiastical as likes himself best? In the
next, to blear men's eyes with all, he grants they may rebuke in public
doctrine, bind and loose by preaching, which is a great part of Discipline: as
though any man were so blind, (as when the book makes three parts of the
Ministers Office ministering of doctrine, ministering of the Sacraments, and
ministering of Discipline) as not to see what violence he does; Nay, what folly
he imputes to the book, as though they should make three of two. For if
Discipline be nothing but the open rebuking in preaching, and binding and
loosing by the same, that being a part of ministering the Doctrine by
preaching, is manifestly contained under it: and so not only makes one two,
but carries one half from one end of the sentence to another, placing a
third between, and for an vmpier belike, least they should fall out, or
else being joined orderly together, should to much annoy him. But his reasons,
which the Jesuits have shaken against the truth hefore him, do follow. Unto
which I answer, that it follows not, that if the Apostle might by sole
authority excommunicate, therefore the Bishop may: for an Apostle is of far
greater authority then a Bishop is. Secondly, it is false that the Apostle did
only command unto them to pronounce the sentence as the Bishop does, the
minister giving them no further authority. For although as an Apostle whose
duty was to deliver ordiaunces, which the Churches were to observe and keep,
he did iustlye decree as the voice of Christ, and so command them what they
should do: yet he does not excommunicate, or take it unto himself, but
wills that by the authority of Christ, they should cast out (not pronounce
his sentence of eiection) they should Separate from 1. Cor. 5. ver. 7. 12. 13.
amongst them such, that they Should judge those within that is under their
authority, not that they should only pronounce his sentence of separation and
judgment, which is also most manifest by his other allegation, out of the
second to the Corinthes, where hesheweth that he alone 2. Cor. 2. 10.
would not forgive, but whomsoever they forgave, he would forgive: he calls
it the rebuke or censure of many, not of Epi^imia. Charisasthai. Curosai.
himself; He shows, now they ought freely to forgive, he did exhort them to
ratify, and by authority confirm their love toward him. Let him therefore
take this necessary collectio^ clean against him, y^ if y^ Apostle would not,
nor durst not take unto himself the sole anthority of excommunication and
absolution, but left it unto the church: How shall any one bishop presume to
shut out y^ Ministers and elders, and carry it wholly unto himself? His next
reason is of as great force. The Apostle says he did deliver unto satan, and
mentions neither their Ministry nor segniory, therefore he did alone. Upon
which example I reason thus. Paul says that Timothy received grace by the
laying on of his hands, making no mention of y^ elders: therefore it is false
that he says in the 1. Tim. 4. that he received it by the laying on of the
hands of the Eldership. James Act. 15. says. I determine or judge Therefore it
is false, which is after set Act. 15. 19. Crino. ctA 15. 22.
down, y^ this was the decree of the Apostles and Elders, with the consent of
the Churches. But what need I stand to answer this argument, which was by a
reverent servant of God, aunsweared openly at Paul's cross, that although the
action M. Doctor Day at Paul's cross. November. 17
be given to one who moderated, yet neither Peter nor James, nor any Apostle
above Apostles, nor Bishop above Ministers had any authority over others, and
that as the Senators were equal in authority, notwithstanding he moderated,
so is it amongst the Apostles and Bishops. And thus much for his reasons. Ours
follow, that it belongs to the Pastor and the Eldership, to excommunicate by
the consent of the people. If our Savior Christ. Math. 18. when he says tell
the Church, mean not one Bishop, because one can not be a number, nor one
alone a Church, and he goes upward from one to 2. from two to more, not
contrariwise, from two to one: neither can it be meant of many Churches, for
then it must be all the whole Church (in the phrase of the scripture) and it
were a confusion and vnpossibility for many Churches, or the whole people to
hear all such Ecclesiastical causes: but do mean upon these reasons a
particular Congregation, then our assertion is most true and certain. The
first we have proved, therefore the second is true.

1 That which the Apostle makes the judgment of a particular Congregation,
that must needs appertain to the Pastor and the rest of the Elders, as the
governors, and to the people as consenters:

2 But this the Apostle plainelye expresses 1. Cor. 5. 12. Why judge you not
those who are within? Separate him therefore from amongst you:

3 Therefore it is true which we affirm.

If it be the especial duty of the Pastor, by the authority of the Eldership,
to deliver the holy Sacraments to the worthy, and detayne them from the
unworthy: Then unless he should be compelled to give them to the unworthy,
and withold them from the worthy, excommunication must belong to him with
his fellow Elders. But the first is manifest by these Scriptures. Leuit. 10.
11. Zephan 3. 3. They have polluted Quodesh.
the holy things. And 1. Cor. 11. 26. 27. Wherefore our assertion is true.
The consequent of the first part is manifest, because he must deliver them to
all, not suspended and excommunicated, and to the rest he must not. The
consent of the ancient times agree unto this. The counsel of Arles. 2. Can.
30. authoriseth the suspencion which the Elders and Clearkes decree against the
Bishop. And they do it by the authority of ancient decrees. Also, seeing the
councels conclude both generallye that the Bishop shall not proceed in any
cause of government Ecclesiastical without the Elders: and that they shall not
ordain without them, and that they alone can not so much as give leave to any
of the Clergy to go unto the Widows or Uirgins, but with the consent of the
Elders: it follows much more, that they might not excommunicate without
them. Now the first sort are directly proved by these Canons following.
Council. Carthag. 4. cap. 23. That the Bishops hear no cause, without the
presence of his Clearkes, otherwise the sentence shall be void, unless it be
confirmed by the presence of the Clearkes. And the 22. That the Bishop ordain
not Clearks without the counsel of his clearks, so that he seek the assent
and leave, or conniuence and testimony of the citizens. Canon. 3. An Elder
Conninentiam.
when he is ordained, the Bishop blessing him, holding his hand upon his
head, let also all the Elders which are present, hold their hands by the
hands of the Bishop. That the Clearkes or those who contain, come not to the
Widows or Virgins, but by the commandment or permission of the Bishops and
Elders. And Can. 32. That the Elder reconcile not the penitent, not having
asked council of the Bishop. Ierom. ad demetri. 1. Epist. The Elders in other
censures of the Church, and the Church has interest in excommunication.
Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 19. Speaking of excommunication, of which until we
shall have understanding, what he have done after, which thing when it
regards the Counsel and sentence of us all, I dare not preiudicate the
matter and draw it only to my self, And lib. 3. epist. 14. epist. 15.
Traditione dominica.
epist. 16. and August. speaking of the elders says, because all things in
tradition of the Lord, are done by the holy Ghost, therefore when a rule and
form of this Discipline is delivered unto them, it is said unto them, receive
the holy ghost: and because it does truly appertain to ecclesiastical right,
whose sins you forgive. etc.

Of the Doctor or teacher, that he is an ordinary and perpetual officer in the
Church of Christ, distinct from the Pastor, by the Word of God.
COncerning which, y^ words of y^ answerer are these: And I hope that the
author will not hereby gather, that by law now in force, a man is utterly
and simply forbidden, to have an other preach in his cure, for then all our
new doctors De robe curte, who iutrude themselves upon, must be feign to
give over their cloakes, and put up their Pipes. fol. 41.

If this had been directed against the particular persons of some, it had been
beyond the rule of charity and modesty, though he should be a Doctor who spoke
it, thus to slander any with intrusion, and having nothing to say to their
doctrine and lives, to gybe at the apparel which they wear in journey, or
otherwise upon occasion, being both sober and grave, yea when as commonly they
use a gown with as much gravity, and less flanting then the most of their
Doctors consecrated according to the order of men, and not of God. But now,
that it is brought to deface (as shall be proved) the ordinance of God, thus
without all proof to flout and to taunt the officers of God, beseems neither
the grauitye of a Cambridge Doctor, nor the modesty of a Christian, nor the
ciuility of an honest man. Their intrusion, forsooth, is this, that having
first (according to the order of the Church of England) authority to preach,
they come upon the earnest desire of the Congregation, with the consent of the
Pastor (unless being no preacher and ignorant, for envy he can not bear him)
to instruct the people with wholesome doctrine, out of the true interpretation
of the Scriptures, their Pipes, which he says profanely, they may put up, is
the Vtteraunce of knowledge, a gift of the holy Ghost, which 1. Cor. 12.
is more sweet to GOD his Children, and acceptable to the Lord, then all the
gilded Organes and Pipes in the Realm. For in the spiritual battle, their
Sound is uncertain, when as these as the Silver trumpets of Gods sauctuary 1.
Cor. 14.
give certain warning to the people to serve the Lord aright. Thus having in
a word, with as much patience and modesty as the Lord would give me, touched
not the Salt, but unsavory brine of his floutes: having no reason of his to
Colos. 4.
deal withal, I set down these following, first for proof out of yt
scripture, then for witness out of ancient writers.

1 Whatsoever (the Apostle setting down the ordinary and perpetual members of
Christ's body, in every particular Congregation) does make an ordinary member
in the same, distint^t in his proper works and action from all the rest, the
same is a perpetual ordinary Church Officer:

2 But he makes the Doctor (in that reckoning) a distinct member, having a
distinct action from all the rest, to wit, teaching distinguished there from
exhortation, from governing, from distributing:

3 Wherefore it is plain, that he is a Church Officer, ordinary and perpetual
(for his gifts and use are ordinary and perpetual) and also distinguished
from the Pastor.

1 Whatsoever Christ has given to his Church, with an ordinary and perpetual
gift, for the perpetual work of the ministry, gathering and building up of the
Church unto perfection, that is an ordinary Church Officer:

2 But so he has given Pastors and Doctors. Ephesians. 4. 11.

3 Therefore both are perpetual, and ordinary officers, and by consequent
distinct.

Unto this argument, they object, because the Apostle having said, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, he says in the last place, some
Pastors and Teachers, which because they are coupled by and, they say they are
one and not distinct. To which I answer, they may as well prove hope and
charity to be one and not distinct, because the Apostle says, these three
remain, faith, hope, and charity, because he coupleth them with and. But if
these men have not learned either that and, though sometimes it rather
repeateth or interprets, then coupleth diverse things: yet that most properly
and commonly it does not so, or that it is an elegancie with the Grecians in
such long distributions, to join the two last members, especially if they
be of greater kindered and familiarity then the rest, to join them with a
copulative conjunction in the end: If, I say, they have not observed this in
Homer and others, Let them learn it of Paul, Galath. 3. where being about to
show, that in Christ there is no difference of the Verse. 28.
outward distinction of kinds in this life: he makes a distinction, or
numbering up of the diverse sorts, and joins the two last most like in nature
and kindred, yet not one and the same together, saying: There is neither Jew
nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male and female.
Having answered this objection, I proceed to other arguments.

1 Whatsoever is set as Church Officer in the Church by God, with a distinct
and proper ordinary gift, that is such as we have above described:

2 But God has set in the Church Doctors, and given them their peculiar work
and gift, The Word, or vtteraunce of knowledge, distinguished from the Pastors
work and gift, the Word or vtteraunce of Wisdom in exhortation:

3 Wherefore the Doctor is such a one as we have described.

The second part is manifest by these words. And these God has set in his
Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, after powers,
the^ the gifts of 1 Cor. 12. 28
healing, helpers, governors, sorts of tongs: are all Apostles? are al
propehts? Are all teachers. And ver. 8. To this is given by the spirit, the
word of wisdom, to an other the word of knowledge according to the same
spirit. If they say, the Word teacher, is here taken generally, not properly
for the Doctor: besides the 8. verse, which does manifestly refel them, these
reasons confute them: First, because he distinguishes them from apostles and
Prophets, which in that general signification should comprehend them, and if
it should comprehend any more then Doctors properly, yet it were no reason
to shut out those who are so called. Lastly, seeing they can show no place
where it is so taken, but always is general of all Ministers of the Word, as
the Apostle calls himself A teacher of the Gentiles. And Timothy is willed
to teach, as also is every Bishop; or else it is proper for the peculier
Church Officer so called: it were against al rule of interpretation, to shut
out the proper, which here agrees with the circumstances of the text, and take
a strange and unwonted signification, as to signify a Pastor by a Doctor. Our
last reason is: Seeing the Prophet Esaias, prophesying of the calling of the
Gentiles by the ministry of the Apostles, does also prophecy, that of these
called to the faith, he would take of them to be Priests and Levites, meaning
(according as the Prophets use to speak, by offices and holy things of the
law, to note out such offices as had some similitude, and proportion with
those under the Gospel) them to be Pastors, who in administering of the
Sacraments, and sleaing by exhortation the old man, and offering up the new man
acceptable to God, hold proportion with the Priests: and to be Leuits, whose
office concerning y^ substantial point of delivery of doctrine, is one and the
same with theirs, that it must needs be, that according to the scriptures of
the new Testament, this prophecy should be fulfilled in the office of Doctors
as well as of Pastors. And this was that which the Fathers meant in their common
Ciprian. lib 1. epist. 9. ad furitanos. Ambros. lib. 1. off. c. 50. Aug. quest
ex vtroq: test. mixed. q 101.
resembling of Pastors to Priests. Eusebius declares this most plainly in
setting down the duties of y^ Doctor to catechize them, and as a master his
scholars by continual reading to them, or exercising to advance them in
knowledge. For writing of y^ persecution of y^ church under Seuerus, and
speaking of Origin, he says: ^he exercise of teaching, or the schole
exercising, as some where even himself makes relation in writing, and none
served or was set to catechize at Alexandria, but all were driven Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 3. Scholazon ti de tei diatribe. Toi Katechein anakeimenou. Toutes
katecheseos proeste didaskaleiou.
away by the threatening of persecution: some of the Gentiles came unto him to
hear the word of God. And a little after: Origin was then 18. year old, when
he was over the school of catechizing or instructing. And Nazianzen says in
Orat. Pros tous politeuomenous. The servants must be subject to their masters,
the wives to their husbands, the Church to the Lord, the Disciples to their
Pastors and Teachers.

Of the Elders and Eldership.
Having ended the treatise of the Doctor his office; we are to proceed unto
the Elders, and Eldership with whom he deals as profanely as with the
others: his words are. fol. 43. But why are Presbyteri, such as expound in the
Church, translated Elders? I trust he minds not hereby to shut out all
laymen from the Eldership or seigniory which is dreamed of, least peradventure
he him self be Exclusissimus. And Page 57. And does our Author think that this
man here does mean their lay Presbiteries, never heard nor read of from the
beginning of the world, till within these fortye years or little more,
because he names them Ecclesiastical Magistrates. In which words of our
author, we see his cheifest reason against the Ecclesiastical Presbytery is,
that the Elders are lay, and the Presbyteries lay, and therefore there has not
been heard til within this forty year, of them in the world. To which we
answer, if y^ Elders which join with the Pastor and Doctor were lay men, yet
it follows not, that the Eldership is lay. But can his degree of Doctor (if
he be so much) give such credit unto his bare word, as though all y^
Christian Churches (which by the grace of God do exercise this discipline)
should be believed to have a Presbitery of such as are not elected and
ordained Ecclesiastically to their office? If I be not deceived herein his
laws may teach him if he will not learn it out of the Scriptures, that
whosoever is called with due examination and trial, with the consent of those
to whom it appertains, and are with fasting and prayers, or prayers only and
with imposition of hands separated or put a part to that office, that they are
Ecclesiastical persons and not laymen (as he calls them) otherwise, there is
no rule in the Scripture to descerne between men private, and between
Church Officers. Now, if he consider either the order which we maintain out
of the Scripture, or that which is practiced in all reformed Churches, he shall
find, that they Acts. 14. Acts. 6. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 5.
are duly examined by the Elders, elected of the whole Church, ordained of
the Eldership, yea, he shall find this to be true of Deacons, much more of
Elders. But if this exception were true, as it is most false, who can choose,
but he must abhor the hypocrisy of these men, who can deface the ordinance
of God, which they want, which they themselves have not. For their Commissaries
and Chauncellors, who suspende, Excommunicate, and administer the discipline of
our Church under the Bishops, what are they? who calls them* the Bishop: who
ordains them* or annoynteth them* his Letters Patentes: By whose prayers do
they look to obtain comfort in their calling? by the bishops blessings
without prayer, without fasting. To what office are they put apart* to mingle
heaven and earth together, matters of God and matters of men: to excommunicate,
and take probats of testaments: to admonish ecclesiastically and commit
penance: to be Lord over ye ministers, themselves having taken no degrees. Thus
though their calling be neither ecclesiastical, because they come to no
church-election, nor have any such ordination: nor civil, because they be
called by y^ bishop only as he is bishop, put a part neither to administer
ecclesiastical things only, nor things civil only, but to both and to some
which are neither; as to give men spiritually leave to mary, and eat flesh in
Lent, as though they were made to go beyond all good estate of mankind,
beyond y^ body, because they meddle with the soul, beyond the soul, because
they meddle with that which pertains unto it: nay, sometimes which is hurtful.
Wherefore, although this were sufficient to stop his profane mouth: yet that it
may appear that the gray hairs of this order, are more ancient then the very
hoarie head of his Chauncellors and commissaries: I will prove it to be the
ordinance of GOD out of the Scriptures, that there ought to be an
Ecclesiastical Senate of Pastors, Doctors and Elders governing only, to have
the administration of Churchmatters, and that they ought to be administered
Ecclesiastically.

1 If the Apostles set down two sorts 1. Reason.
of Elders which rule the Church well, and are worthy of double honor: the one
sort of them only ruling, the other laboring also in the Word and doctrine
(which are as has been proved before the Pastors and Doctors); then it is
plain that these raising only must be added unto them:

2 But the first is true by the express words of the Apostle. 1. Tim. 5. 17.

3 Therefore the former assertion is certain.

To this place some are wont to object that the first sort are such as are
occupied in the Word and Sacraments, though they preach not. But this will not
serve, both because we have proved that none are to be admitted to that, but
they ought to preach, and also because those should yet be occupied in the
Word, and therefore comprehended under the latter sort. Now, when they
perceive this will not serve (being men willing to learn of any) they have
learned of the Jesuits to aunsweare, That such Jesuits Testament Rheimes. 1.
Tim. 5. 17.
Priests specially and Prelates, are worthy of duble, that is more ample
honor, that are able to teach and preach, and do take pains therein. And
therefore they make, that all for their office, are worthy of double honor:
but specially those which labor diligently and painfully in the Word. D. Cop.
ser. lat. in con.
But this shift is manifestly discovered by the text. First, because the
Apostle should then have said thus: they which are occupied in Word and
doctrine, are worthy of double honor, especially those which labor: but he
does not make the ministry of word and doctrine common to both, but the
ministry of governing. Secondlye, the Apostle by these men's goodly device,
should not proceed, but should go backwarde in his comparison: for he had
then said more in the first part, when he said, They which do it well: or (as
he might say) with worthiness of praise, which he that does, must not only
do it with labor, pains, and diligence, Calos.
but also with purity, wisdom, zeal, power, sou^dnes, fitnes, and many other
things besides labor. So this sense clean overthrows the Apostles increase
by the word Especially. Thirdly, by this means the Apostle must make three
sorts of Ministers of the word, such as are occupied in the Word, but not
well, (belike their ignorant Ministers). First, they which should have some
honor for their office sake, then some that do it well, but not with labor
or diligence, which must have double honor though they labor not; and the
last, which do it more then well, which must have more then double honor. If
this be not to dally with the Lords word, what is? Fourthly, If the difference
were not in things wherein they are occupied, but in the labor above others,
or the slothful laboring of others, this difference should be none at all,
seeing the Apostle in other places gives watchfulness, which is more then
labor, for it is a Heb. 13. 17.
continuance of labor, with great regard, not only in preaching, but
otherwise for their souls health. Yea, he gives this very word, Copio^tes,
which labor, to all that are over them in the Lord, and 1. These. 5.
admonish them, which they must reverence and acknowledge. Lastly, their
distinction and interpretation is clean destitute of conference of Scriptures,
which are not wont to give double honor to any but to those which are painful,
and which labor in their work: but ours have most manifest witness out of
other places, as shall appear by the other reasons following.

1 If the Apostle Romans 12. setting 2. Reason.
down y^ ordinary members of Christ's Church, which differ in their proper
action, do set down the Elder to be over the people with diligence, and not
to be occupied in the ministry of the Word, either by exhortation or
doctrine, but to admonish them and rule 1. These. 5.
them: then our assertions must needs be certain:

2 But the first is manifest. Romans 12. 6. 7. etc.

3 Therefore this has been ordained by the Apostles.

1 If the Apostle say in the 1. cor. 12. 3. Reason.
that besides the Ministers of y^ Word, God has set in his Church, Governors,
then our Position is true:

2 But he says, God has set first Apostles, Thirdlye, Teachers, Governors.
etc:

3 Wherefore our Doctrine is not uncertain, but the lively truth of God his
Word.

Unto these two they do obiecte, that by these, Magistrates are meant, but
that is plainelye confuted by these reasons out of the Text. First, because
the Apostle speaks of them as of Church Officers, and which were Romans 12. 6.
1. Cor. 12. 13. 14. 27.
then the members of Christ's body, which then their Magistrates were not.
Secondlye, he speaks of them as of such gifts as came then newly by
preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles, and such as they should then with
zeal follow after. Romans 12. 6. 1. Cor. 12. 31. Which the Apostles would
neither say nor exhort them to do concerning the Magistrates office, for they
never were so Annabaptistical, as to exhort their churches to be zealous, to
become Magistrates. Thirdly, the Apostle does after speak of the Magistrates
and their duty, and of the churches duetye to them. Romans 13. Lastly, the
Governors we speak of, in their government are placed as far under the
Pastors and Teachers, as they are under the Apostles and Prophets, which if
they dare say it of y^ Magistrates they are themselves become plain
Annabaptists, and do clean overthrow the most rightful sovereignty of
Princes over all persons and causes, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. A
fourth reason is, seeing our Savior Christ, in setting down the
Ecclesiastical Presbytery, speaks according to the Jews, for otherwise the
Apostles could not have understood him, when he said, tell the congregation or
Church, which was the title then given unto the 1. Cor. 13. 2. 9 Beza on this
place.
Ecclesiastical Senate, and his words of having as a Publican and Heathen,
does manifestly prove he meant to speak according to their custom: It must
needs be that he did according to the places before brought, ordain a
Presbytery of Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, Mark. 15. 1. Luke. 22. 16.
like unto theirs of Priests, Scribes, or Teachers of the Law, and their
Elders which governed only.

In y^ fifth place, y^ precept of S. James, which wills them to send for the
Elders of the Church, when they be weak, James 5.
thereby plainly declaring, that y^ Church ought not only to have a Pastor and
a Doctor, whose chief attendance must be 1. Tim. 4.
on reading, exhortation and doctrine: But also many who ought always to be
ready at the instant calling of diverse and many at once, that none in y^
necessary work be neglected: it follows thereby, that beside them, there
ought to be such other elders, as may admonish the unruly, comfort the weak
minded, and patient 1. These. 5.
toward all. Lastly, all those places which say, Elders were ordained Church
by Acts. 14.
Church, that an accusation must not be taken against them under two witnesses
1. Tim. 5.
and such like, do establish these; for seeing the words are general to
both, as have been proved before, and no circumstance does restrain them:
nay, the circumstances uphold y^ general because in the first place, Lukes
purpose is to declare how the Apostles brought the Churches to a perfect and
full order of Church-gouernment; and in the other, the Apostle had spoken
immediately before of both sorts. Wherefore unless they will overthrow all
certain sense of these places, and that notable rule of interpretation, that
the words and sense of places, are not to be restrained but upon repugnance of
places, or plain circumstaunces of Text, they must here understand both sorts
of Elders. And thus much out of the Scriptures: now out of the Fathers.
IGNATIUS AD TRVLL. There is no Church which can stand without her Eldershippe
Presbiterion Kai synedrion.
or Council. Tertull. Apoll. Cap. 39. If there be any that has committed
such a fault, that he be put away from the partaking of the Prayers of the
Church, and from all holy affairs or matters: there be presidents, certain of
the most approved auncientes and Elders. Theophilact. on the place of Mat.
interprets tell the Church, tell the Governors thereof. Ambrose 1. Timoth.
5. Complayneth that the Teachers and Ministers of the Word, suffered this to
wear out of the Church, or rather of pride, whilste they only would seem to
do somewhat. Now all know that the Elders, which they called Sacerdotes,
Priests, were not worn out of use, therefore he may mean this, and this
shows what the Fathers meant. And CIPRIAN confirms that as manifestlye,
that it remained in his time: where (he says) Lib. 4. Epi. 22* when either
examining whether al things agreed to them which should be in those, who were
prepared for the Ecclesiastical function. We gave it to Optatus, we with the
Elders, Clerum.
Doctors, and readers, ordain him Teacher of those which hear. Which shows
there were Elders for Government, which were not occupied in any public divine
service, distinguished not only from the Preachers but Readers. Ierom also
says, The Christian Church also has her Eldership. Ier. 2. lib. in Isa. Which
when he meneth it of such as the Jews had, it is plain he means those which
we do, as may appear by his words of the Jews Elders, Ad Galas. quest.
decim. They chose (says he) of the wisest of their company for governors:
which should as well admonish those that had any corporal pollution to
abstain from the assemblies, as to reprove the breakers of the Sabbath.

A reply to the variable collections following, against the Discipline.
HItherto we have had whatsoever force he could make against the several
points of Church-gouernment handled before. Now, because he thought the stenche
of the former dung was not strong enough, to overcome the sweet savor which
the Word casts upon the Discipline; he has tumbled together (as he
thinks) a great many diversities and contrarieties, drawn from the writings
of those, which seek the Church Discipline: whereby he would feign fasten
upon it, that it is not to be yielded unto, because the Authors are Page. 191
not At any accord or resolution amongst themselves, nor yet with other
learned men: Also upon hie old song, that these matters are in the liberty of
the Church, it is a very nice and a dangerous scrupulosity, rather then to use
that aright, which has been once abused, that a man should go about to
devise, and to lay out new plat-formes in Church Matters, Page. 191
in which of necessity such difficulties will daily arise, that cannot by
any 192
reach of man's wit be forecast, and will breed not only a continual toil,
but also infinite dangerous innonations, both in the Church and commonwealth.
Concerning which slanderous dealing of his, I will first generally speak of
it, and then make answer to his several collections, adding unto every one
of his, open contradictions and inconveniences of their side, not only drawn
from the diversity of men's judgment, which in the best things are through
humane infirmity, at odds; but such as show the chief defendors to be at
war with them selves, in the points which they mayntayn, and with the holy
doctrine which they must needs confess. Now may it please the Reader, in the
first place to consider, what iniutye this man does, not only to the
Discipline, but also to our holy Religion in this manner of dealing. For by
this reasoning of his, it shall come to pass that the Religion when it was
first preached by the Apostles, because it was joined with contrarieties and
strifes, as of those of the Circumcision Act 11. and 15 Galat. 4.
with the rest, and sometimes with bitterness and difference between the
Ministers, whilste one would have one that had forsaken the work go with them
another would not: sometimes tumultes and disorders following the same; it
might well have been refused and east away: seeing the Professors were at
variance, contended, and many inconveniences (in the reason of man) followed
their preaching. By this means, the whole religion (which is in truth
maintained of us, and of our brethren whom now they call Lutherans, as an
uncertain and ungrounded religion, because of contrariety between us in the
matter of the Sacrament, of the vbiquiti and other points) may be rejected of
ye papists, and their reason must be held as good, because they have as
learnedly and truly gathered our diversities between our selves,
inconveniences following upon our Doctrine, as this man has done in the
matter of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Next unto this foul injury done unto
religion, his injury done unto so many worthy learned men, which have so well
deserved of the Church of God: nay, his inuiry done unto all the reformed
Churches, in setting them together by the ears, in slaundering them to like
of, uphold and maintain, such a government as has no witness of the
Scriptures or ancient times, though they main tayne it by both) such as brings
with Confirmation de la discipline ecclesiastique.
it, not only a maze and labarinth unto all commonweals, but which is at
flat ennemity with Princes, overthrows their government in Ecclesiastical
causes, and by sudden alteration, turns every thing vpsie-downe. Which
reproach though it be so apparaunt, as his own conscience smote him with the
gylce of it, so as he would feign avoid the shame of it by colorable
protestation, and Page. 191.
that before God, not to derogate from any tolerable order established in
these external matters, yet he cannot choose but charge them, that they make
Princes raunge with the rest of 204.
their Seniours and Church-gouernours, and that they debar princes of that
right of government in matters and over persons Eeclesiastical, which the word
of God, and all the examples of godly kings of Iudae do aford unto us. The
falsehoode of which is not only manifest by this witness of haste, as good as a
thousand against him: but also by the testimonye which so many worthy writers,
nay Princes and Magistrates in their practice and confessions have given to the
same. Now, when the Christian Reader has considered of this iniurye done unto
GOD and his Church, to understand also, first that these are but Rapsodies
gathered at leisure, boasted of and cast in the teth of some long since, such
as had other-wyse been uttered ere this, but that no market would serve so well
this. Secondly, that although He do as Sanballet, send us Nehem. 6. 6. ver. 7.
8. 9.
in writing, word, that we would build up the wall of Jerusalem, and make
our selves kings, when these things come to pass: and that we set up
Prophets which may preach of us at Jerusalem, there is a King at Judah, every
Pastor will be Pope: yea, and above the Prince in his Presbytery: Yet with good
Nehemias we can truly answer, There is none of these things done, but thou
do invent them in thine heart, and that all this is but to cast a fear unto
us: for they say their hands shall be weak from this work that they perfect
it not. And therefore that our remedy is, seeing we use no means but by
supplication, but by manyfestation of the truth, and seek for nothing but
Discipline, which by the book of ordination we promise to further according to
our power, eue^ to pray with the said Neh. Confirm (O God) our hands. The
first contradiction (interlased with a lie, that they make him Antichrist,
Page. 193
which refuses the Presbytery.) is y^ we urge this as perpetual out of the
place of Timothy, which Calvin does refer to his ministry. which is no
contradiction, seeing if it be referred to his office, yet it being a piece of
Timothies office, to procure that the things which he had learned of Paul,
should be kept according to their nature and difference perpetually in the
Church, it sufficiently proves the matter in hand, otherwise how Could he
keep it until the coming 2. Tim. 2.
of Christ? Like to that is, the allegation out of the French discipline, that
those articles which were there contained touching discipline, are not so
settled amongst us, but that the unity (he should say) vtility of the church so
requiring, they may be changed. which I say, is a mere cavil, for they
speak not, nor mean not it of the substance of discipline contained in y^
word, but their manner of setting it down according to the circumstaunces of
their time, as is plain by Their title which calls it Primier project.
but the first cast, brought of the substance of it, as it is contained in the
Scriptures of the Apostles: Which substance, they were not so mad to change,
though they judged they might alter the^ in many points of circumstances. For
these sily contradictions, let him take these monstrous ones proceeding from
this, y^ they will not acknowledge the perfection of y^ scriptures concerning
discipline. One nu^bring up as a circumstance to come clothed or naked to the
supper of the Lord, says of those circumstances, None of these D. Whit. book.
Page. 24. page. 25.
circumstances are commanded in the Scriptures, nor can by necessary collectio^
be granted, yet he knows it does necessarily appertain to comelines. The
next is that the Abstractor says, the Ministers ought not to Page-194
wrest any thing into the government of the church, without due authority from
the magistrate, which he would have contrary to that of the admonition and M.
Cartwright, that our life must not be dear, as though we can not by suffering
(if need were, for so the condition is put) aforde, that, without doing any
thing which has not due authority from the Magistrate. His mingling of our
sentence with Brownes, Page. 214.
is but a malicious proceeding: Seeing himself testifies after, that we do
more then mislyke his doings and writings in respect of such proceedinges.
Like to this, is that he alleges out of Iunius, that if the Prince do
hinder the building of the Church, the people may by force of arms resist him.
Which as it is not in the Page which he notes, nor in all his book of
Discipline: so how malicious a slander it is brought up, upon so worthy a
servant of God, may appear by his whole treatise of the civil. Magistrate,
Lib. 3. cap. 5. Where having showed how the Magistrate cannot alter the
substantial points of Discipline, and handled that question to one obiecting,
What shall the Church do if it be (by the Magistrates authority,
commandment, threatening, and violence) compelled. He aunsweareth, If the
Magistrate ordain any thing contrary to God his word, that the Ministers
should plainly and modestly declare with Paul, that they can do nothing
against, but for the truth. But if the things be not contrary to the truth
and necessity, that the Churches Page. 207.
are bound rather patiently to bear it, then to bring the holy ordinance of
God, their body, and the common peace into danger. Concerning excommunication,
shall be spoken after. The book he names of obedience I have not. The other
matter out of the book deiure Magistratum, as not pertaining to us, I purpose
not to meddle with, especially considering he handles it more like a Lawyer
then otherwise. But after he has alleged testimonies to prove that, Which
none but Papists and Annabaptistes Page. 196.
will deny, that it is traitorous to teach the people that they should owe no
service to evil kings, he adds, least this long treatise should seem
altogether impertinent, that he could not choose but oppose to the fanaticall
Page. 197.
spirits and traitorous allegations, both of these dangerous innouators, and
of the rebellious Papists. But alas, why are we poor Ministers (as he calls
us before, whom a man of mean estate will not regard) so dangerous? He
answers, because we would have our sovereigns kingdom to be holden at the
chief inferior magistrates, the people or Presbyteries devotion. Oh heaven, O
earth, O Lord our God, the searcher of the secreats of all hearts, the author
of the holy discipline we seek, reveal (we beseech thee) our horrible treason:
bring upon us and our children for ever utter confusion in this life, and in y^
life to come, if this wickedness be either intended, thought upon, or be likely
to follow upon the discipline which we seek, or upon our desire of the same.
If you, O you holy fathers, and ministers of God, which have writetn for,
defended, mayntained, and with great danger attained unto this, may not clear
our cause by y^ un fained fidelitye which you have showed to christian Princes:
yet let your wisdom and experience, Oh you Princes and Magistrates, which
have received it, honored it, tried it, bear witness unto the innoce^cie of
this cause. Shall that which has bin a friend to magistrates, when they were
enemies to it, be enemies to Magistrates, when they should be friends unto it:
Shall that which D. Whitgift himself confesses (namely, That such Seniors D.
Whit* last book. 161.
were, but long ago worn out of use. For which he alleges, the sentence of
Ambrose before alleged) shall, that I say, called for of that holy man,
become traitorous and pernicious to the state? Can the office of an Archbishop
in the second place of the land, doing all that alone, and more in
Church Matters then the seniours, having with it civil power and authority be
free from this suspicion: and cannot Ministers and Elders of base account in
the world, meddling only as the Apostles, with spiritual matters and that
according to the word of God, be void of al surmize of such vilanous practice:
can their counsels be accounted safe, where none come but themselves, who^ they
will and who are devoted to their honor and kingdom ecclesiastical? And shall
the ministers consultations be so fit for such practices where so many Elders
(as he says lay men) of all degrees may be present, where the Magistrates may
have both their eyes and their ears? Whose decrees in all matters of greatest
weight, of Excommunication, Election, Abdication, ending of common
controversies, must come under the conscience of all men: yea, whose whole acts
and counsels may easily be seen, by the Magistrate, who may force them to a
new course, if they do any thing prejudicial to the estate? The good king
Iehoshaphat, according to the Word of God, and the example of his father David,
ordained besides the 1. Chron. 27 30.
Priests and Levites in all Cities, the chief of Families for the judgments
of the Lord, and for the matters of God besides 2. Chro. 19. 8. 11.
others appointed for civil matters, called the kings matters. Now, shall we
think, that he could not see into the matters of a kingdom and the safety
thereof, as well as this man? The Princes of Judah at their return, when their
state was subject unto so many dangers, when their Prophets conspired against
Hesr. 10. 8.
them, yet vphelde the Ecclesiastical Presbytery to threaten excommunication
and separation from Gods people, to the obstinate sinners, as well they
the^-selues did confiscation of goods and civil punishment: neither were they
ever jealous over their estate. Wherefore, seeing we have such a cloud of
witnesses of these times and of former, both under the law and under the
Gospel, we need not fear but their lying and iro^forhead in charging us with
such traitorous opinions, shall be manifest to all, and shall turn upon their
own heads. For manifestation whereof; let the Magistrates consider what is
written of them highly derogatorie unto their estate and freedom, which they
make them believe that they maintain. First they say the form and manner of
Church government may be altered Page. 192. (...). 3^9.
by the Magistrate* then they say the external government of the Church under
a Christian Magistrate must be according to the form of government used in the
commonwealth. Which is flat contrary to that, that the Christian Magistrate
may alter at their good pleasure. Which also drives the Queens most
excellent majesty, either to part her Crown with some other, or else must
make one Archbishop not only of bishops, but also over Archb. y^ in the Church
there may be a Monark, as well as in the commonwealth. Again, when they say y^
Archb. is contained under S. Paul's Bishop, they leave it not in the
Magistrates power to take away his jurisdiction, how dangerous so ever it be
to her estate. Again, let them consider into what a low place they bring the
Magistrate into, in the Church, when expounding the place of the Corinthes of
him, they make D. Whit. last. b. deuis. 6. 7. page, 631.
him go after the teacher, and therefore much more after the Archbi. Having
therefore noted these their open contradictions and most absurd opinions,
prejudicial indeed to her majesty's authority: let us ere we pass from this
general, (what the form of ecclesiastical government is) consider once again
of his assertion, and see whether it bewray not manifest ignorance, contain
not co^tradiction and repugnance in it self, and be not highly derogatory to
Christ and his scriptures. His words are these page 192. Now as concerning the
inward government of the Church of Christ by his spirit, God working in his
children, by the Ministers of his written revealed word: and also touching the
essential points of the outward policy and government of the church,
consisting in the true teaching of the word of God, in the due administration
of sacraments according to christ's holy institution, in the advancement and
furthering of virtue, with the beating down of sin and impiety, and in
keeking the Church in a quiet unity and good order, there is no difference of
opinion amongst us. And a little after, we affirm that no such precise and
exact form of external government of the Church by discipline, as they depaint
it out, is so much as by any example reco^mended unto us in scripture: but much
less commanded, as a continual platform for ever to be followed. In which
assertion omitting the nakedness of it, armed with no proof out of the
scripture or any good reason, let us see how it shows such gross ignorance
as is not to be lucked for in a man of his gifts, for it deleareth that he can
not distinguish between the cause, instrument and means of a thing, and the
thing it self, between government and the essential parts of government and
the fruits of it. For government Ecclesiastical, that is, the spiritual
administration of Christ by the order, and instruments of his Church which he
has ordained, is a different thing from the truth of it, which is the
advancement of virtue, the beating down and suppressing of sin and impiety,
the keeping of the Church in a unity and quiet order: which being the effect
of Christ's kingdom and his government, Esa. 31. 1. 2. 3
he makes them the essential parts of it. So that he has not learned yet
to put a difference Between the kingdom of God, and Gods righteousness
established by it, Nor between the two Math. 7.
petitions of the Lords prayer, that his kingdomr may come, and the fruit of
this, That his will may be done in earth as in heaven. Again, he grants the
essential parts of Christ's kingdom* and outward policy of the Church, but
he denies any exact form, as though there can be essential poy^tes of
outward government perpetual, and yet they shall have no perpetual form. Can
there be an outward essential thing without a form? Or can the essence be
perpetual and changeable, and the form variable and mutable: Can there be an
immutable outward government without immutable outward callinges, offices and
works: This is to give a man without members, a skin for a body without
bones and flesh. Lastly, how injurious is this unto Christ? he will acknowledge
the benefit must be had, but he will not acknowledge the hand whereby it is
given. Christ is wise enough, still to administer and rule, and that he will
give him leave to do. But y^ he is wise enough to do it by his own 1. Cor.
12. 2. 4. etc.
means, that he being The only Lord should appoint the diverse
administrations of his Church always, y^ his spirit Should minister fully
sufficient diversity of gifts: that one God should work the sufficient
diverse faculties always, That is intolerable, false, seditious, hurtful to
the estate. He can allow the people should be taught, and exhorted, and have
the Sacraments: but whether by Readers or by Teachers, by reading Homilyes, or
by Pastors, Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 6. 7.
by men or women, God his word does not define; the people must be ruled, but
whether by Governors appointed by Christ, or by men: He must 1. Cor. 12.
relieve his pore with alms, but whether by his Deacons or others: that he
must separate between the clean, Acts. 6.
and unclean cast out the wicked, but whether by his Church and Eldership Mat.
18.
or some other, must by no means be determined. As if one should say, it is
essential and perpetual, that we have our enteraunce into Christ and his
Church, our growing and nourishing in the same sealed up perpetually, but that
it shall be done only by Baptism and the Lords Supper, and not also by
confirmation that, may not be granted. Christ was wise enough, and willing
enough to ordain the effects, but not the instruments. If he say he
commanded them saying, Baptize, do this: So we say he commanded the other
saying, I have set Teachers, Governors, 1. Cor. 12. Romans 12. 6. Mat. 18.
saying, let the Doctor abide in Teaching, the Pastor in exhortation, the
Elder in ruling, the Deacon in distributing, ver. 7. 7. 8.
the Church even the Eldership to be told and to excommunicate. Lastly, it is
as if one should say, I can well allow her most excellent majesty for her
excellent wisdom, to see the commonwealth administered, justice executed,
matters rightly pleaded, and determined: but y^ this shall be don by her most
honorable counsel, by her chief justices, by her justices of peace, by her
Shiriefes and Balifes, by her Sergeants at the law, that I can not like or
allow of. As for y^ place of Tertulian, it is plain, he means it of the
discipline in the course of life, which is cha^geable, as may appear by the
testimenies alleged in the first point. His next contradiction is concerning
y^ means of living, that y^ French church would have, the rentes and revenues
delivered to the Deacons, so the minister receive his stipend, but the book of
Discipline, T. C. and the Admonition speaks earnestly against those who gape
after Church-liuings and turn it to their purses and pleasure, as Page. 197
Page. 198
though these could not stand together, that they should be delivered to the
Church only, and turned to holy use, and that it should be administered by
the Deacons: or as though the playnesse of the one in reproouing an abuse, be
contrary to the good order taken by the other. Howsoever it be, so the
Christian Magistrate see the poor cared for by the Deacons, and that they who
preach the Gospel live of the Gospel, and that the 1. Corin. 9. Proverb. 4.
Galath. 6.
Lord be thus honored with our substance, we acknowledge he does his duty
toward the Church: But if these want and the things given to that use, be
turned to the private commodity of some, there is a defect in that behalf.

But now this valiant champion will overthrow the Eldership by such weapons
as follow, for T. C. Does teach it from the Jewish Synedrion and out of the
Talmud, which according to Bonauentur and Danaeus handled civil things: which
our presbytery may not do. To which I answer that T. C. does not fet it from
ye Talmude, but from the word of God, as his whole disputation does show in
that point: only he shows that this presbytery has been continued under
the Law and under the Gospel, which is true and agreeed upon by all three
which he speaks of. It is also as falls yt Bonauenture speaks so of the
Ecclesiastical. Senate by it self, for that which Boneuen. cap. 18. fine.
Danaeus. c. 10. lib, 2. Isag. 2. part.
he noted is of the civil and politic synedrion, Cap. 13. but he makes
afterward when he handles the Ecclesiastical policy of that time besides the
priest and besides the Teachers in every Sinagogue Senetors, which inquired of
their manners: which is manifest by Exodus 4. 29. Exodus 17. 5. 2. King. cap.
6. 32. Ier. 19. 1. Ezech. 8. 1. and Neh. 8. 5. Where are Elders occupied in
Ecclesiastical matters, assistant to the Prophets and teaching Levites, and
yet distinguished from them, so as they meddled not with the Word. Danaeus in
deed says they meddled sometimes with civil administrations which ours do not,
which thing yet makes no contradiction to us, seeing we say with him, that to
ours is given by Christ Ecclesiastical authority only. But the truth is, yt
they were then plainly distinguished, some being for the 1. Chr. 27. 30 2.
Chron. 19. 8. 11.
matters of God, and some for civil causes, the matters of the king. Now, the
cause of this which Danaeus speaks of was, that in weighty matters both came
together, because the politic laws of the Jews were for the most part
defined and set down in the Word of God, they, the Priest, Levites, and
Ecclesiastical Elders, were there to pronounce the sentence Ecclesiastically:
that is, to pronounce ye sense of Gods word in yt cause: the Princes, chief of
the people, and civil Senate, were to pronounce Ciuilly and iudicially the
sentence of death, or such like according to the sense of the Scriptures.
Secondly by the causes, that when the Ecclesiastical Senate comes to the
Civil, the matters are thus mixed, as Jeremy 26. 16. But when the matter is
Civil merely, and no Question of the sense of the Scriptures, then it is of
Magistrates only: as 1. chro. 28. 1. 1. chro. 13. 1. Or when the matters were
merely Ecclesiastical, then was the Ecclesiastical Senate only brought
together, as in consultatio^. 2. king. 6. 32. As in matters to be done in the
congregation. Act. 13. 15. For Excommunication John. 9. 22. 10. 40. For
interpretation, the Priests and Levites only, Math. 24. And lastly by this,
that Peter being before both the Senates Ecclesiastical and Civil, does
plainly distinguish them, calling ye one Archontes tou laou. Presbyteroi.
the chief or rulers of Israel, the other the Elders of Israel. Wherefore this
proves not that they did exercize civil authority: and although our laws
political, are not in this respect like unto the Jews, yet if the Magistrate
will call the Eldership to declare the will of God, or pronounce duly an
Ecclesiastical sentence, when he will pronounce a Civil, it may well be done
without the confusion he speaks of. The next that he says out of Calvin, ye
Presbitries of ye Jews was from men, not from heaven is false: for Calvin says
only, since the captivity Dilecto.
it was chosen for the censure of manners, but he says also in that place that
that Dilecto.
regiment was lawful and allowed of God, and that Christ did worthily praise
the order delivered of the fathers, and that which was kept under the law
Christ sent unto us. Now the Fathers under the law, did not any of those
things and less then these, but by God his commandment, by his 2. Chr. 29.
25
Prophets: yea, this was commanded both that in every City and that for more
difficult causes at Jerusalem such Senate should be appointed. Deuteronomy. 1. 8.
9. etc. The like vntruethe is it that Musculus understood it of the whole
Congregation. for even as D. Whitgift alleged him, page 633. He says, It was
by Seniors in Ecclesiastical assembly. As untrue is the other y^ Calvin
says, Neither in Christ's time, nor 22. years after, this Christian Eldership
was established: for he says in that place, Where Christ a little after
erected his Church, the corruption being taken away, he did restore the pure
use of Excommunication: And that there is no doubt but this order of
discipline, which flourished under the kingdom of Christ, succeeded into the
place of that old, and it is plain by the Scripture as soon as there was an
ordinary set Congregation, there were Elders which joined with the Apostles in
Church-gouernment. Act. 12. 30. Acts. 15. 6. Acts. 21. 18. Neither must they
by example of the Jews have but one for a Nation only, seeing it has been
showed, such were in every City and Synagogue, Mark. 5. 22. Acts. 13. 15. Act.
18. 8. 17.
whereas if we should square it after this his pattern, we should have one only
for y^ whole Church. That he says y^ Apostles would not have executed the
deacons office al Christ's time, He bableth fables which he knowth not, for there
office in Christ's time was only to preach and baptize in Iudaea, and to be
witnesses of Mark. 3 14. Ioh 4. 2. 28. Act. 1. 21. 22.
Christ's life, doctrine, death, resurrection and ascension: That which they did
at Jerusalem, was but to take care for y^ pore, till they had fit persons and
occasion to establish the order which Christ ordained: neither did they it
only because they were withdrawn (which if they were, being so many, how much
more shall Ministers and Bishops be, if they look to these and to civil
affairs also) but also Ar^ston.
because it was not acceptable (meaning to God) thus to do, when they had by
God his blessing both such persons, place and time as he required. All the rest
of his some of words that neither father, Council, nor Scripture has left in
memory where, when or by whom it was first erected and put in practice, is
worse then nothing. For it was done of the Apostles at Jerusalem, long before
the council, as is proved out of Act. 12. 30. But this shows their
giddiness, y^ say sometime, y^ it has no testimony, either of scripture or
antiquity, and yet again, confess and allege D. Whitgifts s. book page. 651.
Ambrose, to prove that Seniors have been, and that they were extinguished
before Ambrose his time, which they will not say of Elders which minister the
Word and Sacraments, for they were not extinguished before Ambrose his time
neither yet are. Also that they say the Bishops differ, and are above other
ministers, for policy and order only, and Ibid. Page. 385.
yet make them differ in the Ministry of grace as in the sentence of
Exco^^^ucation, of Absolution, (and according to their Doctrine) of ministering
strength against temptations by confirmation: For these they make proper to the
Bishop and not common to every minister, and notwithstanding the Minister must
read the Excommunication: yet y^ word, sentence and authority does come from
the Bishop, and for Absolution it is enough to go to him or his Delegate. The
next contraryetyes agree like friends: for, both all Is not expressed in the
Scripture as the book of Discipline says, and yet all may be proved by
direct Scripture, Seeing whatsoever is necessarily collected thence, (though it
be not expressed) is directlye proved. Also the next is of as little value,
for both Ministers and Preachers, as Calvin says, may be understood, and also
governing Elders, as Beza notes. Beza on that place.
The next is an open lie, for Beza says on that place of Tim. 5. 17. Therefore
there were two sorts of Elders, When Duplices.
one sort should attend on government, the other on the Word and prayer. Of
such force is the next, for the book of Discipline agrees in judgment with M.
Cartwight, that in the place of the 1. Tim. 3. under Deacous are comprehended
both those, properly so called, and the Elders. For M. Cartwright refers him
self to that observation. Page 54. and proves it because the qualities there
set down S. rep. S. part.
are common to both, and there are none touched proper to either, and the Word
Deacons is taken in diverse places for all those Ministers which are not
occupied in the Word as Romans 12. 6. 1. Pet. 4. 11. The next is like to that of
the 14. of the Act, and so to be answered. Also one may gather The Eldership
out of the. 1. Cor. 12 (For of the 14. none does) and out of the other places
both, unless he be so learned in divinity yt he think diverse places cannot
prove one thing. His other cauil is not worth a rush: for in one respect
Deacons signifying sometime all Ministries not occupied in the Word, may be a
Genus or general to Elders and Deacons so called. Also the name Bishop being
generally given of their work of watching or our-seeing Act. 20. unto Elders,
may be common both to ministers and governing Elders, which disagreeth not with
this that Elders be teaching and vnteaching. It is true also which is observed
by the book of Discipline, that the name of Elders is not given to those
Deacons which are distributers, and his written book may be ouer-seene in so
small a thing as that. And so having seen his watr^sh objections let us see
how his side, being drunk with the thirst of honor, do contrary them selves
in one and the same point. For when the place of the Ephesians is brought
against an Arrchb. as numbering up all the Ministries of the Word, and yet
leaving out that, the answer is, it is not D. Whitg. s. book. Page. 309.
perfect, for Deacons are left out: and in the next page, that he speaks
only of the ministers of the word in the place of the Ephesians. And again in
the place of the 1. Ibid.
Cor. ^2. The Apostle leaves out Euangellu^s, and yet in the next page, out of
doubt the division of the Apostle there is perfect, And yet again. page 317. It
is perfect. Here note that to say, It is not perfect, it is perfect, it is
not perfect, of one and the same place, and in the same respect are evidently
contrary. There is no contradiction between this which is Page. 203.
said, that Bishops livings, etc, be turned to maintain the ministry, and yet
that noble men being Elders have no maintenance of the Church, I can find no
such thing in the sixth Art. of French discipline, and if there were, their
meaning is, yt they may not exercize any dominion or cheefedome over the
Deacons. Neither is it any disorder if in an Ecclesiastical Senate and in the
church, the minister be preferred before his Lord, to conceive prayer, to
propound matters: For it is not absurd for one to be superior and inferior in
diverse respects: the Father inferioure to the Son, which is above him in
delivering the Word. The first place out of Simler is not greatly material,
if they choose some elder to moderate, though it belong unto the Pastor, yet
it proves not, but that he is Superior in opening the Word unto them in
chose matters which are debated. The next though it be a geeate blemishe and
mayme, not to have an Ecclesiastical Presoyterye: yet it inforceth no
contradiction, seeing that can-not be the Presbyterye spoken of in the
scripture, where by his own interpretation ministers are understood. His
conclusion which he would infer out of the Discipline of France, that
because Magistrates are of the consistory, and to be directed by the Pastor,
therefore they would raunge Princes with their Seniours, is diversely vain.
For first it is no reason, seeing the Prince may be subject to the Ministry
of the Pastor and Elders, and yet never Subject or inferior to their persons.
Secondlye, it is manifest by their conditions, that they meant not the supreme
Magistrates when they say: If one shall not hinder the exercise of the other,
Which must needs be in Princes, considering their multitude of affairs. In
the Book of the Page. 205. 206.
Soldier of Barwicke, If their be any vnreuerent speech, we allow it not:
yet if any Prince will do any thing without Gods warrant in Church Matters,
It must not be obeyed, otherwise whatsoever is beyond this, we condemn as
indiscreet. In the next, that he might make the Discipline enemy to Princes,
he turns up again that which sober men long ago have left and consented
unto. The first is, that we would have the Ecclesiastical Senate to administer
Ecclesiastical matters. Would not Jehosephat also have the Priests 1 Chro. 19.
and Leuits to administer the matters of God? And what has he brought of our
books, which is not as fully set down by those reverent men of God, B. lewell
and M. Nowell. Seeing they say, as long as Defense of the Apol. 6. part. Chapter
11. deuis. 11. and 12. Chapter deuis. 4. M. Nowel. tom. 2. part 35. 38.
the Ministers be Godly and learned, it is necessary they should deside these
matters: that the Prince is commanded to have recourse unto them in doubtful
matters, that it belongs to the Bishops office, to decide of such causes: but
Christian Princes have rather to do with these matters, then ignorant and
wicked Priests and that in case of necessitye the Prince ought to provide for
convenient remedy. As for his slander that we agree with the Papists to give
Christian Princes power of fact, but not of Law and authority to promote and
set forward, not to intermeddle in causes Ecclesiastical. We esteem it no
more then a foul untruth, which every, man of judgment can convince For if
they have authority in our judgment by the Word of GOD, to see to their
Ministrye, and to cause them to make such Laws, as they know agreeable to
Gods Word: to authorize such, and disanull the contrary: cause them to make
good, when they would make ill: or orderlye to procure such as can and will
be present in the action, and give their consent if it please them, (all which
are given by T. C. b. second. p. 167.
and by us all unto the Magystrate,) then do we grant them no more then
power of fact? then to promote matters? And in speakinge against us herein,
does he not direct him self against the very Laws, and orders of the
Church? Which is, that the Conuocation-house do make Ecclesiastical Laws:
and if they be good, the Queen gives her royal assent, and then they must
be obeyed; if not, then that they are no Law? His second point whereby he
would make us odious, is, that we think the Prince may be Subject to
Excommunication, that is, that he is a Brother. Deutr. 17. 15. Math. 18. 15.
that he is not without but within the Church. 1. Corinthians. 5. 12. 13. If this
be dangerous, why is it printed and allowed in the famous writings of Byshope
Jewel: in that the Priest does his Def. apol. part 6. Page. 720.
office, when he excommunicateth and cutteth off a dead member from the body:
so far forth the Prince, be he never so mighty is inferior to him: yea,
not only to a Bishop, but to a simple Priest? Why is it suffered which
Master Nowell has Tom. 2. fol. 53.
written: The Prince ought patiently to abide Excommunication at the Bishops
hands? Why are not the examples of Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 14. Theod. 5, 18.
worthy Emperors rased out of the Hystories, seeing they have been subject to
this censure? Why did the reverend Father, B. of L. reckon up such examples not
long since at Paul's Cross? The next cavil is not worth the answer: for
they of France may call whomsoever they think good, to give them light in any
Question, and therefore much more professors of Divinity. So is the next, for
both they and Bullinger, may make teaching generally incident to the Pastors
office, for so it is common both to Pastor and Doctor; yet to apply his
special gift and labor that way, may be proper to the teacher or Doctor, as
is proved in the treatize of that point before. The Book of Bertram I have
not, neither is it material if he differ from truth in some point, thorough
humane infirmity: For they them selves say, they condemn the error of those,
who say that Children are damned, D. Whit. b. s. page, 52
which dye without Baptism as much as we, and yet is it written of their
side, that want of Baptism is a probable sign of reprobation: When as we say
it is no sign at al of reiectio^. This opponing of y^ Admonition and Bertram,
and ye Church of France, is ridiculous. For though they say that Ministers,
Elders, and Deacons, are for Church discipline (whereby discipline they mean ye
order of ye Church Page. 7. 8.
generally) yet in the government of the Presbytery they join only the Elders
with the Ministers, and to the Deacons they give nothing, but the care for the
poor and to give advise as the French Churches say, is not only granted to
Deacons, but unto all, as ^u^re occasion shall serve. Concerning the difference
of widows, T. C. says. Where the conditions fall out, which are set down in
1. Tim. ^. there they ought according to that rule to be established. Wherein he
agrees with Daneus: and the book of Discipline does not deny but that where
there are such women and causes, they may, and ought to be so found of the
Church, and are to serve the Church, in such service as they shall put them to,
only he finds no one peculier and proper service whereunto they are tied,
but are to be employed by the Deacons, under whom they are contained, and in
all this there is no difference worth the speaking of, much less
contradiction. In the next, ye question is only of a circumstance how long they
should continue: wherein if Berna differ somewhat from us, what is that unto the
matter in hand? what hurt to the substance of the cause? The next objection
does answer it self, that as they used them then in some respects, as the
Deacon, to Catechize, and such like, which they thought the straightes of the
Church drove them unto: ^o otherwise for their office we do see they do in
their confession acknowledge, That the church must he governed with the
policy, which Harm. confess. Gal. confess. page. 53 art. 30 La confirmation de
La Discipline ecclesiastique obseruee, es eglises reformees du Royaulme du
France page. 7.
Christ has ordained: and that the offices of elders, and Deacons are part of
that policy. Also yt it is a part of his Gospel, and is confirmed to (be
perpetual to have such a government) in their public writing to y^ end. As
fond is the next out of Daneus, which declares, that although the Churches
after the Apostles, chose the Elders and Deacons to be perpetual: yet it also
says there is no such thing defined of in the Scriptures, which proves, that
it is a circumstaunce which may be altered according to the estate of the
Church. In the next he quoteth Bucer as repugnaunt to T. C. but names no place
where we shall find it. Daneus does not contrary him, but acknowledging it
the order of God, does only show what was done in small churches, adjoined to
the great and populous, there being sufficient persons in the one, which were
not at the first in the other, notwithstanding the Apostles ordained it Church
by Church Acts 14. And every Church must have them to send for, Jam. 5. and
the causes of them Neh. 8. 1. These. 5. Romans 12.
which are to be assistaunt to the Pastor, to administer the ecclesiastical
censures, to watch over the people and admonish them, are a like every where.
Now if the Churches be too little, the bodies of several congregations ought
so to be ordered, Romans 12. 5. 6 7. 1, Co. 12. Esaias. 62. 8.
as they may have all the members which Christ has set, for the perfection and
beauty af his body: upon all the walls of Jerusalem there must be watchmen,
and upon Every habitation of mount Syon, Esaias. 4. 5. 6.
upon her meetinges and Congregations, there must be this presence of God, as
a cloud by day, and a fire by night: For look what places they can bring for
the perpetuity, and for the right of every Church for a Pastor: The same or
like may be brought for the Elder. Whereof it comes* that Ignatius said, as
he is alleged before, No Church can stand without her Eldership. And
Justinius made his apology, wherein this Eldership is mentioned for all
Churches. Wherefore, whatsoever Daneus grant was done for a time, till the
Churches might conuenientlye be brought to a convenient stature, neither
being too high nor too short, and to be beautiful bodies, neither wanting a
member, nor having one too much, that must not prejudice the institution of
Christ: which Daneus confesses, When Part. 2. Isag. lib. 2. c. 10. page. 191.
192.
he says they must look to the Church, house by house, and publicly also, to
the whole and to the sick. Of two Consistories in a city it may be he has
read of, but in one particular Church, of two Ecclesiastical Senates, I will
then believe it, when he brings us a more certain direction, then yet he
has done to find it: and if they did, seeing the inconveniences (as he
says) bring it to the right order: what preiudise is that to the truth? In
the next point of counsels, there is no contrariety between the admonition,
and the French Churches order: For they say they may definitiuely define causes
in a prouintiall Synod, (although I can not find those words by his
quotation): And the admonition says so, except there be a general counsel,
and they will have it there. For there is no reason if they will order it fitly
at hoam, to carry it to a general counsel. And I pray are these two so
contrary? They may end it, and they may end it, except they think it better
to refer it to a general counsel. In passing from this difference to the
next, he sets peremptorily, that it is manifest, that there is no certain
form of electing Ecclesiastical officers used by the Apostles, but reason he
shows none whereby it may appear: So that if his Doctorship say it, we
must take it from him as undoubtedly, as if he had it by revelation. For
confutation of which folly, we may say thus much: That seeing in the Ministers,
examination is to be had, of knowledge, of doctrine, of ripe nesse to expound
the Scriptures, and in a word of aptnes to teach; it is manifest, that as the
governing of this action belongs to the Eldership, and is to be done with
public prayers, that besides Acts. 14.
the governing Elders there must be ministers, who may be able thoroughly to
judge and examine, to conceive public prayer, and to deliver to the Church by
doctrine, exhortation, whatsoever is expedient in this case. Which thing is
evident, not only by the perpetual reason of it, but also by the constant and
unchangeable practice of the Apostles, in the first of the Acts, in the sixth
of the Acts, in the 14. in the 1. Tim. 3. of Tit. 1. Only it is to be noted,
that it is not committed to one, no not so much as to 1. Tim. 4.
ordain, much less to elect, but the ordination is by the Eldership. And
Timothy could not carry the matter away, but had a charge for his own part, To
keep himself pure, and not to communicate 1. Tim. 5.
with other men's sins whatsoever other Elders did in this case. Now, as this
order is certain and unvariable, both in the reason and practice of it: so the
circumstaunces, whether it shall be by 6. or by 7. Ministers: by a conference
only, or by a synod (saving where it may be, the more the better) is left to
the disposition of the church. Wherefore it is not only without reason, but
also sense, and contrary to his professed knowledge, to proclayme war amongst
the Churches for this matter of circumstaunce, when they all have the
substance, agreed upon in Gods word, and do not tie themselves or others
to the particular circumstaunces. It is also as absurd, that he sets down
as a contrariety to the election of the Elders and people, that they allowed
the Officers chosen by the Consistorye, or by voices of the people, or by one
Minister, as though that were derogatory to a right order, to ratify that by
good authority, which was at the first imperfectly done. Yet that is most
absurd which he does obtect against the author of the Abstract, as though he
were contrary to Page. 211.
this order, because he would have the people give their consent, seeing as
has been showed these may not only agree, but ought unseperably to be joined
together in Church-lections. For if either by silence, or otherwise they
signify their consent, and the election be not made, but sufficient
deliberation be given them to show just causes of their Page. 212.
dislyke, or gladly to accept them: It is all one, as has been proved in the
treatise to that purpose. In the next objection he must first prove, that we
dissent before he have an answer for to have it done by the Consistorye, and
to adioyne a conference are not contrary. The next is answered in the treatise
of the election of Church Officers. The next is an untruth. For the
confirmation De la dis. Eccles. shows, that the people give their consent and
approbation, according to the 14. of the Acts. Page. 233. The next we take but
for a poor cauil, grounded (unless he make it appear which he speaks of
some which hold it lawful to pick a quarrel and leave the ministry) upon a
slander. In deed if at one man's pleasure for truths sake, they be put out, to
seek an honest way to live is not unlawful, nor contrary to the decree of
the French Churches, that they be chosen to be Ministers their whole life,
unless they be discharged lawfully, unto which decree all agree. The next of
depositions receives the same answer which the elections do: for the
authority which electeth, must be that which deposes, and the Discipline of
France means no otherwise: And of Excommunication, there is the like
judgment. The Author of the Abstract can best expound his meaning, and his
words bear no such collection as he gathers. For in saying the Minister may
do it, and that by Law in his charge, as well as the Bishop in his Diocese: He
does not authorize the Bishop to do it alone, but with due consent to whom
it does appertain. In the next, when he shows who that some be, which
make decision of controversies incident to every Presbytery, otherwise then if
they can with contentation agree of the truth amongst themselves: we will give
his answer to it: In the mean time we judge of it as of the rest: that it
is, untrue. The like of the two other (excepting Brown, for whom he has his
answer) and of the next about Godfathers. Concerning the next point, the
which he says of the Churches of France, that they think it lawful to
baptize without an assembly: I can not believe it, unless I have better
direction then the 7. article of their Discipline, in which I can find no such
thing, though I find some other articles there, which he has aledged thence:
wherefore I fear that it is a fiction. Concerning Holy Days, let him first
show, that the Churches observe them in manner of a Sabbath, wholly to rest from
their labor, and then T. C. with his reasons, or the churches with theirs,
must give place to the truth. The diversity about popish Priests is answered
before in the tretise of that matter. The next are but slanders, to which he
gives no credit by any testimonye, and are confuted before in the treatise
of the Doctor. It is also a manifest untruth, that T. C. mislyketh wholly That
any are suffered to preach nor having a Pastoral charge. For he speaks
generally of such as have no charge, neither Pastoral, nor Doctorall. For he
would have both tied to a certain place, yea the Elders Preaching in other
men's cures or charges, whereunto men are not lawfully called, we condemn
according to the judgment of the French Churches neither does he note any where
we might find the contrary. In ordaining of ceremonies, the admonition
means no otherwise than the French Churches: for though the Eldershippe
abollishe those which are unprofitable, yet it may be don with consent and
alowance of other Churches; for which cause he entreats of conferences page.
30. 31. etc. That he says of the admonition, as though they misliked a
prescript form of prayer, is an utter untruth, for there are not any words
which show they mislike a prescript form of prayers. As for unleavened bread,
it is but proper to Geneua only, and now our Church has allowed the other: why
should he then make any difference or strife about it? The matters of marriage
or such like here named, as they are handled with us are civil; but as they
become doubtful in any question of God his word, or what is expedient for the
Church to do, for avoiding of offense, belongs unto the Ecclesiastical
seigniorie: and so that difference is aunsweared. In the other also it is
defended, as unlawful for a Minister of the Word, to be occupied in Civil
affairs. Against this, he in vain brings an exception in Elders, which
rule only. Neither is it simplye a Civil thing to give testimonies in
writings for to do it, for matters Ecclesiastical: as for soundness of
faith, for assuring them to be received which were excommunicate, or such like,
it is an Ecclesiastical, not a Civil action. Touching the order of the French
Church, for publishing of Books, we consent, that where the Discipline is
established and an order taken, that men with modesly in a Synod may be
sufficiently heard, and satisfied, that it ought to be in force, and as an
Eeclesiasticall order obeyed; from which yet a man may swerve, being driven to
give defense to the truth of God. The next sets his conceits in the laughter
of all men. For may we not mislyke, that he which ordayneth, should bydde the
ordained, receive the holy Ghost, which he can not give, nor has promise
that his imposition of hands shall distribute auye gifts, and yet allow that
that place for instruction be repeated and intreased of? Concerning his long
srory of subscription, this may be sufficient shortly to answer, both to show
our ^uitye in judgment with the Churches, and also to satisfy the Church of
England. First therefore we say, that we have always been ready, according
to our duty to subscribe to her Majesty's supreme authority, and to the
Articles of religion, concerning the doctrine of faith and of the Sacraments,
which is all that is required by law. Secondly, when (as it is in France) the
substance of Discipline shall be out of the word confirmed, and the
controversies between us equally and orderly decided: We will also be bound
to subscribe as they are. His first quotation out of the Adm. does set down
that in a different letter, which is not there to be found. Which practice is
done only to disgrace us vnius^ly with the Magistrate. The other two
sentences, though we judge them somewhat hardly set down, yet they must be
charitably interpreted, according to the course of their Book; the first of
the truth of Discipline, not of doctrine, the other of Ministers, so called
and enabled as God his word does allow. The rest is worth no answer, the
matter being handled before, and On the Act. 1. and 6
Gualter being a party with you against M. Jewel and M. Nowel in that point,
though against you in the question of Church election. Now, in stead of this
heap of disagreementes which are at one with them selves, let him accord
these following, drawn from the writers D. Whitg. s. book. Page. 146.
who are of his judgment. No man for any crime is to be secluded from any law
fall vocation, if he repent him and become a new man, and there be no general
commandments contrary hereunto: But this doctrine is consonant to the whole
course of the Gospel, Yet we all hold that Traitors are not to be admitted
Bishops, or of the Queens Guarde. They maintain this speech of Ambrose Ibid.
page 191.
on the 4. of the Ephesians. In the beginning it was permitted to every one to
preach the Gospel, baptize and expound the Scriptures; but when the Church was
enlarged, certain Parishioners were appointed, and goucrnors, and other
officers ordained in the Church. Yet now Ministers may not preach without a
lisence. It is defended by the former Book, that The word of God is as
effectual when it is read, as when it is preached, and reading is preaching,
yet the Book of Common Prayer prefers Preaching before Homilies. And
himself says, that Preaching is the most excellent means to engender faith.
This man condemns and rejects Doctors as new, yet the former book Page
425. says, that by ancient writers. A Catechistes office was necessary in
the Church, and distinct from the Pastor. The same book fol. 700. in the
marginall note has, Nothing ought to be read under the name of Scripture but
the Canonical, In the rubric how the rest of holy scripture. etc. Jewel
apol. p. 2. p. 122.
Contrary to the book of Common prayer which appoynteth the Apocripha to be
read under the name of holy scripture. Jewel says, that for one bishop to
have authority over an other, is neither by Christ, Peter, nor Paul, nor by
any right of God his word. Yet they do by preaching and writing still maintain
it by the examples of Peter, Timothy, and Titus. In the answer to the
authority of Peter Martyr, it is said that in our Church D. whit. in the end.
religion is only reformed to the quick. But the examiner says, they see
weightyer things in the Church, whereat they may Page. 35.
be grieved as other good men are. Now we come to his questions, which although
Questions.
they he captious, and therefore by law they are not to be aunsweared: yet to
show our sincerity in that which we hold, we will make him an answer. To
the first we say, Discipline, touching 1
the substance, is fully described out of the word of God, in the book of
discipline, and the treatise of ecclesiastical government, and in the most of
the soundest writers of our time. The second is 2
answered, partly by the former, and partly by this treatise. In steed of this
we ask him what be y^ writings which have confuted by the scripture, all those
foresaid godly and learned writings? To the third 3
we answer, it is no sound divinity to exclude Christian Princes from their
government in Church Matters. Concerning Excommunication he has his answer
before. To the two other clawses, let the Papists answer, for they are
maliciously imputed unto us. And we demand of him, whether it be sound
divinity, that when the Prince will eat flesh in Lent or do such like, she
must have a Dispensation from an Archbishop? And that the writes of his Courts
even in causes civil, and matters of instaunce should be in his own name, and
not in the name of her most excellent Majesty? The fourth is answered in the
Treatise of the Eldership: And we ask 4
of him what pregnant proof he has either from scripture or Father, that
Ecclesiastical Government should be exercised in a wholle Diocese, by a
Chancellor or Commissarye being a mere layman? To the 5. and 6. both, we 5.
6.
answer: That rebaptization is condemned by the Word of God, and that those
he speaks of be married folks: And we require him to prove by the Word of
God, that in case of the necessity which they pretend, a Woman may baptize: And
to prove by the same that men may be forbidden to mary in Lent or such like
times. The seventh 7
is answered in that to the 5. and 6. And we demand of him how they can
prove it lawful to admit a Popish priest, fallen from the Gospel and still
unapt to teach? To the eight we answer, 8
there is the like reason of the Supper and of Baptism: And we require him to
prove by the Word of God, that a Deacon may baptize? and when he has proved
that, let him prove why he may not minister the Supper also? To the ninth we
answer, that to 9
the Ministers, there may be diversity of rewards given, so long as none have
to little, nor any too much. And we require him to prove by the Word of God,
that a Minister of the Gospel may carry the pomp of men of estate. To the 10
tenth we answer, as is set down in the Treatise, that a Minister should be
apt to teach: We would have him prove that any other may preach, who is not
apt to teach. To the Eleventh we answer 11
affirmatively, and require him to prove by the Scriptures, that an Archbishop
may put Preachers to silence, for not subscribing to that which is not required
by the law. To the twelfth 12
we answer: it is not lawful for one to be thrust out of his Ministry, for
showing modestly in his sermons, the inconvenience of unleavened bread in the
Lords Supper: that all usury as we speak it, whither biting or nibbling is
unlawful. And we require of him to prove by the Word of God, that it is
tolerable to suffer Drunkardes, whoremongers, ignorant men of occupation in
the Ministry, and for not subscribing (where Law does not enforce it) or for
the not using of some ceremony to turn out godly learned Ministers. And make
a pitiful separation of the Pastor and the flock. The Lord give us to be of
one mind, and wherein we agree, let us proceed by the rule of love.

FINIS.

