A TREATISE AGAINST THE Necessary Dependence upon that One Head, and the
present Reconciliation to the Church of ROME. TOGETHER WITH CERTAIN Sermons
preached in public assemblies,VIDELICET 1. The want of Discipline. 2. The
possession of a King. 3. The tumults of the people. 4. The mock of Reputation.
5. The necessity of the Passion. 6. The wisdom of the rich.


By Roger Fenton Doctor of Divinity, late Preacher of GRAIES INN.

Aug Ser. 12. in Not. Dom. Caput vestrum peperit Maria, nos Ecclesia.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of ENGLAND, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THere are many controversies in the Church: every one thinks he is in the
Tower of Sion. Some that conceive themselves to be inspired with the rushing
wind, would have the Church, like that Spirit, to be invisible: Some are so
pure, that they would have it where it was first: Some imagine a Church to
reside upon their wit: Some will have it in any place, where there is no Room;
and some the greater or more bend all their wits to Rome, and to one Head in
that Church, like the (...) of Pythagoras, or Aristotle's Primum, that must be
a Monarke by Power, not by Gifts, by Multitude, not by Truth; That must
suppress Schisms, and determine Faith. Their cry is great, The Roes and
Hindes of the field do stand aghast upon the opening of every Romish hound,
Cant. 2 7.
The Consonants which speak for this only Supremacy, as their superior
Vowels bid them, and which cause men of tender consciences to make head they
know not whither. Others, either of no Religion, or such as would have an exact
Religion in an Idaea, stand by and receive none till all be agreed. But if we
listen to the Canonists, as the Heathen made Terminus a God, and such a God
that would not yield to Jupiter; so the Bishop of Rome must be the end unto
which all divisions in Religion, wheresoever discussed, must be reduced, from
whom it is not lawful to appeal to GOD.

Many there are that follow him, we may take up a Fathers complaint, many
which we may fly, none which we may follow; which flicker aloof; and suffer
him to fly with his wings of unlimited authority, without a Quid iure posset,
Quid charitate debet, and like an Eagle not in Rome, but in the world to fly
alone. Emperors before were Lions; but now in the mystery of Sampsons Riddle,
mortified by Christ, are become Nursing Fathers, and no Lions. The Bishops of
Rome were Nursing Fathers, now they are Lions, that range alone, that will
brook no equality, either with man, or with the world, or with the Scripture,
or with any power, but God.

So though God has broken down the walls of the old Jerusalem, like the banks
of Paradise, and has let out the rivers of the Church to take their names from
the Countries through which they pass, yet he has made enclosure again,
and will have all to lose their name in him, as the great Sea.

Thanks be unto God, that one of the other side of the bank was lately
driven over the waters of Meribah and Separation, by the Spirit of God, as by a
gentle gale of wind, and is now united unto us in a commerce of Religion,
Mirante Roma, gaudente Ecclesia, The Church ingeminating the name of ANTONIUS
of SPALATO, as they did VICTORINVS of ROME, Aug. confess. 8.2.
converted to public profession by Simplicianus. In Saint BERNARDS time it was
A voce tonitrui tui formidantes. The Pope spoke then something like the voice
of God, but now he roares only in a Bull, and we hope ere long all EVROPE
will sit upon him as a beast, when they shall see such great Masters of the
flock forsake him.

The Author of this Treatise has not confuted every objected Scripture: Like
Turkish Arras no large Imagerie is drawn; but in four knots has folded all
the color which is pretended for the dependence upon Rome. An obscure
resemblance of him, yet his. Sed cuius haec imago est? It is the Posthumus of
Doctor FENTON, adorned with no other garments then he left it, not so properly
his Image, but his Similitude, in which there are the true lineaments that
express the proportion of his former works, though not lived with those fresh
colors, yet his without addition or correction. One there was it seems of the
Tribe of Dan, something a kin to the borderers in the North, that after his
death bit his book of Usury by the heal, Genesis 49.17
and drew his arguments as Cacus did the cattle of Hercules, backward, Ne qua
forent pedibus vestigia rectis; whose impudency was dashed before it had scarce
looked abroad, by that watchful and true Evangelical Bishop the Diocesan of
London.

It may be those that Gossip into other men's labors only for news, will
dandle this a little in their hands, to see whether it be like the father, or
no: Nazianz. in pacie. 2.
(...), not to judge, but to deprave it. And who will deprave that judgment of
his, which was admired of every side; even of those which in regard of our
present government, have their opinions slipped a little out of joint? If there
be any, the naked innocence without affectation, and the natural majesty of
the style, like a Master Be without a sting, will defend it. But as his book
against Usury had a Patron, so next to him not in desire as Adam was to God,
nor in conceit as Nebuchadnezzar, nor in voice only as Herod, but in
integrity, and honor, and judgment, is this poor model dedicated.

And now we are sure, that since God has separated your light from darkness,
Genesis 1.4.
and drawn the Curtain to discover those secret excellencies lodging within
you, which because of some interpositions had not their full Epiphanie to the
world, you will clear his cause and ours, both concerning Maintenance and
Countenance: Not being of those which have broild the Clergy with disgraces
and slaueries, Ier. 52.13. Gregor past. cur. 3. part. cap. 20.
as Nebuzaradan according to Saint GREGORY'S sense, did burn the Temple, but
keep the gold; some alas, which have kept Justice, but loved it not, whose
prosperity, cum arrisit, irrisit, made them fools that thought us no better,
or else our pleas had never been laughed out of the Court with a plus facetiae
quam iustitiae, Ber. de consid. 3.2.
nor these that were oppressed had lift up their weeping eyes to behold how
Justice was become blind, as the Poets picture Love, with which it was grown
too familiar. But to your Honor, which did ever commiserate our humility, and
relieve our miseries, and reverence our calling, and patronize our labors, do
I presume to present this book, which may be bold to offer prayers to God for
your preservation here, and your exaltation in the life of glory.

Your Honors and the Churches servant, Emmanuel Vtie.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader:
IT was the old, and is the common excuse for the penning of books which
march forth into the world like the Tribe of Gad in multitudes, Genesis 30.11.
Christi charitas, amicorum necessitas: I need not make an Apology, because I
am not the Author but a Compiler of the Treatise, and so it must be respected,
not what I am, but what I have: It had been better for me to have watched with
Moses in the Mount, with Elias in the Desert, with Samuel in the Tabernacle in
some celestial contemplations and holy whisperings with God, Exodus 9.9
then have added any volumes to the number of which the world is as full, as
the hand of the Prophet was of ashes, that now are dispersed before the face of
God, to blister the reputation of the best men. In this boiling age of ours, in
which every servile Gehezi that has but made a Prophets bed, will lift up
himself to be seen, though in a scab.

As there were no Hang-men among the Jews, because every one was an
Executioner; so we cannot indigitate one Censurer in the world, because there
are so many: Therefore sine me liberibis in orbem. If this book will avoid the
fangs of censurers, it must as the Apostle speaks of Community with
Fornicators and Drunkards, 1 Cor. 5.11.
(to such as would be Hermits, or sup up water-grewell with Daniel by
themselves) Go out of the world: But I think, as there may be a secret
dispensation for the one, so there may be a public Expectation of the other:
Chrysostom. in loc. ad Corinth.
And so it was especially of some sweet natured Gentle men of the new world,
which were twisted to him entirely and privately like bowels, and qui cum
auulsa sint viscera sentiebant, and cum occidit ille, succidit illos: some I
mean of those in Grayes Inn, whose hearts bled thorough their eyes when they
saw him dead, desired they might have something of his to live after them, a
monument of his heavenly and secret raptures, which did mortify him to the
world: a good reason that he that was dead unto the world while he lived,
should live to all posterities after he be dead: which had been erected
before, if my pen had been as nimble as their desire, or if preaching so
necessarily imposed, and so often expected, had permitted me: But blame me not
for my slownesse to satisfy the expectation of men, since Mary took such a
pawse to answer the salutation of the Angel. Luc. 1.29


For admiration I beg not, we admire commonly nothing but that which is most
great or most ancient. This is new and little, yet as the twelve loaves of
shewbread set upon the altar seven days, Leu. 24.6
to desire God to provide sustenance for the twelve Tribes, are now united
together in one petition of the Lords prayer, panem nostrum quotidianum da
nobis, so there is the substance of some greater volumes comprised in one
demand.

My suite is (Gentle Reader) that thou will love it at the least for his sake,
which if he had lived longer would have reuiewed and renewed it: but indeed as
S. Augustine reports, that his great Grand-sires glass was of more duration,
then three or four men's ages, so we know to our grief, that many spiders
webs which are only Hangers on some Pillar in the Church, Gal. 2.9.
have lasted longer then the life of that man, who was of such great
sufficiency and so little continuance: come not therefore with preiudication,
either of the matter of the person, like these smoking flaxes, which have
neither the clear light of knowledge, nor the true heat of charity, impute not
the errors of the letter to the Author: Take not the cuttings and shreds of
the book, but reuolue it unto the end, and God bless thee with it:

Chigwell this 18. of April. Thy true friend in the Lord, Emmanuel Vtie.

A TREATISE AGAINST THE NECESSARY Dependence upon that one head of ROME, and
the present reconciliation to that CHVRCH.
TRACT. I.
MATTHEW. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church.


WE have been wandering sometimes in strange-paths like Noes dove out of the
Arc, and found no resting place, neither among the Jews, nor Graecians, nor
Mahumetans; the first working upon Scripture, the second by Reason, the third,
by neither Scripture nor Reason but by mere cruelty: We are at the last come
to our Rock whereon we may safely build and repose our souls.

They all confess there is a Rock, but have not yet found it, and though all
oppose this, yet can they not show any other: the Jews say, there is one to
come, but cannot tell when he will come: the Gentiles by the light of reason
have prepared the way in four points; for so much light they have as will
condemn them for denying CHRIST.



By the desire of perfect knowledge which here cannot be had. By the capacity
of the soul, which nothing will satisfy but that which is infinite. By the
extraordinary fear of judgment, in guilty consciences, which is a divine
Judge. By the desire of immortality, which being general is natural, and
therefore cannot be frustrate. By Heroical spirits which aspire higher then a
bodily desire can do, and that by the very thought of immortality. If a beast
could think of reason, a beast were reasonable, if of immortality, immortal,
and therefore by these we may gather that the soul is immortal.


Pudor himinis, and timor numinis, The shame of man, and the fear of God made
them confess, that he created the soul in far better estate then now it
is: Their Sacrifices show it, and their ordinary Queries: why are the feet so
ready to run at the command of the soul, and the affections so slow when
reason commands them? whether the soul has more reason to complain of the
body or the body of the soul? but they conclude that Beasts keep their kind
better then their Masters.

aim at it, De ciuit. lib. 10.32.
and therefore excellently speaks Augustine, De universally via animae
liberandae quam Porphirius male quaerendo non reperit: That great Philosopher
Porphirius, and that great adversary of the Christian Faith under Dioclesian
does confess, he could not find it discovered in any sect of Philosophers,
nor amongst the Indians by the Gymnosophists, nor amongst the Caldeans. No
Saint Augustine, nor ever shall, until they come to Ego sum via, vita and
veritas; Via Regia, via sacra: Abraham came out of Chaldea, so must they out of
their Sects, before they come to these two things set down in the Text.

The Foundation, The Rock. The Building, The Church.
Verse 17.
The Rock imports first a foundation, and the surest, upon which the rest of
the grunsels, are laid: what this Rock is, points to the premises, to that
Rock which Peter discovered before, and laid hold on, that rock which flesh
and blood had not revealed unto him, but the father, in the 17. verse. As thou
art Peter, which signfies a Rock, so upon this Rock, which thou have
discovered, Lib. 6. de Trinit. Lib. 61 9. in Luc. Hom. 55. in Matthew. Vlt.
Tract. in Ioh. Sermon. 3. de verb. Retra. 1.21.
will I build my Church: So says Hillary, Super hanc confessionis petram
Ecclesiae aedificatio est: So Ambrose, Fundamentum Ecclesiae sides est: So
Chrysostom, (...), upon faith and confession: So Augustine, Super hanc petram
quam confessus es, edificabo Ecclesiam meam, And in another place, De verb.
Dom. And in his Retractations he confesses, that he has expounded it of Peter
in some places, and recals it. Christ the son of the living God is the ground,
besides which none other can be laid: Or that Christ is the son of the
living God, is the first ground of truth, whereupon the Church is built up in
faith, and knowledge of that rock which is permanent, we say, the first
ground and principle of Christianity, whereupon the rest of the gruncels and
articles of Christian faith are laid, and out of which the other are derived.

The Logicians make a question which is the first principle in reason, whether
one or many? but this is the first in faith and the very rock of all. Lue 17.6.
In the 17. of Luke ver. 6. The kingdom of God is compared to a seed, The
least of all seeds, and to one grain of that seed; for as our articles are
not many: so are they contained in one which is the first, and that this is
mole minimum, but virtute maximum, it is clear, for in it as a seed the rest
are contained.

If then we be settled in our hearts: There is a possibility of rest, and a
facility of believing the rest that follows.

If that man Christ was the image of his father, by whom all things were made,
he might easily preserve his mothers virginity, and so be borne of a virgin.

If we believe that this man was true God, then we may as easily believe that
he was able to suffer the Jews to crucify, kill, bury his body, and raise it
up again by the power of his divinity; if Christ by whom all things were made
of nothing, be able to govern, then is he able to rectify and restore all by
the resurrection of the body to eternal life.

This was first revealed by the Angel at his conception. He shall be called
the son of the most high. Luc. 1.32.


2. Installed the Head of the Church at his Baptism, This ground was first
revealed, Mat. 3.17.
not by an Angel, but by his own father, Matthew. 3.17. and when John Baptist
was to bear witness, Ioh. 1.34.
Ioh. 1.34. I saw and bear record that this is the son of God.

3. When he was about to go out of the world at his transfiguration, Mat.
17.5.
This is my beloved son, hear him: This is the ground of all, that the
beloved Disciple makes so much of in his Epistle, 1 Ioh. 4.15.
1. Ioh. 4.15 Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him
dwells God: and 1. Ioh. 5.5. Who is he that ouercomes the world, 1 Ioh. 5.5.
but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God: he has gotten here
this very seed and ground of all.

4. Here the rock is revealed to Peter from heaven, expressed by Peter's
confession: Therefore they that believed Christ did first lay hold on this.

Nathanael in the first of John, Ioh. 1.49.
Rabbi thou art the son of God. The Centurion at his death, in the 27. of
Matthew; Mat. 27.54
Doubtless this is the son of God: Therefore this is the first spark of
Christian faith that falls into the heart.

5. Did Christ tell Peter, this Rock? Let us then see upon what rock Peter
built, for he was a master builder. Look the last Catholic Epistle, the
first Chapter, 2 Pet. 1.14.
and the foureteenth verse. Seeing I know the time of my departure is at hand,
I must lay down this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed
me. Verse 15.Verse 15.
I will endeavor therefore alwaeyes, that I may be able to have remembrance
of these things after my departing. How endeavor? Verse 16.
Verse 16 For we follow not deceivable fables: with our eyes we saw his
Majesty. For verse 17. Verse 17.
he received honor and glory of his father, when a voice came from him: Verse
18.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased: This voice we heard in the
eighteenth, when it came from heaven, being with him in the holy Mount: This
he confirmed by the Prophets: Verse 19.
The sure word of the Prophets: Though as a light in a dark place, not so
manifestly shining as afterward. And that he may confirm this confirming
authority of the Prophets, verse 20.21. he says, Verse 20.21
It was an inspiration from the holy Ghost: and therefore Peter had been
ouerseene, that if Christ had poynted to Peter in these words, Super hanc
petram, if Peter poynted not the Church to the successors of Rome: super hanc
petram: especially knowing of his departure, taking his farewell, making his
last Catholic Epistle, he points only to this rock that Christ is the Son
of God.

6. That other master builder so soon as ever the scales fell from his eyes,
Act. 9.20.
straightway he preached Christ in the Synagogue. That he was the son of
God.

7. The Eunuch received Baptism, and all exacted at his hands was the
confession of this point. Act. 8.37.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: Did Philip teach him, that he
and his Queen of Aethiopia must go after to Rome, as before to Jerusalem? I
think he troubled his head with no such points: so still this is the first
ground whereupon the rest are built, and therefore no marvel though Satan
has so maliciously from this day opposed this point.

Mat. 4.3. Mat: 4:3.
So soon as ever Satan enters, he begins; If thou be the Son of God: The
hour and power of darkness, Math. 27. Mat: 27:40.
Satan did then set his instruments against that Rock: If thou be the Son
of God come down from the Cross, and we will believe thee.

Now as the grain of mustard-seede grows, so must we proceed from faith to
knowledge, unadvised they are that would have us prescribe a scantling of Faith
and knowledge, as if either more were needless, or less damnable: but God in
wisdom thought it meet to prescribe no such certainety, and that for two
reasons.

1 To stir up our sluggish nature, To forget that is behind, and endeauonr to
that which is before: Philip: 3:13
It is perfectio viatoris, the perfection of a traveler still to go on: what
need we go to Church? I know the sum of all: believe in Christ Jesus, etc.
Such sluggards shall never grow rich in grace, that good corn shall never
prosper in their hearts, because they are so ouer-growne with thorns and
thistles.

2 Because God would not limit his mercies: As it pleases him to save infants
without any knowledge, so also to save some in all degrees of knowledge,
joining wisdom and mercy in proportioning something to the Times and ages
wherein men live, some to the place where, some to the capacities of the
persons themselves: God exacts not so much knowledge of the woman of Samaria,
as of Nicodemus, John the 3. Art thou a Doctor in Israel? nor so much of them
that dwell in the midst of Spain as of them in the heart of England, nor of
those that lived in the time of superstition, as of us that are in the Sunshine
of the Gospel: It is a sure rule if we hold the foundation sure, and conform
our lives and affections thereafter, the ignorance of other branches shall
never condemn us, except it be wilful or affected ignorance.

1 Wilful ignorance in such as either contemn, or neglect the means of
further knowledge, or such as in doubtful cases will venture without advice,
and then say, I meant no hurt.

2 Affected ignorance when we suffer our affections to blind our
understanding, Act: 19:25.
like Demetrius that persuaded the crafts-men not to hear the Apostles,
because they lived in a profitable trade. But simple ignorance in a well
meaning Christian is either passed over in mercy, or more knowledge revealed in
time, as the Prophet in the Psalms: To him that orders his conversation
aright, Psalm: 50. vlt
will I show the salvation of God: Cornelius, Acts 10.4. Thy prayers and
almes-deedes, The two wings of devotion fly up to heaven together: for as it
is in supplication, Forgive us as we forgive, so in alms, Give us as we give
them: rather then Cornelius shall want knowledge for salvation, God will send
Peter from Ioppa.

If any man doubt, let him begin with the fear of the Lord, and practice those
grounds he knows well, and then by degrees learn to go on and build upon
them, as in Hebr. 6.13. Hebr: 6.1.3.
being the doctrine of the beginning of Jesus Christ: Let us go on and pray
to God that we may lay the foundation safely and surely, that in Faith and
charity we may be knit altogether in the body of Christ.

TRACT. II.
WE have in the former exercise found the Rock whereon we may safely build:
upon this Rock must the maine grunsels be laid, such principles of
Christianity, and Articles of Faith, as be expressed in Scripture in the
plainest places, after compiled by the Church into a little body, or short
form, such as Irenaeus first sets down, as received of all churches about
178. which he testifies to be so uniformly professed in all Churches, as if
all Christians had but one soul, and one mouth: In Germany, France, East and
West Europe and Asia, and in all places of the world. As there is but one Sun
to every nature, so there is but one Faith to every Christian: he that is most
powerful in speech can say no more, and they that are most simple mean no
less.

Tertullian expresses another thing to the same effect, Anno 210. after that
the Fathers of the Nycen Counsel Anno 324. after that Athanasius made his
Creed, more fully designing the persons in Trinity against Arrius; Anno 333.

These ancient known verities being agreed upon of all Churches long before
these distractions: Let unstable minds, that find their souls wavering in
Religion give attention, 1 Cor. 9.22.
for such I make inquiry, as Paul 1. Corin. 9.22. Became all things to all
men: So we will doubt with the doubtful, stand upon indifferent ground, look
on both sides with a single eye, that we may the better discern the true way
of a Christian resolution.

Be we sure then to hold the foundation, and to build upon these truths which
all Churches in all ages have agreed upon. Here take we footing as upon firm
ground and look a little about us, before we resolve where to light.

These parts of the Church within our view do each of them becken us to their
side: The Church of Rome bids us return to our old mother, as only true
Catholic: The Brownist cries come to our congregation, we are even iump as it
was in the Apostles time: nay to ours (says the Anabaptist:) Lo here is
Christ, lo there: It is the plea of every Church.

But of all, the Church of Rome cries loudest, and if her challenge be true, it
stands us in hand to listen to it, for it concerns us as much as everlasting
life is worth: Extra Ecclesiam Romanam non est salus: Without the Church of
Rome is no salvation.

Yet she must pardon us though we make a pause, and do not presently make it an
article of our Faith, because we find it not in any of our ancient Creeds,
nor in any plain text of Scripture in any translation, theirs or ours: what
chymicall wits may extract thence, we will not now dispute: A Catholic
Church we find, but a Romish Catholic Church we find not; That all
Christians have such necessary dependence upon any place, or person, Rome, or
Bishop of Rome, and under such a penalty of eternal damnation.

It seems then, this is the Rock, without which all other articles will not
save us: and yet the ancient Church has forgotten to put it in any of her
Creedes: It is not in the Apostles Creed, Irenaeus has left it out of his,
Tertullian out of his, the Nycene theirs, Athanasius out of his, And Peter out
of his Catholic Epistle, 2 Pet. 1.13.
when at the time of his departure out of this life, he took his last farewell
of the Church.

First one Church we acknowledge built upon Christ the son of God, Ephesians. 4.4.
fully described in the 4 of the Ephesians by one Body, one Spirit, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one Father.

1 One body, because a Church is nothing else but a society of believers called
out of the rest of the world by the word of God, and though it run as the Sea
through many Countries, and thence receives many names like the seven Churches
of Asia, yet it is but one body.

2 It follows One spirit that does animate and inform the members of the
same, as the soul, or spirit of a man knits up the members into one body.

3 This professes One Lord Christ which makes it a Christian Church.

4 Yet the very naming of Christ Jesus our Lord is not sufficient to prove a
Christian Church, unless we embrace that Faith which Christ does publish, one
Faith, not in every branch of divinity, that never was nor will be, but the
grundsels laid upon the true foundation.

5 Yet we are but Catechumenists, as it were in the Church porch, till we be
admitted by the door of Baptism.

6 In which Baptism we are made the Adopted Children of One Father, upon which
the Apostle concludes: one God and Father of all must needs make a Church.

Secondly, this Church we believe to be Catholic, that is, universal, not
because it is spread over the face of the universal world, but because it is
not limited to any place, or nation, as the lewish Church was, much less to
the succession of any person, but it is scattered and dispersed without bounds.
So as still it has a power and disposition to be more and more universally
spread; That Is the sense of the word (...) according to Zacharies Prophecy:
That Jerusalem should be inhabited without walls. Zach. 2.4.


But for the Roman Church so famous in the Apostles time, that Saint Paul in
the first to the Romans, does glory so much in it;

Admit the memory of the Apostle Peter caused the Church to honor his
successors, and to give the Patriarch of that Sea priority before all other.

Admit that Church having been purged by fiery persecutions, and crowned with
Martyrdom under the Heathen Emperors, was therefore more reverenced of
succeeding Churches in other ages:

Admit the seat of the Empire, the renown of the City, the excellent choice
they made of wise and learned Bishops, got them such credit amongst remote
Churches that amidst their distractions which were amongst the Greeks, many
there were that would have recourse to Rome, as to arbitrators for advice and
judgment:

What is all this to the salvation of my soul in these days? What warrant
have I to rent my self from this Church, wherein by Gods providence I am
borne, and whereof I am borne again a member? Or what reason have they to
exact this new article at my hands, whereof I find no mention amongst the old?

I dispute not the point in this place, only let me put the case of a lay
man's resolution.

I am by Gods providence borne and Christened, brought up and Catechized in the
Church of England: The quaere is no more but this: Whether I be bound in
Conscience to become a Romish Catholic, and to be reconciled to the present
Church of Rome, as now it stands in pain of eternal condemnation?

This is the very point that draws so many from us, to whom I propound five
Quaeries or demands, which in the judgment of indifferent men may seem
reasonable.

1 First, I demand some clear evidence or firm ground to build upon, that this
is my duty, and upon so great a penalty: to thrust my self into such an
action without sufficient warrant, I should not only condemn my self of
rashness; but incur offense against God in the 14. to the Romans; Romans
14.23.
What every Man does doubtingly is sin to him that does it, Quod dubitas ne
feceris; A greater matter is a greater sin, a greater then this cannot be
under the Sun; I desire therefore some clear warrant for my resolution.

The first testimony that is offered is the Testimony of the Church, that is of
the Church of Rome, for she tells us that she alone is the true Catholic
Church, out of which there is no salvation: whereupon it follows that such as
will be saved must be reconciled to her: This we verily believe that the
Church of Rome says so, and has so said a long time.

2 The next Quaere is then; whether the Testimony of the Church of Rome in this
case concerning her self be sufficient? Go up as high as they will, so long as
she has made this challenge, I demand whether her testimony be sufficient? I
answer, out of doubt it is not: In the fifth of John, verse. 31. If Christ
should bear witness of himself, Job. 5.31.
his witness were not true: that is, not sufficient: Though after chap. 8.14.
he professes, that though he should bear witness of himself, yet his witness
were true, because ver. 16. I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me:
Take him single as in the first place by the way of concession, that he will
deal with the Jews upon indifferent terms. I hope then the testimony of
Christ concerning himself, was as sufficient in it self, and to the Jews, as
the testimony of the Church of Rome can be either in it self, or unto us. Let
it not therefore seem unreasonable, if beside the testimony of the Church we
desire further evidence; for here she stands for her self against all
Churches in Christendom.

3 Other testimony beside the Church and Scripture they pretend none, for
Traditions are referred to the Church, and the Creeds to the Scripture: To the
Scripture then of necessity she must come in this point.

4 Our next demand is, whether it is expressly there, or drawn out by Tract
of consequent: mentioned it is not, neither in the original, nor in the
vulgar, nor in the Rhemish, nor in any of their own translations.

5 If by consequent it be extracted, my next Quaere is; whether I am bound
under pain of damnation to believe every point that may be drawn out of
Scripture by consequence of arguments, we stumble not at immediate
consequents, as such as these: The Trinity is not named in so many letters; but
the Scripture implies every person to be God in several places, and elsewhere
auerreth that there is but one God: this is easily put together: But are we to
believe that which by long tract of consequent may be gathered? Then none but
great wits can be saved, our weak understanding is not able to fetch every
conclusion from the right ground.

Hence let us make three degrees of divine positions:

1 Some are Articles, as Christ the Son of God was crucified.

2 Some as Conclusions, as that children are capable of Baptism, but not of
the Lords Supper.

3 Some are taken as Opinions, and problemes of Divinity: As that Angels do
more solemnly attend in person at holy exercises: That Saints shall have some
personal knowledge one of another, Matt. 17.
as Moses and Elias had in the mount. Now as fixed stars seem to twinckle,
because they are further remote, and cannot so stedily be discerned by our
weak eyes: so our understandings are more unstable, and our belief more
uncertain in points deduced by many sequels, and far fetched consequents.
These bring narrow issue, let us see what degree of evidence they bring, and
accordingly frame our Faith.

That I cannot be saved except I be subject to the Bishop of Rome as head of
the Church. He must pretend then a title from Christ as he is Vicar: for
spiritual matters it is evident that Christ while he lived on earth, was the
visible head: for Temporalls himself concludes, Who made me a Judge? My
kingdom is not of this world, therefore so far as he medleth with kingdoms,
he cannot claim that from Christ: It is confessed, that while Christ was on
earth, he was the visible head of the whole Church, so as no soul could be
without necessary dependence on him; but whether at his departure he committed
the supremacy to any man on earth: If he did, whether in whole or part: to
whom, whether to the Apostles in general equally, or to one above the rest,
and who that was?

1 Their point is, that Christ left it to Peter alone, and to no other Apostle
in that degree: This is clear out of Scripture, That the rest of the Apostles,
as Apostles, are equal, but as Bishop he above them: note that, a Bishop above
an Apostle, Linus above the Evangelist John, who lived in his time.

2 Admit the Supremacy in Peter, whether it died with him as the Apostleship
did, or left it to his successors:

The difference is, they put the rest out of special favor, They might have as
great power, but it was for term of life: Peter had it for him, and his
successors for ever: But this must be cleared, that Peter had power to leave it
to his successors, and none but he. If this be not proved, why not John's
successors, in the Churches of Asia, or of James in Jerusalem, or any of the
Apostles in other places, as well as he to his.

The reason is, Though Peter by virtue of his fiery tongue, was able to govern
the whole Church in his days being but small, yet he knew the charge in time
would grow so great, and the circuit so large, that Peter's spirit had need be
doubled upon those that should succeed him. If he had one cloven tongue, his
successors need to have twelve: so we might say of the least of his
successors, A greater then Peter is here.

Peter was not alone, during his life, there were the eleven Apostles, Bell. l.
1. c. 21
and Paul as great an Apostle as himself as Bellarmine confesses, and greater,
because he writ more then Peter, he planted more Churches then Peter: he
labored more abundantly then they all, for he preached from Jerusalem, Romans
15.19.
round about to Illiricum, as Hierome auouches, from the red Sea to the great
Ocean, so far as there is any land. Amos. c. 5.
And that all the charge of Peter and Paul and all that the rest had, should
lie upon the shoulders of one Pope, and yet never a cloven tongue to his head:
Sure say That a greater then Peter is here.

Bellarmine proved well from the election of Matthias in the first of the Acts,
De Pont. 4.23.
that the Apostles were not chosen by Peter, and Paul was, Galathians the
first, Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ: Those that
came in after the death of Christ, Matthias and Paul were not: but all the
Apostles successors must now derive their power from the Pope, Therefore a
greater then Peter is here.

3 Admit while the body of the Church carried any proportion to a visible head,
as in the Apostles time it might, and some time after, for avoiding of
factions, a Monarchical government might stand, but when it is so dispersed,
that amongst the Antipodes, for ought we know may be Christians, that such a
burden of government should rest upon the shoulders of any one mortal wight,
it is strange.

It must be cleared out of the book of God, for the Testimony of their Church
in her own case is silent: That Peter did not impart his supremacy to diverse,
in diverse Churches which he planted, but wholly committed it to one, in one
place.

4 If to one, we must know where that one is, Certitudine fidei, else we are
never a whit the nearer. Whether Peter left it amongst the jews till they
fell, being himself the Preacher of the Circumcision. If not, because he saw
they would revolt, why not at Antioch, a Church of his own planting? Paul had
as much to do at Rome as he: Antioch had the Primacy, Act. 11.27.
for they were first called Christians at Antioch, and it was a famous
Patriarchall Church: Why not Mark the Evangelist, Peter's Disciple, who writ
the Gospel from his mouth in that famous Church of Alexandria?

It is clear then that Rome and no other Church does enjoy that Bishop who
succeeds Peter in that great office. But now wherein a lay man may receive
satisfaction, the Scripture is silent: It is not found in our Creed; The
testimony of the Church is laid by in this point.

Bellarmine says, Bell. 2. de Rep. c. 12.
that the Bishop of Rome alone does succeed Peter in the Supremacy, is not
found in Scripture, but to be believed upon tradition. I thought we should
return thither again, it is hard that they will not spare their own testimony
in their own case: Seeing Christ did spare it in his case, I hope we may be
saved without it.

5 Admit this could be cleared, yet that Church does not agree who was Bishop,
Linus, or Clemens, or Cletus, after three Popes at once, Benet the ninth,
Siluester the third, and John. Then two in a schism betwixt Urban and Clement:
The first in Italy, the second in France: after that three again, hard to
judge who was the true one: Such uncertainties must there needs be when
Religion depends upon any man's person in this troublesome world.

6 Admit it can be demonstrated to my conscience, that this Pope is lawfully
chosen, and undoubtedly succeedes Bishop Linus, and Peter by a lineall
succession of true Popes for 500 years, without any material interruption:
yet never the nearer except they do succeed as well in Faith and doctrine, as
in place and person; else they could not exclude us from the Church, for we
show personal succession, as well as they. Cranmer consecrated Barlo, Scony
and Couerdale. These consecrated Parker, Parker other Bishops: these made
Priests; every Act of Priesthood ratified by their own Canons is Valide
factum, though not Licite. Quis enim Catholicorum ignor at ordinatos ab
Episcopo haeretico vere esse ordinatos: That those that are ordained Priests of
an haereticall Bishop are truly ordained, no Catholic is ignorant: So they
exclude us as heretics, as not embracing their doctrine: so by their own
rule they grant that the Church and the Bishop of Rome must succeed Peter as
well in Faith and Doctrine, as in time and place, else we are not bound in
conscience to cleave to them: you see by how many sequels and degrees of
consequent, they must proceed before it be cleared to my conscience that I am
bound to be reconciled to the church of Rome, as now it stands under pain of
eternal condemnation.

If therefore they fail in any of these demonstrations we must fail them:
These six Articles we must pass before the maine point be concluded.

Let us repeat them that we forget them not.

1 We must believe certitudine fidei, with the certainty of Faith: 2 That
Christ left his supremacy to Peter, and to his successors only. 3 That Peter
bequeathed it to one in one Church, and not to diverse. 4 That this one was the
Bishop of Rome, and no other. 5 That this Pope that now is, did succeed him in
this Church. 6 That he and his Church do continue succession of Faith and
doctrine, as well as in person and place.
Until these be all made clear as an article of our Faith, I hope they will
give us leave to serve and worship our God, according to that Christian liberty
which God has given in a Church professing his Gospel.

TRACT. III.
Return we then to our first conclusion that for such gruncels as are
immediately to be laid upon the rock: that is matters of salvation, and
principles of Faith, we must receive them undoubtedly, and distinguish them
from all other positions that are thrust upon us, as necessary to be believed
by the same degree of Faith: And to receive them upon examination according to
the authority of the propounder, and according to that degree of evidence by
which they are proved.

Hold on the foundation, and let us conform our affections and lives, and
build further to perfection of grace, as (...), and then as it is, Psalm. 50.
and the last. To him that orders his conversation aright, I will show the
salvation of God.

TRACT. IIII.
Give me leave a little, because I do not much trouble you with questions, to
examine this point for their sakes that be unstable, or desire the same, the
rather because this is the very ground of their resolution, and if this fail,
all fails.

That the supremacy was in Christ while he lived upon earth, it is agreed: but
whether at his departure he conferred the same upon Peter, and in that degree
which they challenge, is the first maine point?

And for this they pitch upon four maine texts.

1 Super hanc Petram, Mat. 16.18. Matt. 10. verse 19.
2 Tibi Dabo claues: That key of David which Christ had, which opens when no
man shuts, and soutteth when no man opens. 3 Pasce oues, Ioh 21.15. Before
it was promised, there exhibited: To be chief Pastor: To feed the Lambs, that
is, the Laity: To feed the sheep, that is, Rule and Govern the Clergy,
(...): yea the Apostles themselves, if they be sheep of Christ, Peter must be
their shepherd. 4 I have prayed for thee: Tu autem conuersus confirma fratres,
Luke. 22.32. That is, confirm the rest of the Apostles, they were his
brethren.
These 4 are like four pillars, whereupon Peter's supremacy is built:
presently, if Peter had it, the Pope has it: but admit this: yet we find many
doubts which must be cleared, and many blocks which must be removed before my
conscience find a clear evidence to come over to them under such a penalty as
eternal condemnation.

For my Text, the point of difference is, what Christ meant by the Rock?

1 Whether the Person of Peter as they affirm: 2 Or the Faith of Christ which
Peter professed.
Thou art the Son of God, or Christ apprehended by that Faith.

Do them no wrong: it is agreed that Christ is the Primitive foundation, but the
secondary foundation is Peter's person, not as a private person, but as the head
of the Church:

That it should be Peter, not Christ, or the Faith of Christ there are four
colors.

1 Hanc by Grammar must be referred to that which is Tues Petrus, etc.

2 Because Petrus and Petra are all one in the tongue wherein Christ spoke;
Cepbas, therefore he meant the same thing.

3 Not aedifico, nor aedificani, but aedificabo: As if Christ had built his
Apostle upon himself already: But Peter is called Sathanas after and denied
Christ: o but after the resurrection it is built upon Peter, and therefore
Aedificabo.

4 He would never have said, Tu es Petrus, and then Inferred, super hanc, why
does he say with an asseueration, Ego dico tibi?

These are pretty colors to look upon at the first, but these are not wadded,
they will not hold, but shed if they be well handled.

What if we say with St. Augustine: Aug. de ver. Dom. Secu^: Mat. ser 13
Super hanc petram quam confessus es, super hanc petram quam cognouisti,
dicens: Tu es filius deiviui, aedificato ecclesiam meam, id est meipsum filium
dei viui aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Upon this Rock which thou have
acknowledged, upon this Rock which thou have known saying, Thou art the son
of the living God, I will build my Church: that is my self, the son of the
living God will I build my Church: Is not this good grammar.

What if we say with S. Ambrose, Ambr. in 2. cap. ep. Ephesians. v. 20
Super istam aedificabo Ecclesiam meam! hoc est, in hac catholicae fidei
confessione, fides ergo ecclesiae fundamentum est. Upon this Rock will I build
my Church, that is, in the confession of this Catholic Faith, therefore Faith
is the foundation of the Church; has not Hanc a good reference to the premises?

What if I say with Hilary? Vna haec est foelix fidei petra, Hill: de Trin: 2.6.
Petri ore confessa, tu es filius Dei vini, super hanc igitur confessionis
petram, Ecclesiae aedificatio est. Haec fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est. This
alone is the most happy rock of faith, confessed by the mouth of Peter, thou
art the son of the living God, upon this rock of confession is the building
of the Church; this faith is the foundation of the Church: to the same purpose
you find, Cyrill de Trinit. 4. Cyrill. Chrisost. Beda.
Chrysostom. 55. hom. sup. Matthew. Beda upon John the 21. These fathers will
defend Grammar well enough for hanc: but let us add one of their own, Lyra.
gloss. Interlin. Cusanus gloss. in Great. Aliaco.
Lyra who they say for interpreting Scripture had not his match, and the
interlineall gloss. Cusanus and the gloss upon Gratian, Petrus de Aliaco
Chancellor of Paris, though a Cardinal, though he name Peter, yet goes with us.

2. It is all one word Cephas: but Bellarmine, and Augustine, and the rest are
deceived, because they did not understand the Syriake tongue: but the
Evangelist distinguishes betwixt (...). To make a difference betwixt Peter's
faith and his person, to distinguish the Rock that he confessed from himself?
Bellarmines says, (...), and (...), that is, a stone, and (...) in the
Attickes is a stone; but why does the Enangelist alter the dialect in the same
sentence? nay, the vulgar translation which they prefer before the Greek, is
not super hunc; but super hanc.

For edificabo: The Church was not then built, but a few grunsels laid, and
verily loosely too, but he was to build a great Church to the end of the
world: neither was Peter perfectly laid himself; for in general we may say
with Augustine, Aug. de ve. Apost. Ser. 22.
Domus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur. The
house of God by believing is founded, by hoping is erected, and by loving is
perfected: he was not yet finished, or else to what end was this speech, we
hoped that this man should have redeemed Israel.

4. Tu es Petrus, why Peter's name comes in? this it is, thou art Peter and have
made a confession like thy name: a good allusion to Peter's, Christ the Rock,
Peter a living stone: and so for hanc, and for theidentity of the word, and the
Tense Aedificabo, and tu es Petrus, that leads the sentence: Our interpretation
and of the ancient Church may well stand.

Upon this rock which thou have presently confessed will I build my Church,
though it be but begun, yet I will build my Church upon my self,
apprehended by faith: and as thou, answerable to thy name, have laid a firm
foundation in confessing, so shall thou be a living stone built upon me. 1
Pet. 2.4.


1. That our interpretation is the truest, it appears not only by the analogy
of the Text, by the fit allusion to Peter's name, by the exact distinction of
Petrus and Petra: both in the original and vulgar.

2. But secondly by the practice of Peter, and the rest in building according
to the prescription of Christ. In the second of Peter and the first: A voice
from heaven, saying, 2 Pet. 1.14.17. Acts 9.20.
this is my beloved son, Paul in the ninth of the Acts, when the scales fell
from his eyes preached straightway, That Christ is the son of God: Acts 8.37.
Philip baptizing the Eunuch in the eighth of the Acts, the Eunuch confesses
that Jesus Christ is the son of God: Nathanael first apprehended this in the
first of John the fourth, Rabbi thou art the Son of God. Ioh. 1.49.


3. It is unlikely that Christ would build upon that person who within 4.
verses is described by the name of Satan, and that Peter should not be puffed
up, Matthew ioynes both the stories together; to show that to the first Church,
how unlikely it was that this person should be a foundation, and to
distinguish the frailty of the person from the foundation of faith.

4. It is agreed then that Christ is the maine foundation, The Rock ever
expresses the maine foundation: Therefore Christ, not Peter.

TRACT. V.
But they call us to the Testimony of the Church for interpretation. Yet they
might spare us in this. For if the Church did challenge this supremacy from the
beginning, as they maintain it: That Church in this case is no indifferent
witness: but the ancient Church is clear from giving Peter any such power.

The Fathers have three conceits of the Text.

1. Some, and those of the best give that sense which we in the pages before
have laid open: For other foundation can no man lay, save that which is laid, 1
Cor. 3.11.
which is Jesus Christ.

2. Some do mean Peter by the Rock, but as the rest of the Apostles,
according to that in the Revelation: Reu. 21.14. Ephesians. 2.20.
The twelve foundations and the names of the twelve, Ephesians. the 2. The
foundation of Prophets and Apostles: And he one amongst the twelve.

Origin upon Matthew, In Mat. 16
Is it but only of Peter? shall the gates of hell only be against Peter? If
Tibi dabo claues, to thee I will give the keys belong to all, why not this?
Hierom ad Marcellum: Hierom ad Marc. Ad Iouin.
Petrus super quem Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam, but how does he repeat it? Ad
Iouin: Idem etiam dicitur de omnibus Apostolis, and firmitas Ecclesiae
stabilitur aequaliter super omnes: Let them purge out Aequaliter and Super
omnes, or else let Ierom alone.

But what says Cyprian? Cyp de Simplic. praelatorum.
Qui Cathedram Petri tenet, super quam aedificata est Ecclesia in Ecclesia se
esse confidit: The chair of Peter then, and only Peter? This strikes at the
very root, if this was the conceit of the Church in Cyprians time, it is more
then time we were reconciled: but where is it? what edition? where was this
printed? not in Cullen, not Basil, not Paris, not at Antwerpe by Crinitus; not
at Lions, nor at Rome by Manutius: It is confessed that it was never found in
Cyprian, till Pamelius a Canon of Bruges found it in a Manuscript in the Abbie
of Cambron. So have they printed the same at Antwerpe by one Stellius, de
simplicitate Praelatorum, and is not this simple dealing?

2 The third sort lay Peter for the foundation amongst the rest, yet before the
rest, as the first in order. If there be twelve foundations, one must be first:
but Priority in order, and Superiority in power do differ much. It is one
thing in Parliament to be as Speaker, another as Prince; Peter was the first
that commonly spoke; and Christ directs his speech to Peter before the rest,
says Ockham.

1 Either because he was the most ancient in years. 2 Or because he was one
of the most familiar with Christ, noted in the Scripture with James and John.
These three Peter, James and John were admitted to ask questions, Matthew.
18.21. At the raising of Iayrus daughter, Luke 8.51. At the transfiguration,
Mat. 17.1. At his passion, Mat. 26.36. and of these Peter was the foreman.

But Peter first made the confession, therefore must be first laid upon the
foundation, Revel. 21.19. Reu. 21.19.


Cyprian in his foresaid Tractate says: Erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod
suit Petrus Pari consortio praediti and honoris, and Potestatis, sed exordium
ab vnitate profisciscitur. The same honor, and the same power in the rest:
Act. 1.15.
Peter he propounded the matter in the election of Matthias, and after much
disputation in the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15.7.
Peter made the first speech, but James gave the final sentence, to which all
agreed: Verse. 22. Hiero^. cont. Iou: lib: 1. Leo ep. 84.
To the same purpose Hierom against Iouinian in his Epistles does significantly
speak, for my part I cannot find a Father alleged by them, who falls not upon
one of these three points.

1 Either that Christ is the rock here meant and discovered by Peter's
confession. 2 Or that Peter is here laid with the rest equally. 3 Or that Peter
is before the rest in Priority of order, all this comes not near the home.
TRACT. VI.
THe second Text is, Tibi Dabo claues, where Observe that the maine grunsels of
that Church are upon such places which are full of Metaphors: As Purgatory is
kindled out of that of the 1 Corin. 3. Wood, Hay, and Stubble, 1 Cor. 3.12.
and confirmed by the Metaphor of the Minister, Iayler, and Prison, out of
which they cannot come until they pay the uttermost farthing.

So the supremacy is founded upon the Metaphor of the Rock and keys: we may
climb up by a Metaphor well tentered higher then the boughs will well endure:

1 Tibi Dabo Claues, Aedificabo, and Dabo: A promise here is made of that after
was performed.

2 By Keys is expressed the chief authority in the Church: It is fetched from
Esaias 22.22. Esaias 22.22
spoken to Eliakim to be steward in the steed of Shebne: The key of the house
of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open, and no man shall
shut, and he shall shut, and no man shall open: This key Christ had as the
Master, Revel. 3.7.
in the third of the Revelation, and this say they, committed he to Peter. As
the Master Christ had it, so he commits it to the Apostles as stewards, 1
Corin. 4.1. 1 Corin. 4.
Let every one so think of us, as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards: so
the same word is used in Luke, (...), a faithful Steward But Tibi now is
Vobis? True, (...).
it was first promised to Peter upon his confession, but if the same be
performed after to all, that is here promised to Peter, Luke 12.42.
is not the point then at an end?

1 What is more in Key then a Metaphor of binding and loosing, two metaphors,
one to explane another: yes Caiet an and Stapleton say there is more in keys
then binding and loosing: we leave them to Bellarmine, he confutes Caietan in
that, by the general consent of Fathers.

What can the keys do but open and shut? We shut men out of heaven by sin,
by the Grace of the Gospel they are admitted.

So by sin we are bound, and bound over to eternal condemnation in the
chains of darkness: By the Gospel we are loosed from sin to the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God.

1 In the keys then the power is promised. 2 The function is declared: so
says the Catechism upon the Council of Trent challenge them, therefore upon
their Oath:
Sacram Scripturam nunquam nisi iuxta vnanimem consensum Patrum accipiam aut
interpretabor: This Scripture being taken according to common consent, and
interpretation of the Fathers, as the Bull of Oath made by Pope Pius the
fourth, and annexed to the Council of Trent does witness, all shall be well
at length.

2 What is here promised to Peter, that is not given to all, John, the 20. and
the 23. verse, Sicut me pater: As my Father has sent me, so send I you: A
larger commission cannot be given in plain words, much less in a metaphor,
Then sicut me Pater misit. The Father sent me to open heaven to the penitent,
so send I you: The Father sent me to preach liberty to the captives, and to
them that are bound, Esa. 61.1.
the opening of the prison, so send I you, Whose sins ye remitte they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained.

If this power were given by breathing, Christ breathed no more upon Peter then
on the rest, for ought we know. If the Apostles were made Bishops by laying
cloven tongues on their heads, we find no more upon Peter then the rest. If
the Apostles be the twelve foundations, we find not Peter greater then the
rest. If twelve precious stones in the Revelation, the first is esteemed no
more precious, unless in our estimation.
Bellarmine urged by Calvin: Call. lib. 4. Instit. c. 6. Sect. 1. Bell. de Romans
pont. l. 1. c. 9.2. Cor. 11.28
How Scripture still gives the chief power to the Apostles equally without
preferring Peter before the rest, yields the Bucklers: Summa potestas
ecclesiastica non solum data est Petrosed etiam alijs Apostolis: Omnes poterant
dicere Instantia mea quotidiana and solicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum: fuit enim in
illis Ecclesiae primordijs necessarium ad fidem toto orb terrarum celeriter
disseminandam, vt primis praedicatoribus and Ecclesiae fundatoribus summa
potestas concederetur: Mortuis autem Apostolis, Apostolica authoritas insola
petrisuccessione permansit: Is it come to this? that their labor was alike:
that they were all equally the chief Preachers: that they were all in the same
degree founders of the Church, and the disseminators of the Catholic Faith?
The stream of the texts, and the current of Antiquity interpreting the same,
has driven him to that Ingenuity.

What do we contending about Peter's supremacy amongst these texts? We had
thought he would have fetched it from Peter, Peter never had it, search it
then from Linus or Clement, he that succeeded Peter; we do not know who it was.

1 Observe they urge it as Ius Diuinum, and persuade weakelings that of
Conscience under pain of condemnation we acknowledge our selves members of
that Universal Bishop, and that out of Scripture: Scripture does not once
mention him, much less give any pre-eminence to him above the rest.

2 Bellarmine belabors all the texts, Super banc petram. Tibi dabo claues, etc.
as if still Peter had something more then the rest: he has spun such a thread
in this point, that no spiders thread is more subtle: Peter had the grant, but
never to enjoy it one hour; It was to begin in his successors, but after his
death. So they must have it from Peter, else not Iure diuino, else not as the
Vicar of Christ, or from him: yet Peter never had it himself.

Somewhat there was which was given to Peter in these Texts, but to begin after
his death, and after the death of all the rest: It is worth examining, for we
never came to the maine point till now: Go on with these texts which they
press, but you shall find this to be the issue of all.

TRACT. VII.
JOHN. 21.16. Feed my sheep.


LEt us handle this text occasionally, having the last Term propounded the
maine point: The Quere whereupon the resolution of minds unresolved in
Religion do depend: to wit, whether a man stand bound in conscience to forsake
this present Church, in which we are baptized and Catechized to be reconciled
to the Church of Rome under pain of eternal condemnation: so they propound it
to their disciples.

Concerning which, I have made these demands.

1 We demand some clear evidence for our Conscience, else it were not only
rashness, but a great sin in so great a matter: that the Church of Rome is
the only Church wherein is salvation.

2 Whereas to this testimony of the Church, that is, of Rome, for other they
will acknowledge none, that she alone is the only true Catholic Church, we
take exception in this point to her testimony in her own cause: for if Christ
were content to lay by his testimony, let it seem a reasonable demand.

If she ask how long we take exception to her testimony? we answer, just so
long as she has made the same challenge as she does, and no longer.

3 Since other testimony there is none besides the Church, and Scripture, which
they do pretend. I demand whether this point, that she is the only Church
wherein salvation may be found, be there expressed, or by tract of consequent?

Not expressly.

4 Because a man is not bound to believe every thing, that by consequent is
drawn out of Scripture: I demand some clear consequent, for according to the
degrees of evidence must we frame our Faith.

Now this consequent is so far fetched, that before they can persuade a man's
conscience that he is bound to join with them, and become subject to the
Bishop of that Sea, he must of necessity demonstrate these 5. points.

1 That Christ being the visible head of his whole Church, so as without his
Church there was no salvation, they must prove that he left this to his Apostle
Peter above the rest.

2 That this power given to Peter did not die with him, as the Apostleship did
with the rest, but continued in his successors.

3 That Peter at his death did not impart it unto many after him, though it was
a great charge, and like to grow far greater, but heaped it all upon one, and
that that one was the Bishop of Rome.

4 That this Bishop who does now reign is not only lawfully chosen, but does
undoubtedly succeed Peter in a direct succession for these fifteen hundred
years, and above without any material interruption.

5 This proved, we are never the nearer by their own rule, except it appear,
that this Pope and present Church of Rome does succeed Peter, and his Church,
as well in Faith and Doctrine, as place and person, for they do not exclude us
for want of succession, our Records are true and clear; but as heretics for
not obeying their Faith: Therefore if they do not obey the Faith of Peter, all
the former points are to no purpose.

Let me therefore make a motive unto him who is vnseted in his resolution, that
he would rest his soul where it is, and content himself with the plain text
of Christ and his Apostles agreed upon, till these five points be made clear
to his Conscience, and before that I hope his soul shall be in Abraham's bosom.

Now that Christ left this power to Peter alone above the rest, which is the
maine foundation, which if it fail, the whole building must needs fall: It is
laid upon four pillars, in four texts which are repeated before.

For the first I have proved that Rock not to be Peter's person as the head of
the Church, but that which Peter discovered by confession, The Son of the
living God: and that Christ named Peter alluding to the signification of his
name, for that he made a firm confession answerable to his name, and should
therefore be as a living stone upon that Rock: Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-iona, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee: This we have
proved by the Analogy of place, by exact difference observed between Petrus
and Petra, our original, and their vulgar; by the practice of Peter and the
rest in building upon this Rooke, and by interpretation of Augustine, Ambrose,
Hillary, Cyrill, Chrysostom, Bid, or else by Lyra, the interlineall gloss,
Cusanus, Petrus de Aliaco, etc.

For Tibidabo claues: that there is no more power meant in the Metaphor of the
keys promised to Peter then is after expressed in binding and loosing,
Bellarmine himself has undertaken it against Caittan and Stapleton:
whatsoever Christ did promise to Peter in Matthew, is given to the rest in
John, In sicut misit me Pater sic mitto vos: As large a Commission, and in as
plain terms, as may be: As my Father sent me, Esaias 61. To preach liberty to
the Captives and them that are bound, the opening of the prison, so send I you,
therefore whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained.

If there were power given by breathing, where Christ breathed on all alike: If
in the sending of cloven tongues no more sat on Peter's head then on the rest:
If as one of the twelve foundations Peter is no bigger then the rest: If
amongst the twelve precious stones he be no more precious then the rest,
unless in our estimation, Sapphire as good as lasper, then we may safely as yet
determine against them that lay such snares on men souls concerning their
salvation.
For Orabo pro te and confirma fratres, Luke 22.32.
upon examination we have found no pre-eminence given to Peter at all, saving
only in the occasion which moved Christ to speak particularly to Peter, a
prophecy of his denying of Christ in the 34 verse: for Christ prayed for the
rest as well as for Peter, in John the 17. Father sanctify them in thy truth:
Ioh. 17.11.
Now if Christ prayed more for Peter, it was not for his dignity, but because
he was in greater danger, Christ tells him what need there is that he should
pray for him.

Confirma fratres: He means all Christians to whom he preaches and writes, as
in the 2. of Peter 1. and 10. If we will therefore have Christ to mean his
fellow Apostles: does not Paul confirm Peter more then ever Peter did Paul.

4 Text. But Pasce Oues meas, Galat. 2.11.
is the place they lay the most weight on: and it demonstrates three things
faith Bellarmine.

1 That it is directed to Peter alone, by name Simon Ioanna, and Diligis me
plus his? His excluding the rest, and repeated three times.

2 Pasce, not only to feed, but also to govern, expressed in (...). It has
a third signification: To eat: It is well that Bellarmine leaves out that, for
Baronius against Segnorius of Venice, an holy Father, uses it for Kill and
eat. Acts 10.13


3 Oues meas: there is the Lambs, that is the Laity, The little sheep, the
Clergy; and the strong sheep the Apostles: Heretics deny this division,
says Bellarmine, Nobis autem exploratum certumque est omnes omnino
Christianos, etiam Apostolos ipsos Petro tanquam ouiculas commendari cum ei
dicitur, Pasce Oues meas, with all Christians, and the Apostles themselves
commended to his cure: Then Peter, and Peter alone must be the sole ordinary
Pastor of the Church of Christ.

1 True it is that this is spoken to Peter, and only to him, and that three
times: The reason is, because he was singular in denying Christ, and denying
three times: and if the place be rightly waighed, it is rather a stay of his
weakness, then a note of his greatness: Ominous it is that the Pope relieth
most upon those places which are grounded upon Peter's denial.

2 For Pasce, heeres no commission granted, but a commandment imposed to look
to his office as a good Pastor, for (...) is given as well to the Elders of the
church, as Peter: Acts 20 28
If that be of weight, make us all Popes.

3 For the argument, Oues meas, That the Apostles are Christ's sheep, therefore
Peter must be their Pastor, is as much as if in the Gospel of Mark, Mar. 16.15
They must preach the Gospel to every Creature, Ergo, preach the Gospel to
Peter, The argument is all one, let it go.

Ferus upon the Acts, Fer. in Act. 11.
where Peter is to put in his Apology for going to the Gentiles; says,
Ecclesia sponsa Christ, and Domina Domus suae, Petrus autem seruus est and
minister: The Church has power over her servants, etiam penitus eijcere: so it
was of old, but now Peter's successors will not be ruled by the Church, ac si
domini essent and non serui Ideo iusto Iudicio Dei, ab omnibus contemnuntur:
That because they will be Lords and not ministers, therefore they are despised:
Honest Ferus.

When I read how Bellarmine makes a Catalogue of Peter's prerogatives in eight
long Chapters, and in every one finds a mystery of supremacy: In his name
Cephas, in walking upon the Sea: In his double draught of fish, in his first
Sermon, and first miracle: In Paul's resisting of him, at Jerusalem, and the
rest. I see a wise man may be ouerseene sometimes. If arguments went by tale,
and not by weight, I could reckon up Paul's praerogatiues, and Peter's
infirmities, would out number Bellarmines arguments, but you would deem me
very idle to stand upon it.

Peter's prerogatives were, To be a worthy vessel, to carry Gods name: That he
was first in the rank, where there was a Priority of Order, without
superiority of power, because he was the most ancient in years, and one of
the most familiar with Christ, as Occam gives the reason, but what is this to
the purpose?

To sum up the other two famous places of Scripture: For Orabo pro te, and
Confirma fratres: It is for the danger, and not the dignity, and being in the
more danger, he might learn to confirm his brethren in the like: This upon
examination found to be past over.

But for Pasce cues meas: it is largely demonstrated in 3. conclusions.

That it is not spoken to Peter as a note of greatness, but as a stay of
weakness: 2 That it is no commission, but a command: 3 That therefore the
Apostles may as well preach to Peter, as Peter to them by the rule of other
Scriptures: whence is inferred the judgment of Ferus upon that Church, an
honest judgment of an usurping Church, notwithstanding all the prerogatives of
Peter, numbered by Bellarmine more by tale, then weight, from whence they draw
both argument and pretense of their greatness:

After all the four old pillars of Popery are thrown down by the hands of
Fathers and Reason: we have discovered the two new euasions of Bellarmine and
Stapleton.

In that by a rule received, we prove that which agrees to one, agrees to all,
and that if they were equal in governing the people, then equal amongst
themselves.

That since there was no visible head for sixty years, but all Apostles were
alike: It cannot be, that the dignity of Peter can be above the rest, for fear
it be proved, that the Bishop of Rome is above Peter, and so it seems he is,
when his Scarlet Church is about him.

That being no more out of the word feeding, but that which is given to an
ordinary Presbyter in the Acts: By the confession of Bellarmine, the same
Episcopal and perpetual office, with full jurisdiction being given to the
rest of the Apostles as well as to Peter: The rest making Bishops as well as
he, and the same multitude of successors, If not more then he, first these
three issues being discovered.

1 That they are forced like children to run to their mother, and yet

2 They cannot find so much as once Peter to Father them for his own;

3 And therefore Bellarmine gives over Scripture, and since his authority will
not settle a seely mind, that looks not to the by-waies and labyrinths of
questions, but to the mark of his salvation set before him: conclude
therefore, we may be saved without reconciliation to this present Church of
Rome.

These be all the colors which they can allege out of Scripture; Bellarmine
gathers all before him, and adds to the heap, as I have faithfully delivered
unto you: how sandy a foundation it is to set such a building of that weight, I
hope an indifferent mind may see: so sandy, as the latter and wiser sort
considering how weak they are in this point, which must hold or all falls;
being ouerpressed by Reasons, and the current of the Fathers; concerning these
four places of Scripture: give up the old pillars of Popery which have stood
too long in the Church, and have sought out two new euasions.

1 The first devised by Stapleton. 2 The second taken up by Bellarmine, Stap.
cont. 3 qu. 1. Art. 1. Tom. 1. Tract. 1 c. 3
but found first in Caietanes opuscula, which when we have examined, we will
take our leave of this point.
TRACT. VIII.
IT is now agreed that the Apostles are equal, every one had supremacy over
all: Bellar. de Romans P. l. 1. c. 6.
Summa potestas Ecclesiastica non solum data est Petro sed etiam alijs
Apostolis: fuit enim in illis Ecclesiae primordijs necessarium vt primis
praedicatoribus and Ecclesiae fundatoribus summa potestas concederetur. Lib. 4.
c. 23.
The chief authority to them, as to the first Preachers and founders of the
Church, and in the fourth book he spends the whole three and twentyeth chapter
to this purpose: what stir has here been?

Stapleton says, all are equal in respect of the people, Stap. contr. 3. q.
1. ar. 5.
but not among themselves: How can that be? Quae conueniunt vni tertio
conueniunt inter se, A mathematical principle: if they be equaled in governing
the people, then in that office they are equal among themselves. Then Peter is
not above them in governing the Church: but was it in regard of their persons?
It is strange that they should govern the Church without a guide, that could
not govern themselves: In Timothy, If a Priest cannot rule his own house, how
can he govern the Church of God? So, 1 Timothy 3.5.
if they would not govern themselves, how order the Church? Admit an Apostle
should have deserved censure for personal faults: had Peter power to
excommunicate him, and not to suspend him from his office? power to remove him
from receiving of the Sacrament, and not from the Ministration of it to others?
power to cut him off from being of the Church, and no power to suspend him from
being governor over the Church? This is an idle conceit, I find it propounded,
but I think it is not relied upon.

That which indeed is stood upon and the very maine issue of the whole question
es that Bellarmine pitcheth upon, devised by some latter schoolmen a little
before.

That the Apostles were all equal during their lives, Mortuis autem Apostolis,
summa potest as in solo Petri successore permansit: The Apostles for term of
life had as much authority as Peter, but Peter as an ordinary Pastor for his
successors, and that by virtue of this Text, Pasce Oues, Peter as Pastor, they
as Delegates: he ordinary, they out of special grace, so as all their
successors shall hereafter depend upon Peter's successors, and derive their
power from them.

Where note by the way, that the visible Church of Christ from the Ascension
into heaven till the death of the Apostles, which was above sixty years, The
Church I say had no one visible head, all the Apostles were alike, all supreme
Governors, and ever after though the circuit were far greater, and the people
in the Church far more unruly, yet it shall have but one to govern all, and
he sometimes but a silly one God wott; yet shall his charge be greater, his
dignity more excellent, and his command more absolute then ever Peter's was, for
Peter had many peers every whit as good as himself.

But let us follow the point: This only was Peter's privilege above his
fellows, That authority which he had in common with the rest during their
lives, he might as the ordinary Pastor of the Church confer it wholly upon
his successor of Rome, so might no other.

What all that authority wholly? I Will be careful for doing them any wrong: Not
their Apostolical authority, but all their Episcopal and Pastoral authority
which is to be perpetually in the Church by virtue of this Pasce.

Popes do not challenge to be called immediately of Christ Apostles: to have
seen Christ in the flesh as the Apostles did: to work miracles, to be free
from error in preachings and writings, as the Apostles were, saving in their
seat when they have the Church about them.

That which is pastoral is perpetual, Peter is a Pastor by virtue of this
Text Pasce. Therefore he may confer this authority upon his successors: so
have you their meaning, let us follow it.

It is a sure rule, Species aeque participatur in Indiuiduis that which agrees
to a man, as a man, agrees to every man, Quod conuenit homini vt homo, singulis
hominibus: pastori vt pastor, singulis pastoribus. Now that which is said here
to Peter (...), feed my sheep is said to the Presbyters in the Acts of the
Apostles, (...). Act. 20.28
To feed the Church, yea but they mean not that Peter is as an ordinary
Pastor: then somewhat must be added to this Text: Its not pasce oues meas will
carry it: It must be pasce prae caeteris, or pasce pastores. Either feed
before the rest: or feed them that feed: else pascere Ecclesiam is as much as
pascere oues: if not more.

Here is nothing singular in this text, but the singular number, thrice
repeating of it, alluding to the thrice denying of Christ, which will not be
for their credit to stand upon: for it is noted by an Ancient, and let us not
forget it: to be rather a stay of his weakness, then a note of his greatness.

But let us follow their conceit without Scripture: Peter was chief Pastor of
the whole Church, therefore had power as Pastor to leave that power to his
successors.

Were not the rest of the Apostles Pastors as well as Peter? had not they this
power as well as he, I mean not Apostolical, but Episcopal and Pastoral
which is perpetual?

Hear what Bellarmine has ingenuously delivered from the consent of the
ancient: Lib. 4.24.
Sicut me misit pater factos esse his Christiverbis Apostolos Christ's vicartos,
immo ipsum Christi officium and aut horitatem accepisse: en Apostolica
authoritate contineri omnem potestatem ecclesiasticam: sicut me misit pater
siquidem misit filium summa potestate praeditum. That they are all the Vicars
of Christ: that they have all the office and authority of Christ himself:
having alleged the fathers to this end he inferres thus, Vbi vides idem dari
Apostolis per illa verba ego mitto vos quod Petro fuit promissum, per illatibi
dabo claues, and postea exhibitum per illa, pasce oues meas, id est,
iurisdictionem plenissimam etiam exteriorem. Bellarmine concludes that, that
full and outward jurisdiction, that was promised to Peter in the keys, and
exhibited to him in his pasce, was also given to all the Apostles in their
general Commission, Sicut me misit, iam sumus ergo pares. These Texts that we
have troubled you withal, leave them equal, why may not then the rest of the
Apostles make their successors in other Churches as well as Peter at Rome? and
if we may credit Ecclesiastical writers so they did. James left Simeon to
succeed him at Jerusalem, Simeon left Iustus, Iustus left Zacheus, and so
along: John left Polycarpus in Smyrna, as Tertullian auouches; Paul left
Timothy at Ephesus, Titus in Creete, Dionysius at Athens, as Eusebius: All this
they confess: Where are we now?

We are come to a narrower issue, so narrow that it crowdes the supremacy in
pieces: for how can the successors of Paul, of John, and of the rest depend
upon Rome? They fetch it from the other Apostles; They immediately from Christ,
as you have heard, Sicut me misit, Bellarmine says, It is a prerogative which
is not found in Scripture, but in other authors, as in Johannes de
Turrecremata: Peter was made Bishop by Christ, and Peter made all the rest of
the Bishops: why? Alioquienim cum omnes Apostoli plurimos Episcopos in varijs
locis constituerint, si Apostoli ipsi non sint facti Episcopi a Petro, certe
maxima pars Episcoporum non deducet originem suam a Petro. If not the Apostles,
then not the greatest part of Bishops take their original from Peter: then we
are undone.

Bellarmine makes an objection: If Peter made Judas Bishop, our answer is,
Judas was no Bishop: no? In the Acts, Let another man take his Bishopric,
(...), That's but praefecturam. Did he make John Bishop, the Disciple whom Jesus
loved? did he make Paul Bishop, who does so glory that his authority came not
of men or by men? Galat. 1.1
Then comes in Bellarmine, In Apostolica authoritate contineri omnem potestatem
Ecclesiasticam, sicut me misit. In good time now the Popedom is contained in
the Apostleship: had Campian got us at such a vantage, how he would have
gloryed with his spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici: I do protest I have
beaten my brain to reconcile them in this point, and I cannot, I would gladly
have a sentence of a Father that Peter made Paul Bishop, or John, or any of the
Apostles.

The only color I find that Peter, James, and John made James the less
Bishop of Jerusalem, as Eusebius and others do record: not Bishop, but Bishop
of Jerusalem, giving him an especial care of that Church, James was Bishop
before says Bellarmine: Its included in his Apostolic power. A Bishop may be
a Bishop, though he be designed to no place: nay though he be an heretic,
capable of no place, yet he may ordain: Quis enim Catholicorum ignorant
Ordinatos ab haereticis vere esse Ordinatos, quando Ordinator haeretieus vere
Episcopus fuerat and adhuc erat saltem quantum ad Caracterem.

Is it possible any indifferent mind should believe it? that the Evangelist
St. John, that Eagle of the new Testament could not ordain Polycarpus or any
in the Churches of Asia without Peter's leave? or that Paul could not ordain
Timothy unless he had power from Peter?

This is the last refuge.

If it will not hold: Maxima pars Episcoporum non deducet originem suam a
Petro. The greater part of Bishops have not their original from Peter, Then
the Church of Rome is not that only Church, but there may be salvation without
it.

So the question is at an end.

TRACT. Vlt.
THese issues and desperate distinctions are forced from them, Bell lib. 1.23 de
R. P.
Quia passim docent veteres Romanam Ecclesiam esse matrem omnium Ecclesiarum,
ab ea omnes Episcopos habuisse consecrationem and dignitatem suam, quod non
esset verum; nistin eo sensu, quod Petrus qui Episcopus fuit Romanus omnes
Apostolos, omnesque alios Episcopos ordinauit: because it is the mother Church
it is therefore so: you see them driven to this issue.

2 It is conceited that Christ intends nothing in Peter above his fellows, but
only that the successors of Rome may be great; who are not once mentioned or
prophesied of in Scripture: Cyrus prophesied by name; should not the holy Ghost
neither by Peter, nor any other, give us some inkling of him under whose wings
alone we must seek salvation? except we will have him mentioned under the
title of Antichrist, we have it not: The Church of Rome is spoken of by Paul,
he glories as if it were his Church in the first chapter to the Romans: Romans
1.4.
Peter does not so much as once name it, unless they will have it under the
name of Babylon.

3 Bellarmine does ingenuously give over Scripture in the entrance to the first
book, and the three and twentieth chapter, dividing it from the rest, Hactenus
quae ex diuinis literis colliguntur, addemus nunc quae ex varijs authoribus
decerpsimus: A man will hardly hazard his estate upon so nice a difference
without maxim, bookcase, or any authority in Law: and should we rely our
souls upon so narrow, so new and so perplexed a Divine?

In this great point as we are directed so let us look upon that place in the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 4.6.
That no man presume above that which is written: and then we shall find that
in the Ephesians: Ephesians. 2.19.
Now therefore we are no more strangers, and forreiners (or heretics) but
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the
foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head
corner stone. Let this be ever our hold, and we shall never fall. And to
conclude, let us go on even with our adversaries, so far as they lead us in
the right way, but if they carry us into unknown tractes, and dangerous
passages: let us there protest a separation from them, and then we shall show
our selves to be right Protestants indeed: Let us look also with a vigilant
eye, as some religious men did after corruption grew thick upon that Church,
and then we shall see that we cannot communicate with her in this point and
others which she professes and practices, without shipwreck of conscience:
which corruptions, if we should reckon, they would swell beyond the proportion
of our present project: which, if a simple man cannot behold when he is
assaulted by the Bishop of that Sea for present reconciliation: let him
ingenuously plead ignorance, rather then yield, and tell him plainly he knows
him not: and that his mind is bent to know God and himself, if he have any
reference to God, he will acknowledge him in his due place: In the mean time
we pray for divine knowledge out of the scriptures, that the beams of that
celestial light may double her reflection upon our hearts, and so warm our
affections with the love of the Truth, that we may bring forth the fruits of
it in a Christian Life: Amen.

Deo Trino and vni Gloria.
FINIS.
A MOTIVE DEDICATED TO THE Honorable Society of the Gentry in Grayes Inn. by
E. V.
RIGHT WORTHY GENTLEMEN:
ALL this Treatise stands upon that Union spoken of by St. Paul to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.4.
There is one body and one spirit, even as you are called in one Hope of your
Vocation: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: one God and Father of you all,
which is above all, and through all, and in you all: To prevent distraction,
and preserve the unity of the Church: To limit out the natural branches,
besides those that are cut off by schisms, or pared away by the censures of
the Church, to set out the truth of the Redeemer according to the Doctrine of
Faith, and the covenant of Baptism: here are the bonds of peace combined in
one head, not in the Church which had their circular Epistles written for
communion, Coloss: 4.16. Acts 15.6.
nor in the Synods of the Church, which had their Councels for the composing of
divisions: These are but confirmations, no beginnings of that unity which is
pretended. A peace there is pretended, or as the Author says, a
reconciliation: what peace? says Iehu to Iezabel, Pacem do vobis, pacem meam
Relinquo vobis: sufficit Domine, pacem quam tu relinquis excipio, Relinquo quod
Retines. Give me leave to set these feet of dirt upon that golden image of
him whom you did admire, and I do imitate, he did convince you, let me only
move you by that which follows: Upon that Scripture there are 3. things
grounded: 1. That the Church is united in Christ. 2. After him in Peter. 3.
after Peter in the successors of Rome: In the two last points he ioynes an
issue, and finds that unity of a visible head, and that Vna Sancta Catholica
Ecclesia, Decreto Bonif.
in the Decretall: and that subjection thrust upon every creature with a
Declaramus, dicimus, definimus esse de necessitate salutis: not to be trust up
in One: when we have done, I hope this thirteenth article shall be thrust out
of our Creed.

First for Peter.

The same reprehension, Mat. 20:26 Mat: 9:23 Mat: 19:28 Rev: 21:17 Acts 1. Acts
8:14.
the same commission, the same promise, the same glory, the same power was
given to the rest of the Apostles as well as to him: If any thing more, it was
not given but assumed: be would not assume it that was sent as a Legate, not a
Pope, he could not be Pope, that did not decree, but show his opinion, and his
opinion being rejected at Antioch, Acts 15:19.
it is time for them to give him a sword, and yet we see not how they can draw
it out of that text of Luke, that leaves us only to suffer, and not to rule.
Galet. 2. Luke 22:38.


That he is put the first, and Mary the last, she full of Grace, Acts 1:14
Acts 2. Luke 2.
he but fall of the spirit, neither he nor any had that prerogative to be
full of Grace, and full of that holy fruit besides described by that great
Astrologer, to be an honest and beautiful Virgin, bearing in her hand two
full ears of Corn: Albamaz: in mayor: Iotroduct. tr: 6.
A fable, as all the writings of the Poets concerning the sons of Jupiter was
by the policy of Satan to make the world believe that the Prophesies of that
Jesus was but a fable: but the truth is, she is so described, and therefore
Peter being set before her the last before the first, behind her in dignity,
Luke 1:13. 2 Timothy: 4:21.
before her in place: That Linus is set after Pudens, the Bishop of Rome may
blush indeed to rank himself before all the Church, or Peter before Paul,
which besides the excellency of his miracles, as Salmeron confesses, went up as
high into the third heaven, with the fulness of faith, as Peter sunk low into
the waters for want of it, and it seems he came to visit Peter, Galat. 2.18
to see whether he were sick of any opinion or no: for I think the word
will bear it, if any think not so, (...).
we can show an author for it: so that except they will make an universal
diffusion of some secret Grace flowing from Peter as from the name of Jesus,
which is an Ointment poured out: Cant. 1. Phil. 2.
If they think that this name of Peter like oil above water gives a general
command over heaven and earth and hell as the names of Jesus, which it seems
they do, for in their writings Peter is as often writ as the name of Jesus in
the Epistles of Paul: but I think, as David was not a King over all Kings
because of his mystery of three times anointing, no more was Peter Prince over
all the Apostles, because of the commission of threefold feeding: but that he
was at Rome, that he seated himself there, that he planted the Church, gave
it after his death to Clement, we take it as a matter of history, not of faith.
For if it were so, we wonder that Paul should be so uncivil to leave out a
salutation to Bishop Peter amongst the rest. Romans 16.
It may be Peter being one of the hot spirits of Galilee, Galilei pugnaces.
Iero^.
where was nothing but a word and a blow, as it seems when he cropped the High
Priests servants ear, would in stomach at Paul's unkindness leave him when he
came to his first answer: Mat. 26.
let them answer this, or there is no Apology to be made for Peter, 2 Timothy 4.16
that besides unkindness is to be accused of negligence that he grounded the
Jews at Rome no better, that were scarce catechized in rudiments of
Christianity by him that was not Bishop of Rome some five and twenty years,
Acts 28.
but also of the circumcision: and not only of negligence but forgetfulness,
in not remembering the words of Christ, Ioh: 21:15.
Feed my Lambs, upon whom depended the hope of the whole flock: It is a
sign of lightness to be credulous, so said Porphiry against the Christians;
but being mortal as we are, and not celestial, let them aperire fontem
sciendi, and we will imponere iugum credendi: If they can make us know it, we
will submit our selves and believe it: yet they cannot.

But that he left it to the Bishop of that See is the maine issue: let them
answer Paul that had not a vision of the Gentiles as Peter had, but the
division of them from the Jews: and even then me thinks when the Doctor of
the Gentiles, Acts 28.28
of which Rome was the chief City, was out of favor with his Countrymen I
think Bishop Peter was something inhospitable, to let him hire an house. Peter
had no Palace, Epiphan: Hares. 27.
that's a wonder, no more had Paul, both Roman Bishops: It seems that Peter
dwelt upon the stone in which Luke did engraue the picture of the Virgin Mary,
or else to be supposed that he was Bishop of Rome by one of St. Ieroms
allegories, Hierom: in Philem: Acts 28.30
as he does interpret Paul's biennium, to be the gift in the two Testaments, and
so the Bishopric it self: so doubtful we shall find it in the history,
that when we come to believe it, I doubt it will but prove an Allegory.

Let them then interpret Gregory the Pope, Greg: ep. ad Eulog: Alexand.
who does avouch that the succession of Antioch was from Peter, and answer
Antioch, who they say, enjoyed him seven years, where was the first name of
Christian, or Polichronius of Jerusalem, who thinks the Primacy should be
where Christ first was, where was his first Fecit and Docuit: Then alas it will
be but mere folly to thrust upon us the writings of Clemins and Anacletus,
Jacobo fratri Domini Episcopo Episcoporum Hebraeorum Ecclesiam Regenti.
whom they make say so without any craft, for Clement writes to James, and
after that John is living, both under this Pope, both their writings in the
canon, and the Epistles of these the only heirs to Peter's Chair forgotten:
and so they may, for truly their authors are hidden and obscure, as the devout
Abbot spoke of William the simoniacall Bishop of Afric. Concerning his
letters Apostolical, so secret they are that they seem to come a Principe
tenebrarum, not a Principe Apostolorum: They were forgotten as he did his own
Dignity, by calling James the Bishop of Bishops, and yet will teach the
Apostle, as his successor Anacletus it seems being a little more warm in the
Chair corrects Saint John by deriuing (...), John 1.
which the Apostle himself does interpret a stone: as simple deriuations as
the Latin is in which their Epistles were written. Aug. conf. 8.
But as Victorinus the Rhetorician before his full conversion, ashamed of the
humility of the word, blushing at the shame of the cross, was wont to mock
Simplicianus when he inclined him to open profession: Ergo ne parietes faciunt
Christianos? The walls of the Church make no Christians, nor the chair of
Rome it seems make Rhetoricians, but as in Art, so in the Truth of Religion,
it may be, Mat. 13.45
they acquire all their knowledge by sitting: no pains they take to purchase
that pearl in the Gospel: no, we presuppose they found it before they sought
it.

Is it come to this? Then to that Religion, and unto that Church which finds
us and we not them, must we be reconciled under pain of damnation: Eusebius: 5.
Let us deal with them a posteriore: Then was Irenaeus in the state of
damnation, which took up Victor for censuring the Eastern Church: Then those
were blessed which Cyprian calls Desperate, Ep: 55.
and he in a woe case for condemning those that made appeal to Rome from
Afric: Then presently after Cyprian, the Church of Carthage must be damned
for want of Reconciliation, that excepted against the universality in
particular: Ne quidem Romanus. And St. Augustine as deep in hell that was an
assistant to that Council. Search the Counsels Mileuitan and Nice, nothing
can be found in the Originals, except as the Athenians made an Altar, where the
Beasts staid, to the unknown God, so where the Pope sits, they will make
relation to some unknown Original in the time of Numa: but Plus oculo quam
oraculo: Chrysostom. Hom: 43. in Matthew.
we will see it before we receive it upon their bare report: for we are sure
the Greek Church would not yield in Chrysostomes time, he writes against it,
and the other did excommunicate those that made an appeal to Rome, because no
good did issue from appeals; but long iourneyes, expense of money, many
miseries, but no redress, no pity, no indignation at the wrongs, and to those
that did practice them, it was not Refugium, but Suffugium, a refuge, but a
shift to slip off the punishment of some notorious crimes, that they had
committed in their own Church: not for any care to religion, but to be of that
religion which did either permit unlawful things, or dispense with great
persons, like the Magi that said unto the Kings of Persia: We have a Law, that
it is not lawful for a man to marry his sister, we have another Law, Virgils
Fglog.
that Kings may do what they list: Et quae tanta fuit Romam tibi causa
videndi? Libertas, says the Poet, liberty and impunity was the cause of these
appeals, and though there were a necessity, yet no fruit did grow from it.

The comparison which S. Jerome a Priest in Rome does make betwixt Orbem and
vrbem is well known, and the place in which he paralels the merit and
Priesthood of Constantinople with Rome. Ier. ep. ad Euagr. Einsdem meriti et
Sacerdotij.
I omit the titles of Gregory the Pope himself, enough to discover his
successors to be Antichristian, not spoken only for mere opposition to the
pride of John of Constantinople, but for his own part, absit haec leuitas ab
aurihus meis, Job. 7.
he would not hear of it, but because he was but a spark of mortality as
others were, he would not strive to fly the highest, but shine the brightest,
and so we are come past the 600. years: Then every man knows how Phocas
killed Mauritius, and usurped the Empire; and to curry favor with the Romans,
made that dog of the flock, Boniface the third universal Bishop: so they
continued in hight of pride and cruelty: as the old Rome was built in blood:
so was the supremacy gotten by parricide, Psa. 67.20 Non Jesuitarum suasu sed
militum terrcre: Eliens. epis. ad Bell. Apol. Resp. cap. 1.
we wish it did not so continue.

It was a saying, Thou leadest thy people like sheep by the hands of Moses and
Aaron, but now alas, it is not Ducit, but Trahit, we must not be led, but
drawn by the necks, not so much by the persuasion of Jesuits, as the violence
of Soldiers: Ignatius turned from a Soldier to a Jesuit, now turned from a
Jesuit to a Soldier: by bloody inquisitions and by force of arms must we be
forced to reconciliation: not violence used only upon Subjects, but upon
Kings: There have been some that have given an uncertain sound to the battle
against this plea: As that the Bishop of Rome is not above a Council in Paris;
not above the Laws and all Ecclesiastical Persons, by supreme power, in
Venice: not above all by a direct temporal dominion, in the consistory of
Cardinals: There have been in England five Kings that have resisted the Pope
in such usurpations, and now, thank God, JAMES is the sixth, but amongst them
and us the first, which not long ago in that famous disputation at Cambridge,
where the King, Anne Dom: 1614. Mark 8. Luke 2:6. Reu. 1:13.
sitting like Christ among the Doctors, keeping an Act, not of approbation, but
of admiration, or rather like the Son of God in the similitude of the Son
of Man amongst the golden Candlestickes, a King like a Doctor, opposing,
answering, determining, not in the Majesty of his person, of which he did but
show the lineaments, but in the beauty of his administration, in which he did
communicate light to every disputer, and glory to himself: When that profound
Schooleman his professor, upon the Question, Whether the Pope had any power in
temporal things as they tended to a spiritual good? Objected that the Pope
had power, in disposing and transferring dominions, in prescribing the civil
Laws of Nations to Kings, as S. Ambrose might to Theodosius under pain of
Excommunication. The sum of the answer being, that it was not by civil
authority, Non politica authoritate sed medicina spirituali, etc.
but as by a spiritual medicine, not by the power of constraint, but
prescription, not by authority but by Council: The King added Concionando non
cogendo: It pleased him further to use these words, Quaestio est vtrum
Ambrosius iure fecit? Vtrum exemplum cius sit lex? Nego plane Ambrosij factum
fuisse licitum, nimis arroganter se gessit Ambrosius, and plusquam decuit in ea
re. Spoken like a King; Leuit. 10.
for Moses must speak when Aaron must hold his peace: S Ambrose might persuade
him to defer the punishment 30. days after the or of the Grecians he could not
constrain him, nay a little further, since man is only above beasts, but Kings
are above men, because they are Gods, there is no way but by turning to a
greater God, Psalm: 82: 6.
whose children they are, and though they be wicked, yet they are children of
the most highest: strange children, Psa: 18: 76.
etc strange because they let go Justice, but children because they keep the
image of God: and therefore when S. Gregory gave advice to that murderer
Phocas which had slaughtered Mauritius with his Sons and his Brother, even then
when he might read the impiety of the fact in the very nature of the plague
that followed, which killed them before they had any time to be sick, Ex
Iudel: 6: lib: 1: c: 1: and 2.
as he murdered them before they had any time to rule: yet his advice to take
away the enemies of the commonwealth, to restore the freedom of it, to remove
abuses was concluded thus, Melius hoc orando quam suggerendo: A greater degree
of divine wisdom then was in St. Ambrose: This turned to the King, he turned
to God, far from constraint that he would scarce suggest: And it seems when
Elias had the sword it was given him, and then he took it, persuaded by
Prophetical motion, directed by the word which commands the death of
Idolaters, and permitted by the King, but he turned not the sword against the
King though he were an Idolater, no more then Michael did the sword of the
Tongue against the Dragon: neither the nature of an Angel with the right of
his quarrel, nor the advantage of the place, nor the multitude of an heavenly
host must conquer but the blood of the Lamb. A King is like unto Sina that
must not be touched but by Moses, that carries within him the spirit of
meekness: there is more fire of courage in a King, then in an ordinary
person: It must be quenched by preaching of the blood of Christ: Our Churches
bed is a bed of flowers, Cant. 1.
nothing in it but the sweetness of peace: The Church may correct something in
zeal, suffer some things in meekenes, some things in good consideration they
may dissemble, so they do not approve the^. And when the King waxes wanton in
wickedness like Jeroboam that worshipped the calfe, It is enough that the
Prophet reprooues it: All shall be well if we neither eat the fat nor the
blood, be neither carnal nor cruel. Leu: 3: 17.
So then we commend S. Ambrose with Mr. Calvin for his constant refusing to
appear before Valentinian a young Emperor. ruled by his mother that was an
Arrian: Institu: 4: 11: d: 15.
distinguishing rightly betwixt his authority in matters temporal, and his
judgment in matters merely spiritual, but in this point leave him to the
censure of the King. In the mean time our Religion is not a Religion of blood:
even the Law only prescribed the death of beasts, not of men, no humane
sacrifice but Christ that came for the preservation of men to sacrifice his
blood. The same argument therefore that we have against the religion of the
Heathen gods, their cruelty in desiring the slaughter of men, and of the most
innocent, as virgins and children, which proves it to be false; The same we
have against this religion of Rome, that makes a game of murder, and holds it
an Aphorism to kill the innocent; praeter intentionem, for the Catholic good.
Ephesians: 4. Ioh: 12: 32.
Let us be reconciled to that Religion where is the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, and not to that which does not draw us, but drive us: not draw
us like a wagon, but drive us like the horses, and now by this time we are come
to move you by the consideration of two points.

First, what honor the fathers of the 600. years gave, and upon what ground.

Secondly what division that causes rather then reconciliation.

We stand not upon this word Pope, it is but a Father, it was but given to
Pastors, to those that were worthy Pastors. Ascribed to Fathers in Epistles
and superscriptions, as to Augustine a poor Bishop, and to Paulinus a poor
Deacon. A name of reverence now grown odious, as tyrannus is for tyranny: And
when it was given, it was an amplification in regard of worth of the persons,
not in regard of preeminence of place, given to those that had nothing to do at
Rome: and that (...) as Theodosius called Ambrose in the temple of
Constantinople and Illustrissimus Doctorum latinoru^, ascribed to S. Austin,
and the large circuit S. Gregory entitles Cyprian withal, even all the 4
quarters of the world, is rather a personal amplification, then a jurisdiction
of place: and indeed consisting with equality of a jurisdiction that others may
challenge from John and James, and Polycarpus: and if Rome were wise, they
would take as great a privilege fro Paul as Peter, I am sure Irenaeus is of
that mind, Lib. 3. Acts 6.
and all the privilege that the Counsel of Afric gave him after Cyprians
death, was to be Primaescdis Episcopus, not Princeps Sacerdotu^, no relation to
the holy Synod of Priests and Bishops, but to the place, and to the place
only in a civil respect, other institution it had none from Christ, and in
this no likelihood of succession from Peter. A civil priority then, not an
Ecclesiastical superiority: Civil, for the Scripture in the hottest
contention of the Church in the 600. years was never urged for it. It was
found out in the grossest times of ignorance, and then it began to be thus
ordered: 1 Rome: 2 Alexandria: 3 Antioch: 4 Jerusalem: And (alas) see the
indisposition, Alexandria before Antioch, the seat of Mark before his Master
Peter at Antioch: A malice discovered to the Apostle of love, is Ephesus of no
account where John preached? he preached too unhappily and foretold the tricks
of Babylon, and that is the reason why the Church that he founded, was not
Patriarchall: And Jerusalem the Iast because traditions did not begin there,
but the Gospel first at Jerusalem had his original: Luke 24.
so that it was not Christ nor his Apostles, that made Churches Patriarchall:
They were dead before Constantinople was made one: It was propter Imperium as
the Council of Chalcedon defined, notwithstanding the instances of Leo's
Legates. It is true some of the fathers did inuest the old Rome with
privileges above the rest, but 152. Bishops gave the younger Rome equality,
because there was an Empire and Senate as well adorned: Magnificent titles the
Grecians gave poor Grecians like schoole-boyes to their Pedagogues,
Reuerendissimo, Maximo, so did they write: for Rome was then the scourge of the
world. And for that unlimited title of universality, it is so trust up of late,
that I must only gird it up with one of Justin Martyrs interpretations upon
that All of every beast which Peter saw in his vision, Act. 10.12 Quest. 2. ad
Orthod. 89.
which All he does restrain to the unclean: As Christ who is the head of
every man, that is, of the faithful who are the body of Christ, not of the
unfaithful: so they may expound (universal) if they will of all in Rome, not
in the world, and if the comparison hold, then shall they have (no doubt) a
company of cleanly beasts except they be mended since S. Bernards time, he
describes them hand somely in that Chapter which he entitles of the manners of
the Romans, to be a want on people, intractable, tumultuous, rebellious,
proud, sacrilegious, seditious, inhumane, unfaithful, importable, unthankful,
De consid. 4. c. 2.
deceitful, hypocritical: It is enough for the Pope to dress his own
stables, all the world is too much, o but Rome is too little, as Paradise was
for Adam: it is too straight a prison for his Godhead, Genesis 3.
then since Man is become like one of us, let us turn him into the wide world
out of Paradise, from Paradise to a fools Paradise, a little Garden, a small
City will not comprehend his godhead: So shall the Bishop of Rome be
universal, and like to Lucifer in Heaven, and Adam in Paradise, take up the
Rome of the second person in Trinity, because One. Consid. 3. Cap 4.
But Saint Bernard thought it not lawful for him to dismember the Churches at
his pleasure to confound Order, and to break open the bounds of the Church
which his fathers before had made: Romans 13.
power he gives him, and thinks it unlawful to resist him; power he has, a
principal power, but not a singular power: his meaning is, he has an head
above him, unto which other eminent members of the Church have a reference as
well as he. Every one knows how the Fathers run upon the difference betwixt
praesum and prosum, betwixt dominion and dispensation, betwixt possession and
Law: and so his Lordship which was prayed for in their Letanies in the time of
Pius Quintus, by the name of Dominus Apostolicus amongst the rest, is by this
discovered to be nothing but truly worse then Octanus and Tiberius his
predecessors which refused the name of LORD, because it was a Title of power,
but not of Piety: So then his Ecce duo Gladij, The two swords, the one for the
Church, the other of the Church; the one from the mouth of the Priest, the
other from the hand of the Emperor: It is enough, it is too much, as devout
Bernard speaks: And by this time we see the reason why the Pope above Rome,
and Rome above all Cities, Inter Caput extulit vrbes, have exalted themselves.

These 5. things considered will clear it.

1 A primacy in regard of the Empire.

2 The chief men elected Popes, excellent Scholars, worthy Martyrs. This
made the people wing on that side.

3 The Emperor translated to the East, The Pope getting the upper hand of his
deputy at Rome, the Emperor curbing the Bishop of Constantinople, the Latin
Church grew strong, and the Greek weak.

4 The leuity of the Greek Church, given to novelties, distracted with
heresies, suffering of Bishops opposite to their Church, even within their
walls, was the cause that compelled the better sort of Bishops to appeal to
Rome for succor, and of the credit of that Sea.

5 The Emperor still withdrawing his forces, the Clergy of Rome
ouer-ballancing the temporalty, Propter imperium, gave advantage as stirrups
for the man of Pride to raise himself by the help of Phocas, and such wicked
Pages that lifted him up into that seat where now he sits Although all the
Fathers that speak of Order, and Gregory, and Hierome themselves so much run
upon that word Aequaliter, yet now ambition tears in pieces those brazen
steps where Devotion before did wear it self, and we are wearied with the
weight of this great head that is upon us, that never yet could be set upon
the shoulders of Russia and Armenia, and other places: and now we may pray
with DAVID, Lord save us from the Horn of the Unicorn, because this head has
made the most precious home of the Church an Instrument of Murder and of
division rather then Union.

Be it so, that will not content them to be Lords over us, but our Faith also:
They will have an infallibility of Determination: That must depend upon that
Chair, and to this we must be reconciled, and so we must think under pain of
damnation.

This Question was canuassed at Cambridge before the King: It must determine
and therefore necessary, One Tribunal necessary to determine matters of Faith;
Non vnum vniuersum supremum Tribunal said the King upon that ground. The
Deane of Paul's, Loquebatur in puncto, Doctor Carry.
as the Prouer be is: His words were like goades and nails, sharp and sure.
How wittily and substantially did he prove, that there was to be had the
last resolution of Faith: that Christ instituted that infallible: that it was
most expedient to be so: that Christ foresaw it to be so expedient: that the
Church could not be one body without it: that there could not be without it a
just uniting of the parts of the Church: that there could be no unity of Faith:
that without it Heretics could not be convinced, nor lay men in the Church:
that the unity of the Church was more preserved by it: that no Heresies were
condemned without that Bishops consent: and that hce had the definitive
sentence. If any were given by others, yet they had recourse to the Pope for
confirmation, as in the Mileuitan Council. So pithily disputing, that it was
enough to have plucked out a man's eyes as the preaching of Paul to the
Galathians, and led him by a blind Jesuitical obedience to think so.

The King certainly admired the frame of his arguments, and therefore impatient
of interruption, bad them, let the Deane go on. A frame indeed.

Aut hoc inclusi ligno occultantur Achiui,
Aut aliquis latet error, equo ne credit Teucri.
I had not spoken so much of him, but in remembrance of S. John's, That has
brancht out this goulden Candlestick to beautify one of the most famous
Churches in this King dome: Greg. ep. Reg. 12. Indu. 11. cp. 7.
S. Paul's in the time of Gregory the Great complained for want of light, this
cannot, howsoever in the other I am sure not in the spiritual sense. I have
done with him; even in his Relation something may be collected to unsettle that
opinion of dependence upon the person of that One, as chief in matters of
faith, because we take our level of belief rather from the matter then the
person, you shall know him by his fruits, Mat. 7.15.
nnt his fruits by him. It is Christ's order not Quis but Quid. The Pope as a
Graduate or Catholic Priest may err, not in his Chair. There is not Quid
but Quis, not what he speaks, but what he is, the order of Christ perverted:
and so give me at the last leave to persuade you by the second point. That this
dependence upon this one person may be a cause rather of division and
separation, then of that Reconciliation that is so much implied, and so
furiously persuaded.

Now let us look back and see whether we can be reconciled to that Church:
which before that head could be set on that body, caused more distractions and
bloodshed of the Lords servants, then was in any part of Christendom. And why
did Chrysostom complain in his time, that the Bishop of Rome had filled the
Churches with blood, and defiled the holy Eucharist with murders? well, it
might have been prevented, if Peter's successor had done to his fellow Bishops
as Peter to Paul, Gal. 2.9.
given the right hand of fellowship: or if they would, as Gregory does
interpret that part of Esaias; Esa. 40.9. Gregor.
O Sion that bring good tidings, get thee into the high mountains, not of
the highness of place, but of the excellency of life, but he keeps himself
alost above his fellows of the Clergy; if he would descend a little there
might millstones of offenses and scandalous sins be discovered in him to
tumble him as low as Eucebolius that unprofitable salt: and upon that place of
Mark, after Christ had confuted the supremacy of the Apostles, Mar: 9: 50.
he inferres, Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another,
wisdom with unity, the Pomegranats besides the bells in the garment of the high
Priest, the diversity of gifts without, the unity of Faith within, not any
eminency of place, or necessity of dependence, or infallibility of
determination: in which we may observe the indisposition of that Bishop from
that scripture in the Romans. Rom: 14: 22
Have thou faith? have it to thy self: that he should love for others, and
believe for himself; but he believes for others, and loves for himself. No
love in him that cannot brook equality, but is ravished with his height of
dignity, as Peter was with his glory on Mount Tabor, not what he had, but what
he saw, and would not look once at Paul that mounted higher, yet was brought
down, Ab inuisibilibus coelorum ad Secreta coniugum, from the spiritual
mysteries of the third heaven, to the carnal secrets of a marriage bed, and
calls himself a servant, a fellow-helper, one that had dominion over his own
life, not his brethren, 1 Cor: 4: 1. 2 Cor 1: 14.
all to beat down pride, but it would not be.

But indeed one visible head is the cause of errors, and pride the cause of
division, and dependence upon one a fountain to poison all the rivers of the
Church: One that has often provoked them to hatred, animated them to
contentions, instructed them to treacheries, carried them to slanders: the
mouth of that One has taught them that has been sometimes impure, sometime
blasphemous: Rea: 18.
I cannot conceive how all nations should be drunk with the cup of that One,
Verse 23.
how deceived with the enchantme^ts of that One, unless it be by such an
universal dependence up on One. Give him what they will, the more they give
him, makes us suspect him the more: that he can determine a against the
Epistles of Paul, he is Paulo mayor, that he can define against the old
Testament, because he is greater then all the Authors of the old Testament,
a title in their Canons: Ros: flis: Franc:
That Christ did orare, Franciscus exorare, Christ prayed, Sess: 6:
Francis a lowzie Friar obtained: That Pope Leo was anointed the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah in the Lateran Counsel under him; that not only the Lion, but
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, was ascribed to him
by the Ambassadors of Cecilia. P: Aemil: lib. 7:
That he can dispense with one that committed adultery with the Virgin Mary,
and with one that plucked a feather from Gabriel the Archangels wing, light
stuff for this Thamar the whore of Rome. That they must needs misinterpret
the first verse in the Bible, that one visible Head, non in principijs, sed in
principie, Gen: 1: 1:
that they must thus add and diminish, and mistake the word, enforce tradition
as articles of faith, such articles as are published at the Popes Parliaments.
That it is not lawful to appeal from the the Pope to God himself: and all
these to be believed under pain of damnation, though all the world should
stand against it: Then fall down and worship him, I: de Turrecrem: in L: 3: 64.
Dicite plures, Dicite nullum, Dicite Diabolum: as Apollonius and Julian the
Apostata fell from many Gods to no Gods, and from no God to adore the Devil,
so if we must not only fall down here before God, and worship him, Dicite
Papam: who will not then start aside at these fearful characters which Satan
himself has marked upon the face of this Antichristian Bishop? These are
blasphemies.

And now I humbly desire you that loved that sweet Soul that lives now in
heaven, and upon earth did breath this temperate demands in his Treatise
against that necessary Dependence amongst you: that being a parcel of his last
will unto you, it may be a caveat to take heed of those winding Spirits that
have left off the habit of Lions, and Woolues, and Bears, the violence of
Kingdoms described in Daniel, and have taken the names of cups, and drinks,
and enchantments, and women, and whoredoms in the Revelation: Zach: 3: 7.
and as in Zacharies prophecy wickedness is called a woman, so Antichrist is
called a whore, not a whoremaster, that does overcome the younger Gentry of
the Land, not by force, but subtilty, John 4.
and to that end take heed of those that meddle with the Samaritane like
factors in other Countries of no Religion, but like Medlers, indeed rotten
within, and if that skin of pretended love unto their Country, and loyalty to
their King were plucked off, you will find it so: and see them turn Assyrians,
a scourge to their own brethren: And though these ordinarily object our own
diuinons betwixt the separation, the Caluinists and us, as it was of the
obstinate Graecians in S. Barnards time; so say we of them, Iuncti fide pace
diuisi, A little lame they are, and will not go the beaten way of our
Discipline, they take a softer way of liberty not far from us, as Prudentius
comprehends wisely in those hexameters.

-- Concordia laesa est,
Sed defensa fide, quin and concordia sospes
Germanam comitata fidem sua vulner a ridet.
In Faith we agree, but in remote points of more difficulty, and less
necessity we may differ as themselves do. It they see our Bishops less
insolent, and the Clergy less dissolute, if they see desolations,
dilapidations, prescriptions, confusions, scandals in our Church, not
altogether dressed because of negligence and deceit, yet it hurts not our
Faith, because these are personal, and we bid that man of pride look to
himself, for he walks as one upon a rope, Justin Martyr. Ep. ad Ier. and
Serenum (...).
above the place that God has provided for him, and so has caught many falls
in our observation, we hope fore runners of his destruction: no great motives
from any thing in him for reconciliation.

This man that made that Treatise in term Lectures for you: The man of love
beloved of you, not in a barren love, but in the love of both Rachel and Lea,
benevolence and bounty without any triumph of unkindness, or selfeloue, which
are the breake-strings of the heart of Love, A mauit nos quoque Daphnis: for
he called Grayes Inn his Crown, and well might he call it so that endured so
many public labors and private wrestlings, so many Reading amongst them, so
many meditations at home that brought him first to Timothies (...), often
infirmities when he was but young, the Gout St. Gregory's disease, the stone
St. Barnards hell, the burning ague St. Augustines Purgatory. All these he had,
Mat. 7.
like Light and Salt he did wast himself, draw on disease upon disease, and
which is the life of Love and St. Paul's Impendam, cut off all hope of life, yet
not unrewarded in living and loving: for he refused all for your sakes, who
would have done this but for a crown? not a crown of Paper to write of him
and adorn his memory as I do; Plusarch. in Agesil. 1 These. 2.19
but St. Paul's crown of rejoicing in his care and labor for you; so did he
Ouare, so was this Lamb crowned with gould, so did he sacrifice himself, and
so was crowned D: Fenton the Preacher of Grayes Inn for the space of 17.
years, whom every man did know to be so approved for Sanctity, so Catholicall
for profession, so conformable for unity, so discreet in commanding, so in
dustrious in disposing, so able in performing, so modest in speaking, so sober
in zeal, so right in judgment, so affable in conversation, so amiable in
aspect, and that which was an admirable conueiance to his judgment, his
invincible meekness against all contradictions of opinions: that he went like
meek Moses through the red Sea, Number. 12.2.
a world of Divisions inclined to no faction, but followed his calling as he
did the cloud and the pillar, that we may say with the same affection as Hales
of Bonauenture; non videtur Adam in homine isto peccasse: never was more
knowledge and so much innocence in a Preacher that was the son of Adam. We
have lost our delight; he has changed his for better, in that place where
there is exact knowledge, and perfect righteousness Let therefore the
worthiness of him be a motive to those of your society that are unsteady,
that they make no intercisions in this point, but rely upon him as an Oracle
sent from heaven: As it was once the cry of the Synod, Haecest fides Cyrilli:
haec est fides Cyrilli, so haec est fides Fentoni: Whosoever have any other
acclamation, proceeeding from spiritual tymorousnesse; or diabolical
peevishness: there cutting betwixt two religions; these intercisions will at
the last prove abscissions, turn to separations from God and his Church like
Goats. And as it was not Abell but his blood, Matthew 25.
so not the writer, but the letter shall be the black scrole of their
condemnation at that day when all judgments and opinions shall be cleared:
which writings are grounded upon rules of Scripture, according to which
Scriptures he professed: In which profession he lived, according to which life
he died and as he lived and died a Lamb, Revel.
so no doubt he follows the Lamb of God from meekness to majesty, from
humility to Glory.

FINIS.
THE WANT OF DISCIPLINE: A SERMON PREAched before the King at White Hall.
EZECHIEL 28.14. Thou art the anointed Cherub which covers, and I have set
thee in Honor.


IT was the Royal state of Tyrus, to which God by his Prophet directs this
speech: a royal and flourishing estate it was which God thus honored,
comparing it to his holy Cherub in the Holy of Holies, which coue red the
Mercy-seate, and the Ark of God. Yet notwithstanding, those sins specified
before, and after my Text did at length overthrow that state: those heinous and
grievous sins, by which even the Cherubs themselves were broken in pieces,
and the most famous kingdoms of the world, long since laid in the dust: And
were it not for these sins so grievous, so general, so inueterate, He that
sits Judge aamong the Gods, and dwells between the Cherubs, would have
dwelt there still: for how loath he was to depart, witness this our Prophet in
the ninth chapter. The glory of the God of Israel was gone from the Cherub
whereupon he was, and stood upon the door of the house. Cap. 9.3.
Great abominations those were which then moved God to remove from his
seat, his Mercy-seate, and when he removed, he stood but upon the door of the
house, offered as if he would be gone, but went back again, and staid there
still. Being forced again to remove in the tenth Chapter, Cap. 10.
he staid at the door still, loath to depart: but at the last, when there was no
remedy, no hope of amendment, no remorse, he went away for all ado.

The more cause have those Kingdoms and States to magnify the name of God,
among whom he vouchsafes to continue and dwell still, and for whom he has
caused these examples to be written, that in them they might look themselves,
consider their dignity with thankful hearts, and in their dignity their
duty, with obedient hearts to the highest majesty: for these two, dignity and
duty are ever so twisted together, as they ought never to be severed.

Both of them implied in each part of this text: In the name of Cherub.

In the anointing or hallowing of the same:

In the work or office of covering:

And last of all, in the Author of all this excellence, the Lord: I have set
thee in honor.

In every one of these, Nescio an plus honoris vel oneris: sure I am, too much
honor cannot be given to them who bear so great a burden. Wherefore that subtle
serpent showed Christ all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, he
shows them all in a moment of time, Luke 4.5.
says S. Luke, full well knowing if he should have given Christ any longer
time to have looked into them, he would have perceived somewhat in them, that
would not have tempted him so much: Great is the glory of them without
question, as appears by this glorious comparison: Cherubs were pictures of
Angels like men, to teach that some men should be like Angels, and though all,
even the best of us in regard of our personal infirmities shall be men, not
Angels: yet in the place and execution of public functions we ought to be
Angels, not Men: Angels, so it pleases God to call public persons in respect
of his Divine image which he has put upon them, for as Angels do carry the
name of the Sons of God above other creatures in the first chapter of Job: so
these men be filij Excelsiomnes, Job. 1.6. Psalm. 82.6.
in the fourscore and second Psalm: not as ordinary persons like pictures
drawn to the shoulders in respect of Reason and understanding, but drawn
throughout as Cherubs were, to take in heart and affections, and the whole man.

For the understanding part: My Lord (says Mephibosheth) is as an Angel of
God, 2 Samuel 19 27. so able for his wisdom to judge of all matters, for
sincerity and readiness to execute, as Angels are ready to do the will of God:
Ps. 103.20
So it is our daily Prayer that his will may be done in earth, as it is in
Heaven, that is, with all integrity, as the holy Angels do it, with all
alucrity as the Seraphins do it, Esaias. 6.2.
described with six wings in the Prophecy of Esaias, That they may do his will
both in Justice like the Cherub at the gate of Paradise with the blade of a
sword shaken, as also in mercy like this Cherub with wings evermore stretched
out.

2 A Cherub is but an Angel, but this Cherub carries the name of Christ the
anointed, who in that he was anointed was reputed far more excellent then
an Angel, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Unto the Son he says, Heb. 1.8.
thy throne is for ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of
righteousness, wherefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows: All Christians receive some drops of spiritual
unction, for which they be colled Christiani from Christ, but Christus Domini,
the anointed of the Lord is amongst men, as Christ among the Angels anointed
above his fellows, hallowed and sanctified above the rest, and separated from
the rest to take upon him the person of God himself, to sit upon his throne,
and to execute his judgment: Blessed be the Lord thy God, says the Queen of
Saba, who has loved thee to set thee on his throne as King in stead of the
Lord thy God. 2 Chro. 9.8.


As anointing does imply a dignity, Vncti Domini e grege factisunt egregiae
creaturae, so does it with all a duty, for Oil is both a gentle, and a very
Sovereign thing. It cures by way of suppling, to teach them to be gracious
Sovereigns, to establish their royal thrones by mercy, Proverbs the 20. Prou.
20.28. Number. 11.12
Like Moses carrying his people in his arms as a Nurse does her sucklings: So
David tendering his people as he Tendered his Ewes great with young ones: like
Solomon, As a shower of Rain distilling into a fleece of Wool: Psalm. 72.2.
like Christ himself, who though he bruised his enemies with the Rod of Iron,
and brake them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, yet amongst his own did he
not break a Bruised Reed, nor quench a Smoking flax.

Which tender care over the flock of God insinuated in the word anointed, is
most lively expressed in the office of covering: for as Christ does profess
he would often have gathered his people even as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings: so these anointed Cherubs do with their wings stretched out,
cover the Mercy-seate, and Ark of God. This Cherub to whom Ezekiel here
speaks was thus far honored, that being a Gentile, he was vouchsafed to be
a Benefactor unto the Church of God, for that which David prophesied of him in
the five and fortieth Psalm, Psalm. 45.12
The daughter of Tire shall do homage with presents; the same was accomplished
by Hiram King of Tirus, and his Subjects in Salomons days, who sent Cedar and
Firre-trees, Gold, and what ever was desired to the building of the Temple, 1
Kin. 9.11.
whose Navy brought much gold from Ophir, and precious stones, Chap. 10.11.
whose cunning work men made all these exquisite works described in the
seventh Chapter of the same book, by whose means the Temple was adorned and
beautified, even as the Cherubs did adorn the Mercy-seate: for which Honor
done unto him (for Hiram took it to be a great Honor) in the first of Kings,
the fifth. The state of Tyrus was honored, 1 Kings 5 7.
as we see in this place above 14. generations of Kings after him from Salomons
days to these of Ieconias. All which was but a prefiguration that Kings and
Princes of the Gentile, should be protectors of the Church of Christ; the first
fruits whereof we did commemorate yesterday in the wise men of the East, the
full harvest whereof is reaped and enjoyed by us in the North all the days of
our life, and we hope shall be by our posterity to the end.

Blessed be those days wherein it may be said in plenitudine sensus, even in
the fulness of the holy Ghosts meaning, that not only this Scripture, but many
other joyful Prophecies to this purpose are fulfilled in our ears, that
Christian Princes twice anointed Cherubs (for this kingdom and that which is
to come) be our Nursing Fathers, Esaias 49.23
and nursing mothers, that the tender Church of Christ shall suck the milk of
Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings, as if Kings had breasts to feed, and wings
to cover and protect the Church of Christ.

Tues Cherub Protegens, which covers the Ark of God, and in it 3. things.

1 The Tables of the Covenant, the moral Law of God, for though the
ceremonial Law did pass as a shadow in the presence of the Body, though the
curse of the moral Law be abolished in the name of Jesus, who has saved us
from the same, and though the rigor of it be mollified, and suppled by Christ,
Cant. 1.2.
whose name is a precious ointment powered out, that our imperfect keeping of
it, is in him acceptable unto God: yet the everlasting and euer-binding Law it
self was engraven by the finger of God in Tables of stone, and reserved in the
Arc to be kept for ever: so as he that willingly breaks the least of these
Commandments, shall be of least account in the kingdom of God, Mat. 5.19.
Matthew. 5.19.

2 The Goulden pot of Manna: not such as perished in a night with worms, be
melted in the day by the Sun, but preserved Manna, representing that
spiritual food that perishes not, but came down from heaven to feed our
souls to everlasting life. Both these have been hitherto covered and
preserved safe for us, not in figure, but in truth.

3 But there is a third, which was also put into the Arc, and that by the
special command of God himself; Of God to Moses in the 17. Numb. 17.10.
of Numbers: Aarons rod that budded, the rod of Discipline, without which
the Church of Christ is better fed then taught. This Rod is either wanting,
or so withered, that it will not smart, men care not for it, their consciences
are not kept in awe for want of it.

St. Paul could threaten the Church of Corinth with this Vultis vt in virga
veniam ad vos? 1 Cor. 4.21.
shall I come unto you with the rod, or in love, and the spirit of
meekness? Sure if any be of such a good disposition that we can win them
with meekness, it is well, but the Rod is gone.

Our Savior Christ after his resurrection, when he would teach his Apostles
by fishing how to fish for men, John the twenty one and the sixth, he bids
them Cast out on the right side of the ship, John. 21.6.
and they shall find: accordingly we cast our nets, and we hope on the right
side, but see the success.

1 Many there be, will never come within compass of the net; there be Recusants
on both sides the ship, in profaneness as well as superstition.

2 Many come within the compass, and suffer us to cast our nets over them, but
they run themselves so deep into the mudde, that the net cannot get under
them. In the 33. Eze. 33.31
of this Prophecy, verse. 31. Son of Man, my people sit before thee, and
hear thy words, but they will not do them, for either they make themselves
merry, or else their heart runs after covetousness. They run into the mudd
of pleasure and pelf of this world that we cannot catch them.

3 Now the third and best sort are caught, and so long as the net is dragged
the same way that they swim, they come currently forward: but when they
perceive how they be restrained of their former liberty, and how their
consciences are entangled in this net, they give a ierke and break net and all.

We had never more need to sit and mend our nets: for let us twist them as
soundly out of holy writ, and weaue them as strongly as possibly we can, Psalm.
2.3.
these sons of Belial who cannot abide a negative, will break them. They
will hear us preach out of the two Tables while the bellows hold, they will
devour whole Gomers of Manna, and yet never the better liking: but Aarons rod
they cannot endure to hear of it, though their souls have surfeted never so
much of sin; though their Consciences be never so dangerously wounded: as
much of the Samaritanes oil as you will to heal it presently, and draw a
skin over it, but for that sharp wine to scour the wound, for that Corasiue
Divinity to eat out dead works, for the Churches Physic by Contrary, they
will perish before they can take it.

After they have suffered their minds to wander after their eyes in the
corners of the world, and to feed upon unlawful vanities: tell them of
afflicting their soul, and crucifying their affections and lusts, of confining
their thoughts unto devotions, and the Meditation of unpleasing objects, Death,
Hell, Anger to come, of David's daily Vows, of striving, of laboring, of
watching unto Prayers with all perseverance. Ephesians. 6.18.


After they have corrupted themselves in the service of Mammon, tell them of
Zaccheus his restitution and Almes-deedes for all their mis-deedes, that all
may be cured by the contrary, and made clean unto them, Luke 11.41. Luke
11.41.


After they have pampered their flesh, and fulfilled the lust of it, tell them
of the Corinthians revenge upon themselves for so offending such a gracious
God, 2 Cor. 7.11.
of Paul's not beating the Air, 1 Cor. 9.26. Psa. 102.9. Luke 7.38.
but beating down his body: of David's ashes for Bread and mingling his drink
with weeping: of the sinful woman's Poenitent Bath and her Towell: and of that
destruction of their flesh that their spirits might be saved in the day of the
Lord: Corin 5.5.
Do but show them this rod they are presently gone, and Aaron is not able to
hold them, except Moses help him: To hear of Discipline either voluntarily
inflicted by themselves, or necessarily imposed by others, is detestable.

If there must needs be a Rod, they will choose Moses Rod, though it turn
Serpent, and sting them like a Scorpion, rather then Aarons, though it bud and
blossom, and would become in the end never so fruitful, and comfortable to
their souls: It was Aarons rod and not Moses, which God commanded Moses, Number
17.10
and not Aaron to preserve in the Arc.

The first time that I find this Rod missing in the Ark of God was in
Salomons days, 1 Kin. 8.9.
in the happy and peaceable days of Solomon: and then was Plenty, Peace and
Liberty, the abuse whereof brought an iron rod for want of Aarons Rod,
Rehoboams Scorpions, the renting of the Tribes, leading into captivity, turned
Salomons Canticles into Ieremies Lamentations, and all for want of Aarons
rod: for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor.
11.31. O Cherub Protector, vouchsafe to look down into this Ark of God,
consider the want of this rod in these quiet, peaceable, Salomons days: Aarons
rod is missing in the Ark of God: our Church in her book does still complain
of the want of this Rod: Until (says She) the discipline of the Primitive
Church may be restored again, which thing is much to be wished, etc. In
steed whereof is a Commination against sinners, as much regarded of the
people, as Bell, Book and Candle. But had we that discipline which the Fathers
of the Primitive Church had, who respected not so much the multitude of
professors, as the truth of their devotion: had we (I say) that severe
discipline in these dissolute days, which they had, and power to execute it,
and grace to use it aright, men would quickly be weary, either of those sins
which they now commit with greediness, or of that counterfeit profession of
Christianity.

This is the Fan that John Baptist speaks of, Mat. 3.12.
which would purge the flower and sever the chafe from the good corn; for
want of this there is no trial or manifestation either of faith by works, or
of Repentance by the exercise of mortification; but as by a vain dead faith,
so by a slight unsound Repentance we deceive both our selves and others, so
consequently there is no fear, no awe, no remorse of conscience. And were it
not that the mercy seat is above the Arc, that the invincible mercy and long
suffering of God in Christ is above all his works, we should soon feel the
want of this Rod.

But the seat of God amongst us is a mercy seat, and his oracles is the
comfortable voice of the Gospel of Christ which defends us and the whole
Church: It was the voice of him that dwelt in the Bush which preserved the Bush
from burning, though it was all of a flaming fire: and it is the voice of the
Gospel of Christ which has preserved this Church from fire and powder. The
anointed therefore as he has already with his Cherubs quill, so let him ever
after with both his wings defend, protect, and cover this Gospel, so long as
the heavens cover the earth with his own wings: they be his, let him then
suffer none to pluck them, lest the Church of God be left naked and
uncovered: They be a pair of wings, let him keep them in their due proportion,
Moses and Aaron be brethren, it were vain to contend for seniority, who was
the elder brother, they are brethren: God leads his people by the hand of
Moses and Aaron: If we see any one, Psalm. 77.2.
he or she beat their hands one against another, presently we imagine there
is a distempered person: let the anointed Cherub to bring us in temper, prune
and proportion his own wings, that in their due places and bounds, they may
be both stretched out to protect the Church of Christ.

4 Thus far we have presumed to ascend; yet one step higher to conclude with
the voice of the author of all: Ego posui te, says the Lord, I have set thee,
that is, I have made thee a Cherub, with my holy oil have I anointed thee, I
have covered and protected thee in the midst of all dangers, to the end that
thou might cover and protect my Church: neither is it unfitly added by the
Translater, I have set thee in Honor, for there cannot be a greater honor then
to protect the Church of Christ, nor a more lasting honor for all posterity,
even 14. generations: I dare be bold to say this title of covering Cherub, is
a more honorable and glorious title then Prince, King, Emperor, or Monarch of
the world.

If all this honor was done to and for shadows, what shall be done to the
body it self? for Hiram and Solomon and his Temple, and the Cherub and the
Arc were but all shadows of these blessings we enjoy: what honor is it to
protect that Church for which the King of heaven has taken such pains, as he
could not do more for his Vineyard: That Church for which the King of glory
that fills heaven and earth with his glory, became a lump of flesh, Who binds
Kings with chains, and Nobles with linkes of Iron, was himself swadled in
clouts and laid in a manger? what honor is it to be a nursing Father, and to
give milk to that which was bought, and is daily fed with the flesh and
blood of the Son of God? what honor is it to cover that with his Cherubs
wings which the Angels in Heaven desire to behold and look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.
(...) says S. Peter, and he alludes unto the Cherubs that were made bowing
and looking into the Arc, and Mercy seat: so the blessed Angels in Heaven,
who continually behold the face of our Heavenly Father, they bow themselves and
count it a part of their contemplative happiness to look into those holy
mysteries of salvation, which we on earth do enjoy. Which that this Church
may enjoy while the Sun and Moon endures, beseech we him who dwells amongst
the Cherubs and blessed Angels, to bless us and our Cherub to the honor and
glory of his blessed name, and our everlasting comfort in Christ Jesus: To whom
with the Father and holy Spirit, three persons, one eternal, everliving, and
only wise God, be all honor, praise, and thanks, this day and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE POSSESSION OF A KING.
Another Sermon before the KING.
GENESIS 28.13. The land whereupon thou sleep will I give thee and thy seed.


THis short sentence delivered without curiosity does speak three things.

1 The land of Promise. 2. The promise of the Land. 3. The persons to whom the
Land is by promise assured. 1. The Land of Promise specified in the word
whereupon. 2. The promise of the Land delivered in the word Dabo. 3. The
parties first Jacob himself in person, then his posterity after him: The Land
whereupon thou sleep will I give thee and thy seed: this is the effect of
the Text.

But if I should rent it from the premises, I should offer injury to the
context, for it is not entire of it self, neither can it stand alone.

1 While Jacob was sollicitous for a biding place upon earth, Verse. 12.
God points him the way to heaven in the former verse, Behold a ladder whose
top reached unto heaven, and the Angels of God went up and down by it.

2 To assure him that that way was open for him, he renews the covenant made
unto his Fathers in this verse: I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and
the God of Isaac.

3 Then follows my text, The Land will I give thee, etc. teaching Jacob ever
to set heaven before earth, even then when he most desired and stood in
greatest need of a place upon earth, to provide for his mansion in Heaven: I
wot not whether the holy Ghost had any such intent in transposing Isaacs words
while he was blessing his two Sons in the former chapter; for in Esaus blessing
the fatness of the Earth is put before the dew of heaven: Genesis 27.39
but in Jacobs blessing it is quite contrary: God give thee of the dew of
heaven and the fatness of the earth: Verse. 28.
howsoever, this I am sure of, that our Savior plainly asseuers, that if we
first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, all these
shall be ministered according to our several places: the whole land whereupon he
sleeps to Jacob and his seed.

First, It Is not an unknown land, a far off which I will give thee, but even
this whereupon thou sleep: and secondly a fruitful and plentiful land that
flows with milk and honey: and thirdly which is more, a blessed and holy
land, whereupon thou sleep, and sleeping dreamest, and dreaming beholdest
the gate of heaven, and the way to eternal happiness.

There be profane spirits in the world (far be they from the palaces of
Jacob) who would persuade us that Religion and this gate of heaven is but a
dream: but let them know that the foolishness of God is wiser then the
wisdom of men, and the weakness of God stronger then men, whose power and
wisdom do by silly means shine the most glorious: what is counted more idle
then a Dream? What is of greater importance then the way to life? What Is weaker
then water? What Is stronger then the house of God? yet he that laid the beams
of his chambers in the waters, has revealed that to Jacob in his sleep which
the greatest potentates of the earth, and the most quick disputers of the
world could never find broad waking.

Jacob slept upon the land which God gave him, and might sleep soundly for he
was weary, but his sleep was a troubled sleep, and great matters did run in
his head; by which it seems God would divine unto Jacob that possessors of
great Dominions must be sometime: content with broken sleep, when meaner
persons sleep more securely under the shadow of their wings: we that little
know what belongs to these, can read in our books, Tali nocte dormire non
potuit Rex, as good King David's eyelids slumbers, and Jacobs upon his stony
pillow: Our Savior did once sleep in a ship, and then suffer a tempest to
rise, to intimate that while Governors sleep in security, there is some danger
of a Tempest, yet see the mildness of him that was able to command all, that
when his Disciples did presume to awaken him, he was not offended. This land
whereupon thou sleep, whereon thou take though a troublesome, yet a most
happy and heavenly sleep: this land will I give thee and thy seed, and so we
pass to the

2 Dabo.
Jacob might claim this land by right of inheritance, by his descent from
Abraham and Isaac, by the same right that Abraham is called the heir of the
world, Rom 4.13.
Romans the 4. yet Dabo, I will give, is that upon which Jacob relieth: Gods
gift is the best inheritance, and whatsoever is not grounded upon his promise
has but a sandy foundation, whose promise does establish every man's right,
which houldeth his right from God, and so professes: This did Jacob know, and
this did he acknowledge. It was the phrase of Esau his brother, Genesis 33.9.
and the manner of his speech that he uses speaking of his possessions,
Brother I have enough: Like the rich miser in the Gospel, Soul take thine
ease, thou have enough laid up for many years: but Jacobs answer is in another
tenor, God has had mercy on me, therefore I have all things: Doubtless every
good thing and every perfect gift comes down from above from the Father of
lights: but shall we observe out of the Pronoune Tibi upon whom this gift is
bestowed. It is that wherein the goodness and power and wisdom of God did
most gloriously manifest it self.

3 Tibi.
1 To thee Jacob whom I have chosen of purpose before thou wast borne, that
thou may give all glory to me: Before thou had done good or bad I said,
Jacob have I loved.

2 To thee I give it whom I delivered from the bloody hands of Esau that sought
thy life, from the treacherous conspiracy of him whom I ordained to be thy
servant, and to bow to thee, and by this thy deliverance I witness that thou
art preserved for some excellent work.

3 To thee will I give it, to whom I have revealed this Ladder, the only true
way to heaven, by which the gate of Heaven is open unto thee, and a continual
commerce is had betwixt heaven and earth, by which I standing at the top,
will be thy GOD, and my Angels shall be thy fellows, Ascending and
Descending to defend thee and thy Dominions: To thee will I give, whom I have
so instructed in the knowledge of my Son CHRIST, who is the only Ladder that
knits heaven and earth together, the sole mediator betwixt God and man; the
foot of whose humanity stands upon earth; the top of whose Divinity reaches
unto Heaven. Endeavor more and more to settle and establish this Ladder in the
land where thou sleep, and this Ladder shall establish the land to thee and
thy seed for ever.

Thou well perceiuest what Ladder this is, no peeced ladder as some dreamers
have dreamed, but entire of it self: the way to heaven is not peeced out
either by Saint or Angel, or any other but by Christ alone, standing on earth,
reaching along unto the highest Heaven.

Neither is this way so easy as some have slanderously reported that we
teach, and as flesh and blood is prone to believe, we shall not be carried to
Heaven in a Fether-bed, but we must climb a Ladder. If we be carried as Elias
was in a chariot, it will be a fiery Chariot. If we will climb, we must take
pains, for the way is long, and the impediments many.

That our Church did ever teach a Theoricall Faith without practice, is a mere
slander: We must apprehend and lay hold on this Ladder with the hand of Faith,
and climb every step of it with the feet of our affections, in being
conformable to the Son of God, or else we shall never attain that which we
expect, so has God predestined his to be, Romans 8.29.

1 The first step is his Conception and Birth unto which we must be
conformable in our regeneration and new birth. 2 To his Circumcision, in the
cutting the Foreskinne of our hearts, that we may bleed in remorse for our
wicked life. 3 To his infancy by converting and becoming as little children,
else we can never enter into the kingdom of God. 4 To his Baptism, by our
washing and purification from dead works. 5 To his Life by learning his
humility, meekness, patience, and obedience to his Fathers will. 6 To his
Death by mortification, and fruits of repentance, which if it be a godly
repentance, What care will it work? What indignation? What fear, what zeal,
what revenge, even to the crucifying of our selves unto the World? 7 To his
Resurrection in newnes of life and good works: but here commonly we make a
stand as though we were out of breath, if one of the Sons of thunder do not
urge us forward. 8 To his Ascension by devotion having our conversation in
heaven where Christ sits at the right hand of God: From the foot of his
conception to the height of his Ascension, we must climb if ever we mean to
reign with him: this Ladder did God reveal to Jacob, which Jacob did well
consider, therefore (says God) to thee will I give the land that thou may
settle this Ladder in the land.
4 To thee Jacob will I give it, that thou may be as thy name is a
supplanter, or a wrastler; to supplant Esau and all profane Edomites out of
the holy Land: to wrestle with many crosses, and all impediments which hinder
GODS glory, and good government: for the old Serpent is a supplanter still, and
will never leave biting at the heels to make us fall backward from God:
Christians thought themselves secure, when Governors, who used before to
persecute them, were become Christians. Great cause they had to rejoice, but
none to be secure: Imperatores factisunt Christiani, sed nunquid Diabolus
factus Christianus? Though Emperors become Christians, and the most sincere
Christians become Emperors, so long as the Devil is alive and Walks, Jacob
must wrestle still, that he may become Israel to prevail with God and man.
Pray we that our Jacob may so prevail as Israel did, not so much by his
sword, as by his true sincerity.

5 To thee Jacob and thy seed: Here will I rest and proceed no further. The
promise was to thy progenitors in part, but to thee intier, I was the God of
Abraham, but in the line of Isaak only; I made a promise to Isaak, but in the
line of Jacob, but to thee and thy seed without limit. The family of Abraham
was divided betwixt Isaak and Ismael, whom men called Ismaelites: The family of
Isaak was divided into Jacob and Esau, and his were called Edomites: but the
family of Jacob united all the Tribes which became one Church, one Body, one
Kingdom known by the name of Israel: and doubtless had Solomon preserved
that unity and uniformity of Religion which before was established, the house
of Jacob had never been divided. But Solomon divided religion wherein Gods
kingdom consists, betwixt God and idols, therefore did God in his just
judgment rent his kingdom betwixt Jeroboam and Rehoboam. But in Jacob it was
united, wherein he was a type of the chief corner stone Christ Jesus, who
united many Nations into one everlasting Kingdom: A fit subject for Simeons
song, Mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou have prepared to be a light
to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel: an
admirable pattern for Princes how to carry themselves in their kingdoms: For
such was the dispensation of God, that took away contempt on one side, and
envy on the other, and became salvation unto both, that the Jew might not
contemn the Gentile, therefore he was a light to lighten the Gentiles, that
the Gentile might not insult over the Jew, he was the glory of Israel, and
salvation prepared before the face of all people.

Now the God of all wisdom and power who is only One without division: That
eternal son of his, the only pattern of true union: That holy spirit of
his, whose function it is to build up and knit together the members into one
body in the bond of peace: That blessed Trinity united inseparably in one
Deity, so guide and moderate your Wisdoms and consultations herein, that
Jacob may carry the image of the God of Jacob, that he may be a light to the
one, and glory to the other, and happiness to both.

For setting forward of which happiness observe a threefold blessing entwined
and twisted together in this short sentence promised to Jacob, enjoyed by us.

1 Dabo tibi semen, a posterity to Jacob which his progenitors wanted long. 2
Dabo terram tibi and Semini: a blessing prepared for his posterity also; when
thou shall wax old, and grow weary of this clodde of earth, when thou shall
desire to pluck up thy feet, and step into a better kingdom: The land
whereupon thou sleep is for thy seed after thee. 3 Dabo te and semen tuum
terrae: a blessing of all blessings to this land whereupon: to the land it
self, and an happiness prepared before the face of all people.
This triple cord is not easily broken, neither was it ever broken in the house
of Jacob, something untwisted it was in the captivity, but never broken before
the appearing of the son of God in flesh, then was that Kingdom delivered
unto Christ, that he might be all in all. That blessing be upon us and our
children, upon Jacob and his seed, till the appearing of our Lord in the
clouds, from whence we expect a true kingdom, whereof all these are but
shadows: That everlasting kingdom purchased by the blood of his dear Son
and our only Savior and Redeemer, to whom with the Father and Spirit, three
persons and one God, be all Honor and Glory, from this time forth and for
ever: Amen.

FINIS.
THE TVMVLTS OF THE PEOPLE.
Another Sermon at the Court in White Hall before the King.
EXODUS 32.1. But when the people saw that MOSES tarried long ere he came from
the mountain, the people gathered themselves together against AARON, and said
unto him: up, make us gods to go before us.


THE circumstance of Time is a powerful circumstance, either to aggrauate a
crime, or to make any action more effectual: the very same time that God was
providing a law for his people, and writing it in Tables of stone, they were
conspiring idolatry against him: The same night that Christ was betrayed, he
took bread, 1 Cor. 11.25
instituting a Sacrament of life for them who were plotting the treason of
death against him.

With this opposition did the Law and the Gospel both begin, by which it does
appear, that that old arch enemy of man's happiness was the chief agent in
this business: It was not Judas so much as he that entered into Judas, nor the
Serpent so much as he that spoke by the Serpent: nor the people so much as he
that drives them like an heard of swine headlong to the accomplishing of
Satan's purpose, and their own destruction: for Satan had a further purpose
in this intent then the people thought of: He had been 2000. years in
blotting Gods Law out of man's heart, he sees that labor like to be lost, for
that Law is at this present renewing by God in the mountain, and a writing by
his own finger in Tables of stone to continue: therefore a plot must be
devised either to break the tables in pieces, or some way to deface the work;
and he plots it unhappily, for in the very instant when Moses came within
sight, they were in the midst of their madness shouting after a Calfe, the
sight whereof so wrought upon the feruency of Moses zeal, that down fell the
Tables and brake in pieces. As David's prayer was his only defense against
Achitophels policy, 2 Samuel 15.31.
so must we pray to bring Satan's Council to naught, for none but he can do it.

Satan is the principal agent, yet not mentioned no more then in his first
temptation, Genesis the 3. Moses historicum agit non interpretem, let us
therefore consider of this Scripture as it is an history, the Tract is plain,
and the passage easy by the steps.

1 The chief actors mentioned in the business are the people 2 The occasion
they took for this attempt, Moses absence in the mountain, his long absence
as they pretend. 3 The instrument wrought for their purpose must be Aaron. 4
The means whereby they wrought him, by force in a tumultuous assembly. 5 The
work whereunto he was forced, Make us Gods to go before us.
Where the people be principal actors, there is a dangerous piece of work
toward; it is via serpentis, where the tail guides the head, where the people
command Aaron. The true visage of an Anarchy; for if ever we should fall into
the hands of a disordered multitude, we should see the sweetness of
government, Carendo magis. Here Is a multitude: It is like the waves of the Sea
that dash against this Rock, and that Sand, and break one upon another: here
against Moses, there against Aaron, at the last against themselves: And herein
is the power of God, says King David in the Psalms, In appeasing the noise of
the waves, Psalm. 65.7.
and the madness of the people: the one by his invisible power, the other by
that beautiful government which is his own blessed ordinance.

But what people be these that disorder themselves, or to whom do they belong?
The people, and my text has it twice for failing, The people. In the third
Chapter and the seventh verse; I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my
people, then were they Gods people, and all along the history they be termed
the children of Israel, the posterity of Jacob, but now they be neither Gods
nor Jacobs, but their own, a rout of masterlesse men that none will own: so
in the 32. of Deuteronomy, They have corrupted themselves, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
not being his people, but a froward generation. Doubtless it grieved Moses at
the very heart, verse. the 7. When God said unto him, Get thee down, for thy
people which thou brought out of the land of Egypt have corrupted their ways:
Thy people says God to Moses, Governors had need to have a tender care over
Gods people, for when they transgress, God turns them over to them. And had
not Moses a tender care? No imputation could lie upon him, he had provided
sufficiently for them in his absence, Aaron and Hur besides the Elders and
Nobles of the Elders of Israel: therefore hark how Moses answers God again in
his own defense, and in commiseration of a masterles people, verse. the 11. O
Lord why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought out
of the land of Egypt, with great power and a mighty hand? See how they be put
off from one to another. God will not own them, Moses cannot: they be their
own, they be themselves: I have seen this people, and behold it is a
stiff-necked people, says God to Moses in the 9. verse, and What did this
people to thee, that thou brought such a sin upon them, says Moses to Aaron,
verse 21. Thou knows this people, that they are even set on mischief, says
Aaron to Moses, verse. the 22.

Thus do their sins fall upon their own heads: they lost the glory of being
Gods people, they lost the honor of being the Children of Israel, even the
Nobles of the Children of Israel, cap. 24.11. Though men be never so well
descended, vice does taint the blood, it stains Nobility, especially this of
resisting government: they be left to themselves alone, a degenerate
multitude, they be neither Gods Children, nor the Children of Israel: this and
the like are the fittest appellations of such a sinful people.

2. The occasion which moved this people thus to do, was taken and not given.
Moses was absent; what then? was he not about public business? receiving
Laws and Ordinances from God, for the governing of them, such Laws as no
nation under heaven had the like: did he not acquaint them with all this
before he went? more then Governors are bound to do: In the 24. chap. verse
14. Moses told them all the words of the Lord: How far was he gone? but into
the mountain leaving them at the foot. He left them not alone without Judges,
cap. 24.14. whosoever has any matter let them come before them. Yea, but he
tarried long before he came down: How long? not six weeks in all. So
impatient, so quickly have they forgot the covenant made at their parting, cap
24.3. All things that the Lord has said we will do; repeated again in the
seventh verse, and ratified with sacrifices. Is the impression of thunder and
lightning so soon worn out? will not the twelve pillars erected at his going,
at the foot of the hill be sufficient remembrances for six weeks absence?
Children of Israel, well might he call them children, and Moses their nurse to
carry them, as sucklings in his bosom which he conceived not, ever crying and
complaining, never satisfied; taking occasion where none is given. There was
great difference for a quiet contented heart when Moses was a Shepherd, and
when he was the Governor of this people: Nec abnuendum si dat imperium Deus,
nec appetendum.

3. Moses is gone, they wot not what is become of him, 3 The Instrument.
or they will not know, the power is in them, somewhat, some exployt must be
done, and who must countenance the matter but Aaron? One highest in authority,
and that should be holiest in life, he must be the man, and so he was. Omnis
caro foenum; If Aaron, Moses Vicar amongst the people: If Peter, Christ's Vicar
in the Church? who should be Summi Pontifices? If these fall so foul, that
one denies his Lord, the other preferres a Calfe before him: let the Church of
God never be built upon that Rock, but upon that which Aaron prefigured, and
that which Peter discovered in the sixteenth of Matthew, Mat 6.16. Aug. vlt. D.
tract. in Ioh.
Super hanc quam confessus es petram, says S. Augustine, upon this Rock which
thou have confessed will I build my Church.

God in Aaron would teach Israel that he who was thus captiuate to sin
himself could not deliver captives from sin by his sacrifices, as the
Apostle proves at large in his Epistle to the Hebrews: Moses died in the
wilderness, Aaron fell fowly in the wilderness, the mortality of the one, and
infirmity of the other were as School masters of Christ the Lamb of God, and
Lord of life, to deliver us from sin and death.

4. 4 The means.
But let us not (as the manner of the world is) lay more imputation upon Aaron,
then there is just cause: his infirmity was great, yet was he no voluntary
agent, but a forced Instrument, they assembled themselves against him
tumultuously, and urged him in threatening manner, up make us Gods: True, it did
not excuse him more then Pilate, who feared a tumult, Matthew the 27. He
should rather have died a thousand deaths then have yielded: yet see what
pretty policies he has to stay the business.

1. He calls for golden eare-rings of their wives, sons and daughters, in the
second verse: thinking women would by importunity bring any thing to pass,
rather then part with their jewels and ornaments: there was some hope, that
either the covetousness of men, or the pride of women might so far prevail,
that some domestical dissension might hinder this great conspiracy against the
God of heaven. But as Satan will not cast out Satan, so one sin is hardly
wrought against another, especially those diabolical sins of pride and
idolatry: There was no cost spared, for all the people plucked off their
jewels, not one from another, but from themselves in the third verse: their
Idol was their Jewel: they never yet bestowed such cost upon the true God,
that brought them from the bondage of Pharaoh, nor on Moses their Gonernour, as
now upon the image of a Calfe.

2. When there is no remedy, he takes the Jewels, casts them into the fire,
fashions a Calfe, carueth it, made a grauing tool to go over it, built an
Altar, proclaimed an holy day, whil'd the time that Moses might come down, or
some accident befall to stay their fury: so unwilling was Aaron, but they
forced him.

5. What to do? Make us Gods to go before us: Gods service is a reasonable
service in the 12. of Romans: Romans 12.1.
but the service of sin is most unreasonable; especially this of Idolatry:
that a God can be made: that Aaron a sinful man can make a God: that he can
give it life and motion to go before them; Is it possible the people should
be so senseless?

This point then will bear two Queries.

1. What Gods they meant should be made? Make us Gods. 2. To what end? to go
before us.
Some think they meant only a sensible resemblance of the true God; or an
image to which some Divine power might upon consecration be annexed: but I
doubt they troubled not their heads with such differences.

1 They called them gods in heathen terms, they were weary of one God, and
now they must have a plurality: though Elohim be usually translated in the
singular number, yet in this place I take it plurally, because St. Stephen does
so read it in the seventh of the Acts, (...), Acts 7.40.
Make us gods.

Idolatry implies plurality, a plurality a nullity, dicite plures, dicits
nullum: two infinites there cannot be, either one must run into another, or
they must be finite on one side.

2 When I consider how David speaks of ancient Idolaters, Psalm. 115. Psa.
115.8.
They that make them are like unto them: how Esaias describes them, cap. 44.
verse. 16. They bake bread with one piece, Esaias 44.16
roast meat with another, warm themselves with the third, and of the residue
make a god: How in Baruc the 6. Baruc. 6.19.
Cats and Owls do redeem their Gods from their enemies, Rats and Mice that
would devour them: I conceive the most senseless kind of idolatry: and
howsoever Aaron might seek to refine it in the 5 verse, in proclaiming an
holy day to Jehovah the true God, yet sure the people themselves conceived it
in gross.

The like difference may be taken in matters of inferior superstition betwixt
the school distinctions and the practice of the vulgar: Non colitur imago sed
Deus in imagine, colitur Imago sed alio cultu, cultu eodem, at no^ vniuoce sed
analogice and reductiue: distinctions well filed and refined in the brain: but
alas, the people in whom is greatest danger, who are not able to distinguish
betwixt Aarons Beard, and the Beard of Aaron, must of necessity fall into
extremity; howsoever Aaron in this place might help them with references and
reductions to Jehovah, yet in the peoples intention this idolatry was very
gross.

2 To what end? to go a Procession, to go before us: did not the Cloud go
before them by day, and the pillar of fire by night? yea the Lord himself went
before them in the pillar and the cloud in the 13. Chapter, verse. 21. yea and
that at this present, verse the 22. he took not away the cloud by day, nor the
pillar of fire by night from before the people. This will not content them:
they must have a Calfe, a costly Calfe, and when all cost and caruing is
bestowed upon it, it cannot go, it must be carried before them; whereas the
cloud and pillar of fire moved without their help. See how men please
themselves in their own devices be they never so foolish, more then in Gods
own institutions, be they never so full of Divine wisdom.

But whither should it go before them? I think themselves scarce know
whether: whither they meant to roue up and down in the wilderness, sit down
to eat and drink, and rise up to play: but if they intended a set journey, it
was either toward Canaan, or, as I think rather, back again into Egypt:
else why should they think of a Calfe, but in alluding to the Egyptian Apis,
that pide Bull? they meant to go into Egypt, therefore they must have an
Egyptian God to guide them: These be thy gods o Israel that brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt as strangers when the Egyptians desired us to be gone,
and these shall conduct us back again. But that which persuades me most, is
in the Acts of the Apostles: they turned in their hearts back again into
Egypt, Acts 7.39.
(...), saying, make us gods: Their hearts were in Egypt already, they wanted
nothing but a God to guide them.

If all things in the wilderness were in figure unto us, (...), 1 Cor. 10.11.
This history most of all: all of us were under the bondage of Egypt, subject
to sin, death, and hell, taskemasters of that spiritual Pharaoh, who has
power over death. Heb. 2.14.


Our true Master Christ has delivered us out of Egypt, and brought us under
hope of enjoying that celestial Canaan. In the mean time he is gone up to the
mountain to God the Father to mediate for us, and to write the Gospel is the
Law of Christians, and the new covenant: he has left his deputies beneath
Civil and Ecclesiastical to govern us in his absence: He has left
Sacramental representations, as the cloud did represent his humanity, the fire
his divinity: but his absence is so long, not a few weeks, but many hundred
years, that we carry us in this life, as if we knew not what is become of him,
where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 2.4.
in the 2. of Peter and the 3. Thus we sit down to eat and drink, and rise
up to play: Every one has his gods, his dearling affections, his desires, his
devices, though as wise as Calves, Deus est suacuique cupido: these foolish
desires lead us back again into Egypt, there to make brick, or gather
stubble; for that's the Dicotomy of this world: we are either making brick to
build or plant our selves on earth, or gathering stubble, picking the strawes
of vanity and pleasure: in which return, if we hold on, we had better we had
never been delivered: for Christ will come as suddenly as Moses did from the
mount, either himself in judgment, or by his messenger Death, give us our
portion, make us drink the powder of our Gods wrath. The dregs of sin which
will turn into the gall of Aspes: He that presumes Christ will be long a
coming, and that death is a far off, he will surely come to him unlooked
for: The Master of that servant will come in an hour when he is not aware.
Luke 12.46.
There be three Parables St. Luke ioynes in an excellent order. The Parable of
the Prodigal Son, the unjust Steward, and the rich Glutton. The Prodigal by
prodigality became miserable, by misery was drawn to repentance. But because
men when they have runn themselves out of breath in wickedness, presently have
the parable of the prodigal child in in their mouths; He adds unto that the
unjust Steward, who had short warning to give up his stewardship; he wisely
cast in his mind what to do, Quid faciam, and never ceased casting till he
resolved Scio quid faciam, and presently put it in execution, set down
quickly: and because every man should not expect any special admonition before
hand, he adds unto that the Parable of the rich man, who thinking his Master
would belong a coming, follows his pleasure: and in momento descendit in
infernum, died, and was presently in hell before he lift up his eyes unto
heaven; So does sudden destruction ever follow presumptuous sins.

Therefore these golden glistring calves that we propose unto our selves to
follow, be it the Calfe of wealth or pleasure or ambition, let us break them
in pieces, and stamp them to powder by true repentance before the Lord come and
break them for us: let us drink the powder in the tears of sorrow and
contrition, that judging our selves we may prevent the judgment of God, that
we may redeem the time we have so vainly spent, in doubling the works of a
good life; and happy is that man, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find so
doing. Which happiness God grant unto us for his Sons sake Jesus Christ our
Lord: To whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be al Honor and Glory
both now and for ever. Amen.

THE MOCK OF REPVTATION. A Public Sermon.
GENESIS 3.22. Behold, the man is become like one of us.


ALL story and discourse whatsoever, endited by the spirit of Wisdom, the
more concise it is, the more pithy is the sentence, and the matter of more
special note: which Truth if it hold, as like it does in Divine writ: Lo
here the Acts and Monuments of a thousand six hundred and odd years
comprised within the compass of six small chapters, the only true Records of
that Age, containing story of more weight and worth, then all the books and
Chronicles of the Kings of Judah: which respect, beside others common to holy
scripture, does intimate unto us what virtue and pith the holy Ghost has
pressed and couched together within every sentence of this Chronicle, whereof
my Text is one, and such an one amongst the rest, as is noted by the finger of
the holy Ghost in the margent, Behold, the first word of wonder we find,
pointing at some spectacle worth the beholding: A spectacle not for men to gaze
upon, but Man a spectacle to God and Angels, who being placed by God in
Paradise, was by his folly put into a dream of a deity, aspiring in knowledge
to become a God, was in understanding made like the beasts that perish, turned
out of Paradise into the open field amongst the beasts to be clad in Leatherne
hides, and skins of beasts: wandering in this miserable plight, Almighty God
puts him in mind of his glorious Godhead, Behold the man is become like one of
us, a God, and no man, where indeed he was a wretched worm, and no man.

These words delivered by God in a figurative speech, and in the form like
nails do pierce deeper, and stick faster then an ordinary speech. An ironie,
but uttered by a man of God, 1 Kings. 18.21.
made Baals Priests lance themselves with knives till the blood followed. A
figure that being spoken (as here it was) to a proud man in misery, is Death
unto him, and cuts deeper then any knife, vox tamen haec est non tam
insultantis, quam caeteros ne superbiant deterrentis: God in this Ironie did
not so much intend to wound a miserable man, as to warn his posterity.

Wherefore, (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and well-beloved) when I gave
all diligence to speak unto you of those swelling humors that reign in the
Sons of Adam, I was directed to this Scripture, which for the Majesty of it
was delivered by God himself in the solemn assembly of the blessed Trinity,
and holy Angels, for the use of it to the terror of all us which lay in the
loins of Adam, for the Virtue of it pointed with an Irony, to pierce our
affections, and stick fast in our memories, That we break not Gods bonds
asunder, nor cast away his cords from us, least he that sits in Heaven laugh
us to scorn, and the Lord should have us in derision.

The sentence it self like Christ's garment, may not be divided, it is so
wouen into one period, that to dismember the words, were to disgrace the
figure: yet to avoid confusion of speech, and help our memories, I will
distinguish these two points.

1 Man's purpose and aspiring mind to become a God. 2 The shameful miss of
his purpose, that indeed became nothing less.
Both which are insinuated in this figure, and may naturally be branched out of
this sentence.

Verse 22.
Peccasse Adamum tam specie quam indiuiduo, is a schoolepoynt very probable;
That Adam did not sin only personally, as a particular man, but as bearing the
person and nature of all mankind: for that devilish infection of an aspiring
mind, has made as deep an impression in Adams posterity as ever is did in
himself: Dan. 4.27. Acts 12.21
Nebuchadnezzar and King Herod, the one for Power, the other for Speech
affecting a Diety, are two fit Emblemes of man in this place. Is not this great
Babel that I have built by the might of my power, for the honor of my Majesty?
spoken like God himself: Is not this great Heaven and Earth, which I have
built by the might of my power, for the honor of my Majesty? but while the
word was in the Kings mouth, his Kingdom was rent from him, and himself turned
out of his palace among the beasts of the field: Herod after he had made a
smooth oration in a great assembly, for assenting to the peoples applause: The
voice of God and not of man, became a prey to the worms: these two bear the
Image of the old Adam, who being in honor like Nebuchadnezzar, was cast out
of Paradise amongst the beasts that perish, and for listening to the Serpents
voice, Eritis sicut Dij, like Herod became mormes meat, Dust thou art, and to
dust thou shall return.

But what do I tell you of Kings and Monarchs? that of the Poet, Est Deus in
nobis, is common in every man's conceit, no affection so ridiculous, which
vain man has not made a God: 'twere vain to stand upon particulars: shall I
tell you of the God of Gods exalted above heaven and earth? It is the God of
honor and reputation amongst more. A God mighty and terrible, a jealous God,
and a consuming fire, a God more honored of English Gallants, then ever was
Jehovah in Iudaea, or Jupiter amongst the Grecians: Si quoties peccant homines:
Jupiter is very sparing of his thunderbolts, though often dishonored of
mortal men, and the God of Israel when he was in his greatest fury, and most
provoked to execute judgment, yet is said to seal up his plagues amongst his
treasures: Deu. 32.34.
as though he were loath to spend them: God is patient, and yet God is provoked
every day: but if our honors be touched never so little, agitante calescimus
illo: out goes a challenge presently, he shall die the death: Thus as
vengeance were ours, miserable men will be Gods to die for it.

By your patience (Honorable and worshipful) saving your Honors and
Reputations, give me leave to estimate them one degree below Gods honor, and
your own salvation: Happily you will object, It is our honor, and we stand
upon it; more precious and dear to us then life it self, for that is the life
of our mortal lives, and preserues us living after our death, life without
honor is no life, and honor after life makes death no death; wherefore in
this respect no less honorable is our Resolution, then Razis the father of
the Jews commended in the Machabees, 2 Machab. 14.42.
in choosing rather to die manfully, then suffer reproach, unworthy his noble
stock: It Is true, God forbid we should deny, but that honor in a noble mind
is to be preferred before a thousand lives, if our lives were altogether in
our nostrils, if our Essence did return into the womb of the first Chaos, as
things of baser being; if our spirits did vanish into the light air like the
spirits of beasts; then were this reason without exception: But we must
remember that besides this word Honor which is commended to the favorable
opinion of the world, to be blown to and fro with the breath of men's
nostrils, there is an heavenly substance to be disposed of, to be placed
after death, according to thy death, either in everlasting Tabernacles or
perpetual torments: Wherefore, endangering thy self in single combat, not
only to die, but to die the death, not only to perish, but to perish and come
to a fearful end: not only to be cut down, but cut down and cast into the
fire. Then poize these two, the blemish of honor, with the hazard of ever
lasting life in the balance of thy judgment, and accordingly make resolution.

I presume none will deny but in our usual and daily quarrels the danger is
great, and rufull for any Christian to consider: but in a case of necessity,
when otherwise neither Court can clear me, nor the devise of man give remedy:
there laying apart all personal respects, abandoning all affections of Honor,
without any desire of revenge, only for trial of right I Will commend my cause to
the proof of Arms, and sentence of weapon, to be directed by Divine
judgment. If your resolution be such, let me commend unto you a double
consideration of cause and person.

1 Is thine injury so heinous as may not be borne? and the trial so difficult
as neither can be manifested by Record of Writ, Ier. 32.44.
nor decided by testimony of two or three witnesses established by our Savior,
nor indeed by Oath, Ioh. 8.17.
which the Apostle makes the vpshot of all controversies amongst men. If thy
quarrel be such, Heb. 6.16.
thou appealest to the judgment of Weapon.

2 Then in the second place examine thy self, if respecting the private injury
and blemish of honor, thou can meet thine enemy in the field, and leave all
sinister affections at home, if thou can carry Christian Charity in thine
heart, and the weapons of Death in thy hands? If thou can commend a prepared
soul to thy Savior, and intend to shed that blood for which his blood was shed
on the cross. If thou can expect the reward of Gods saints in heaven and
determine to cast out thy brothers soul in a wrong cause; then see you have
warrant, and keep thy resolution, but understand that this thy passage into
heaven, if there be any such, after all honest pretenses man's wit can devise,
all the Differences the Law can afford, are bestowed upon it, will prove as
hard and narrow a passage for thy soul, as a Nedles eye for the huge Cammell.
What shall we say then? Is there no redress for the blemish of honor and
reputation? Yes beloved, there will come a day when the most secret cause will
be made manifest, when all the Courts in the world shall be judged over again,
till which time God has reserved many causes untried for his own Court.
Therefore says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.5.
Judge nothing before the time, till the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hid in darkness, and then shall every man have praise of God: have
patience then till the trumpe blow, and the walls of Jericho fall flat to the
ground, Till the Heavens pass with a noise, and the elements melt with fervent
heat, then shall thou meet the judge of the world, and receive sentence
according unto right, then shall thine honor be restored seven fold in the
sight of Men and Angels: there mean while resolve thy self like a Christian,
if thy supposed honor affect thee, in case of Gods honor or the safety of thy
soul, cast it off, better it is for thee to enter heaven lame in honor,
maimed in reputation in the sight of the world, then having all sound to be
cast into hell fire. I speak not after the manner of men, else would I
persuade that it were not a world could eclipse true honor, Well: true or
supposed honor, shall I suffer disgrace till the last trumpe? This is an hard
interim, I would to God I could relieve you.

Shall I with S. Augustine adfratres in Eremo, commend unto you the example of
our Savior, who being disgraced, and shamefully dishonored of his enemies:
the first oblation he offered upon the Altar of the Cross, was prayer for his
enemies: that were not so fit, it was writ adfratres in eremo, but I know to
whom I speak: Shall I commend the Prophet David's example, who dishonourably
reviled of Shimei, revenged not again, but dealt honorably with lame
Mephibosheth, the remnant of his enemies house. Yea but David was a Prophet
altogether swallowed up with divine contemplation, we are not of that precise
coat: yea but David was a Prince, and well wist what true honor meant; a
valiant Prince, whose arm would encounter a bow of steel, and by the might of
his God spring over a wall, yet herein was his glory to show kindness to his
deadly foe. 2 Samuel 9.3
Remains there not one (says David) of the house of Saul on whom I may show
the salvation of God? Honorable David that thought it the most honor to be
likest God in showing mercy to his enemies: All my Fathers house (says
Mephibosheth to David) were but dead men before my Lord the King: Posse and
nolle nobile, To revenge a quarrel argues skill and courage, but to forgive,
or not regard an injury, that is right Honorable. Wherefore, to conclude this
point, Mar. 8.35.
that which our Savior Christ pronounced in the Gospel of Mark is as truly
to be meant of honor, as of life, Whosoever will save his honor shall loose
it, and whosoever shall lose his honor for my sake and the Gospels shall save
it. Be it then far from dust and ashes to seat himself in Gods place,
crying vengeance is mine, I will repay it: to extol his own honor before
Gods, least he that sits in heaven laugh them to scorn, and the Lord should
have them in derision: This is one point in which vain man the Son of Adam
does affect to become a God Like one of us.

If it would please Almighty God to look down from Heaven upon the sons of
men, Psalm. 13.2.
he might behold more presumptuous and aspiring gods amongst men, or would he
come down from heaven to make trial of these cries that are come up to him,
Genesis 18.21.
as himself speaks in the 18. of Genesis, would it please him to take a view
of his own dwelling place, the holy house of his habitation, he should perceive
one of Adams unhallowed sons seated in his room, houzed within the holy
stones of Sion: his chambers and chaires adorned with the Churches robes,
himself and his family fed with Tithes and Offerings: would not this provoke
Almighty God to take my text for good sooth, and say behold the man is become a
god like one of us: harbored in our sanctuary, and served with our Priests,
like one of us, honored and worshipped in consecrated Tithes, and holy
offerings like one of us, whiles we may take up our lodgings with Baucis or
Philemon, or content our selves with ten shekels of silver, and a suit of
apparel. Then sure blessed must that house be where God is so well regarded
says that idolatrous miscreant Micah. Iud 17. ver. vlt.
As for Tithes and Offerings, they be but Leuiticall customs, ceremonies, and
shadows vanished away at the Sunshine of the Gospel: thus are we content to
have our mouths musled, and our tongues tied.

The Roman Orator played his prizes never worse, then in his own cause, and I
know not how it comes to pass, either we are ouer-modest to plead for our
selves, least we might seem partial, or too timorous: we are content at
Balacks beck, neither to bless nor curse, or (which is worst of all) if ever
we mean to enter Gods house, our selves must come like Gods, like Jupiter
himself in a goulden shower, or stand without, o aur eum orationis flumen;
these be the golden streams of eloquence that make the Preachers voice the
voice of a God.

But as I begun to say, we are unfit Orators for this theme, will it please you
to hear almighty God speak in his own person: Malac. 3.8.
Will a man spoil his gods? but you have spoiled me, says the Lord: A strange
speech for the God of heaven to speak to mortal men, You have spoiled me, and
that made the people of Israel to wonder, Lord wherein have we spoiled thee?
God answers, in Tithes and Offerings: parturiunt montes, a ceremony, a shadow,
a toy: no (beloved) almighty God fights not with shadows, nor is so zealous
for a ceremony, there is more in it then all they account for: these are not
Mint and Annise we talk of, but matters of greater moment.

All the wonders the Apostles wrought upon the earth were saving wonders,
restoring men to their health and perfection; but when they met with sin of
alienating Church goods in Ananias and Saphira, their wonder was an
extraordinary judgment, no less then present death: When the Lamb of God
walked upon the earth, he is observed never to have wrought any thing by force
or violence, but all with gentle persuasions, and fatherly admonitions, so
observes S. Augustine in one book, Vera relig. c. 16. Cap. 13.
yet the Father was deceived, for himself does retract that point in his book
of Retractions, and does confess, that indeed when he met with this sin of
Merchandise in the Church of God, then his patience was moved to use some
Discipline: then, and only then in all his life did the Lamb of God play the
Lion of the tribe of Judah; for himself alone with a three-stringed whip drove
the Merchants out of the Church.

Now if these Merchants shall quit him with his own, and through their
merchandise drive Christ out of the Church, they are no more to look for a whip
of cords but a rod of iron, to break them in pieces like a Potters vessel; If
they will needs meddle with forbidden fruit as Adam did, they must look to
turn Gods as Adam did, in whom I beseech you a little to look your selves as
in a glass. Man having his choice of all the pleasant fruits in Paradise, only
except the forbidden fruit, whereof if he eat, the same day he must die the
death, was visited by the Serpent; yea, has God indeed said, ye shall not
eat? indeed, says the woman, we eat of the trees of the Garden, but of the
fruit of the tree in the midst of the garden, (there is a tree in the midst
of the garden worth all the rest) of the fruit of that tree God has said, Ye
shall not eat, neither shall ye touch it lest ye die: Die? says the Serpent,
ye shall not die: die the same day? ye shall not die at all: die the death?
ye shall live most happy lives, ye shall be Gods: but what became of them,
we all know by woeful experience.

So you, beloved, are by Gods goodness here placed in a land like Eden for
pleasure and plenty, blessed like Ifrael with the deaw of heaven, and fat of
the earth, enriched like Tyrus, whose Merchants were Princes, and Chap-men the
Nobles of the land, sucking the abundance of the sea, and treasure hid in the
sand: only the forbidden fruits of the Church touch not least ye die the
Death. Then comes the Serpent, has God indeed said ye shall not eat of these
fruits? Indeed (answers flesh and blood) we eat of the fruits of the Land, and
abundance of the Sea, but there be certain Holy fruits of the Land worth all
the rest, Tithes and Offerings, the flower, and fat of the land, pleasant
springs, Orchards, Gardens for recreation, goodly stones that would build us
stately houses and towers, whose top might reach unto heaven, were we but
possessed of these, we should be gods upon earth. Thus stolen waters are
sweet, and the bread of deceit is pleasant to a man, but afterward (says
Solomon) it turns to gravel in the mouth, and then you know what follows, a
gnashing of teeth, when almighty God shall come to give sentence. Adam where
art thou? Have thou eaten of the forbidden fruit whereof I said thou should
not eat? Thou shall be cast out of the Paradise of this world, not in Letherne
skins among the beasts of the field, but stark naked among the fiends of Hell,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then he that sits in Heaven shall
laugh them to scorn, and the Lord shall deride them with a bitter Irony,
Behold the man is become like one of us: Son remember thou in thy life time
had a paradise of pleasure, no dwelling would please thee, but the sanctuary
and habitation of God: no lands and livings content thee but those hallowed and
dedicated to God: no bread sweet and pleasant unto thee but Tithes and
Offerings, and holy things of God This shall be the Lords derision: this is that
fearful sentence whereto my text is but a warning piece, and the fall of Adam
but a figure; and so we have done with the second general point, wherein the
Son of Adam affects to become a God like one of us.

Out of the last words, Vnus e nobis, it is agreed that almighty God directed
his speech to the persons in Trinity, whence it may be demanded, to which of
the three persons man affected to be like, like one of us; though indefinitely
it may be understood of any, yet the School determines: He affected not so
much to be like the Father in power, or the spirit in love, as in knowledge to
resemble the second person, who is the wisdom of his Father, for it follows
like one of us, knowing good and evil.

The sum of which is, that man created in perfect reason, and endued with great
measure of knowledge, according to his kind, yet in time was to attain to
greater perfection, but unwilling to stay his time, and expect the means
appointed by God, thought to take a shorter out, but taste an apple, and
presently have his eyes opened, and become a God in knowledge: A fault
(beloved) that died not in Paradise, but lives still, and never more then in
these days, where knoledge and Divinity do budd and blossom, and ripen all in
a trise, like Aarons rod, as if we were suddenly inspired from heaven, or we
our selves had a cloven tongue at command.

The treasures of wisdom and knowledge are not all gathered in one day;
had thou a more excellent wit and gifts more famous then young Timothy, of
whom Prophesies went what a notable instrument he was like to prove, 1 Timothy
1.18
yet Timothy must so belabour it, that his stomach shall be the worse for it,
and his body subject to many and often infirmities. 1 Timothy 5.23
Do thou rely upon Gods special grace and assistance never so much? as S.
Paul did, not I, but the grace of God with me, yet Paul's books and parchments
must not be forgotten, for all the spirit. A man would think that visions and
revelations were never more rife then in these days: to see a young Divine
plunge himself out of one Church into another, Determine Religions and
challenge Moses and Aaron, as if himself in a trice had thoroughly digested the
volume of Gods book, and drunk up the whole current of the ancient Fathers:
but if Paul will be a planter of Religion, he must take spade and mattocke,
dig deep, and labor more abundantly then they all, yea and spend a more
precious humor then the sweat of his brows: Librorum helluo makes the best
Divine, Ezekiel 2.8.
by Eating of the book, and not of an apple do we attain to Divine
knowledge, howsoever Adam will touch and taste, and have his eyes opened: And by
this time it remains to enquire what is become of him, Behold, says God, he
is become like one of us. And thus far shall suffice for the 1. point, of Adams
purpose and aspiring mind to become a God: Now follows the shameful mill of
his purpose, that in truth he became nothing less then like one of us, which
is truly expressed in the manner of speech being Ironicall, Behold the man is
become like one of us.

2 Ecce Adam, behold the man, Quid superbis puluis and cinis? Diabolus superbit
sed non puluis and cinis, says St. Angustine: It had been a wonder if Lucifer
the brightest of Angels had become a God, being but a creature, but for man,
Dust and ashes, a piece of clay, taken from under the feet of beasts, to be
extolled amongst the gods, this was exceeding wonderful: This man is become
such a god, that attired in skins, turned out of the Garden, the bruit
beasts, had they the tongue of Balaams Ass, might have saluted him in good
sooth without a figure: Behold the man is become like one of us; shrouded in a
Leatherne hide from the parching heat of the Sun, and the pinching frost of
the night, like one of us: nay, respecting his condition far worse then one
of us, Quanto peius est fieri, quam nasci belluam, far better it is to be a
beast by natures privilege, then by degenerating to be compared to beasts;
worse then that, sent to the school to learn of beasts, by Solomon to the
Conies and Pismiers for wisdom and providence, by a greater then Solomon to
the Ravens and Fowls of the air for trust and confidence in God, by Jeremy to
the Ox and Ass for knowledge and religion: Ierem. 3.2.
The Ox has known his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe, but my people
have not known, nor Israel understood: This is that goodly Godhead almighty
God means in this figure, upon which phrase of speech, it is worth the while a
little to pauze: Behold, says God, he is become, but how came he? factus est,
sed quis fecit?

Verse. 44.
In the two and thirty chapter of the book of Exodus, when the Israelites went
a madding after a Calfe which Aaron had fashioned for a God, Moses put Aaron to
his Apology, who made this narration for himself, They gave me their gold, I
cast it into the fire, and thereout came this calfe: what Aaron? became that a
calfe by hap hazard without hands, or did it make it self a calfe? theront
came this calfe: Aaron was ashamed to say, he had made a God, that the God of
Israel should be the worke-man-ship of his hands, wherefore he passes that
over in silence, and says, I cast the gold into the fire, and thereout came
this calfe: in like manner God in this place to make the wonder greater,
neither expressing the Author nor manner of this Metamorphosis, only, Behold
the man is become like one of us: notwithstanding, that may be easily gathered
by the allusion and reference of this sentence to that of the serpents in the
fifth verse (Eritis sicut Dij) his meaning is, that man was a God of the Devils
making, who finding our parents of a Thrasonicall and swelling disposition,
aspiring toward a Deity, comes upon them like Gnatho, with Eritis sicut Dij,
yea, you shall be Gods: a practice so performed of all hands, as it is become a
maine pillar of Satan's Kingdom, Parasitatio quam facilis quam pestifera, an
easy part, the Cobblers Crow will conne that: yet never played without a Devil:
Peter no sooner saluted our Savior in this smoothing dialect, but presently he
discovered a Devil, Get the behind me Satan: Satan never moved the tongue
of Beasts, but to sooth and flatter: Almighty God never opened the mouth of
dumb beasts but to reprehend, and the simplest Ass in service shall stand his
master in better stead in this kind, then the nimblest tongued Serpent that
walks in this garden: art thou then placed in a Paradise of pleasure,
abounding with all delights man's heart can desire beware the serpents poison,
that will make thee to swell bigger then the skin will hold, to stretch thy
self beyond thy self, till thou consume as smoke that vanishes by increasing.

Art thou a Caesar upon eath, parting thine Empire with Jupiter himself, Cave
asalutatoribus, these are the Crows that pecke out thine eyes being alive, and
make thee stoneblinde, that thou shall not be able to know or discern thy
self.

Art thou set upon the Candle stick of the Church, to give light to all that
are in the house of God? art thou determined in shining to others to consume
and spend thy self for Sions sake? Look to thy followers, there was a
Parasite amongst the Disciples pulled Christ by the sleeue, took him aside, and
bade him favor himself,: It Is a world to see what pre-eminence this profession
has gotten in the world: no state so holy or absolute, no person so base or of
small worth, whom this Court holy water has not besprinkled: If all thy
earings, gold, or silver, or what ever plucked from men, women, and children by
violence and extortion will but raize a Goulden Calfe. The whole host of
Israel will play the Parasites, or that Calfe shall become a God: That great
Ox Nabuchadnezzar lifted upon a Monarchy had his saluters at hand, O King live
for ever, as if it were not impossible but a Monarke might be immortal like
God: Hi homines prorsus exstultis insanos faciunt: Our Parents Adam and Eve
went a fooling after a Godhead, and here comes the Devil with an Eritis sicut
Dij, ye shall be Gods, and carries them headlong like an heard of Swine into
utter perdition: Atque sic homo factus est Deus, thus did the man become like
one of us.

The Serpent having his prizes is fled away, and Man hears no more of him: his
Oracle proves true, but in a wrong sense: their eyes were open, but to their
own shame: They had the knowledge of good and evil, but by woeful experience.
And for the third, he said they should be Gods, and children to the most high
God, but they died like men, and fell like one of the Princes, like the Prince
of Babell from the worlds dominion to the beasts of the field: like the Prince
of Angels, from glory and joyful bliss, to extreme misery and torment of
conscience: like Prince Herod from a conceit of a god, to a pray for worms.
Here ends the tragedy of woeful man wallowing in the pit of endless
perdition, vexed by God from heaven with a tanting Ironie, Behold the man is
become like one of us.

It were great pittty to leave man in this miserable case, will our text lead
us no further but iumpe to the pit of perdition? No sweetness to be sucked
out of Gods Ironia, but all bitterness and wormwood? Yes (beloved) The Father
of all creatures delights not in tanting, vexing, or tormenting of any. The God
of all consolation, who in the midst of Judgment thinks upon Mercy, was
never more ready and quick to show mercy then at this present. For before ever
he did pronounce judgment upon man at the 16. verse of this Chapter, he
promised the seed of the woman should break the serpents head: in the 15.
verse gives promise of redemption, before the sentence of condemnation, the
reason of which redemption may be gathered out of the last words of my text,
vnus e nobis, according to the premised doctrine.

In Matthew the 12: Mat. 12 32
He that sins against the Son shall be forgiven, but he that sins
against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world
to come: Satan in this act sinned directly against the holy Ghost, of mere
envy maligning the state of man, and therefore his fall was without redemption:
but man offending more directly against the second person, affecting in
knowledge to be like the Son of God, the wisdom of his Father: wherefore
almighty God, says S. Barnard, in the fury of his wrath, seeing his son so
dishonored, and as it were thrust out of his throne by the aspiring mind of
man, cries vengeance is mine, and I will repay it: I Will revenge my sons
injuries upon Adam and his posterity for ever: nay (father) replies the Son
in tender zeal to his Fathers glory: Let it never be said thou made man for
naught, and the sons of men for endless perdition: thou that made the Heaven
for thy perpetual seat, and established the earth never to be removed: Thou
that in wisdom have created all things for some happy end, willt thou bring
man the image of heaven, and glory of the earth, the collection of creatures,
and map of nature, the impression of divine essence, to shame and confusion?
Let that malicious Serpent never boast himself that he has disgraced the
workmanship of thy hands, and defaced thy divine Image, that he made the
Prince of Paradise a vassal of hell, and the Lord of Creatures a bondslaue to
Satan: And for mine own injury, Si propter me haec tempestas orta sit, If I
be the occasion of all these troubles and tumults, take me (father) and cast
me out of thy presence into the Sea of that troublesome world, that thereupon
may ensue a calm: let the deep swallow me up, and the water of affliction go
over my soul, that many souls may peaceably arrive at the Haven of eternal
happiness: If for tasting the forbidden fruit of Paradise, the whole earth
must be barren, and cursed with unfruitfulness, let the plowers plow upon my
back, and make long furrows, whereout man may reap most joyful fruits of
my bitter passion: If in the sweat of his brows he shall eat his bread, let
me by mine agony and bloody sweat become that bread of life, whereof if he
feed he shall live for ever: Let me be crowned with those thorns which the
cursed earth for his sake brought forth: since it has pleased thee for my sake
to take his fig leaves from him, put him into Leatherne skins to salute him
with this Irony, behold the man is become like one of us: let mine enemies for
his sake, take mine own garments from me, and put upon me Scarlet Robes to
mock and deride me with Hail King of the Jews: If man for affecting mine
image in knowledge be for my sake cast amongst the fiends of Hell, let me for
his sake take upon me the image of man, that man by me may be exalted among the
Angels in heaven: If for eating of the tree in the garden he shall die the
death, let me be made that fruit, hanging upon that cursed tree in Golgotha,
whereof if he eat he shall live the life, that everlasting life whereby in glory
and true happiness he shall indeed become like one of us: If for affecting
that fair seeming fruit of Paradise man shall become an exile from the place
of plasure, let me be made a pleasant fruit of a new promised land; Grapes of
Canaan growing out of a withered and deformed stock, without form or fashion,
that goodly cluster of grapes carried upon the bar of the cross, pressed out
into most precious liquor, a pleasant wine that makes glad the heart of man,
and does him good at the soul. Father, since it is thy good pleasure in tender
zeal to mine honor, thus to bring forth miserable man, for a wonderment and
gazing stock to the whole host of Heaven with an Ecce: Since nothing else
will pacify thy wrath and heavy displeasure for thy sons sake, I my self
will bow the heavens, and go down, inuest my self with a veil of flesh, and
cover of skin, the shape of a servant, that mortal men may in truth salute
me, not without a wonder, Behold the God of heaven is become a mortal man like
one of us, Aeternity it self is born, and immortality put into the grave, like
one of us.

Behold the eternal Son of God begotten of his Father before all worlds
without a Mother, brought forth of his Mother into the world without a Father:
He that built heaven and earth, a Carpenters Son, and the Prince of Heaven
spoyld of his royalty, become a sucking babe like one of us, laid in a woman's
lap like one of us. Behold the incomprehensible light of glory, put into a
lantern of corruptible flesh, the bread of life an hungered, and the fountain
of living water a thirst like one of us. Behold the eternal God in whom is no
shadow of change, no mutability at all, has put on a piece of clay, a bundle
of grass, a bubble of water, is become a vapor, a shadow, a Dream, when he
became man like one of us: If this will not satisfy thine indignation, more
then this: since man by his fall is compared to the beasts: let this Ox and
the Ass of Bethleem salute me: Behold the incomprehensible deity that fills
heaven and earth, is laid in a manger, and the Lord of Heaven installed in a
stable like one of us: If this will not suffice thy wrath, let Traitors,
Robbers, and Malefactors of the world salute me: Behold, the immaculate Son
of righteousness is condemned at the bar, the glory of heaven spit upon: he
that sits upon the Cherubins, and rides upon the wings of the wind, is mounted
upon a Cross, and hanged up between two thieves like one of us. Thus was our
cause pleaded, and our salvation enacted at the high Parliament of the blessed
Trinity: This is the intercession of Christ's blood, that speaks better things
then the blood of Abell, which cried for vengeance: this is the comfortable
speech of the Son that mittigates the bitterness of his Fathers Irony: This
is the pleasant voice of God in a burning bush, that the hot wrath of God
consume us not: This is the honey in the Lions mouth, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, that has broke the Serpents head, and trod Satan under feet: Thus is
Heaven and earth joined, and God and man reconciled: The gates of heaven are
lift up, and the everlasting doors set open: now men and Angels may praise God
in one quier, and sing one song, Glory to God on high, in earth peace, and good
will toward men: Now the Cherub which before kept man from the tree of life
with a fiery sword, does ouershadow the Mercy seat for man. This is the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: what shall we do then? but take the
cup of salvation, and praise the name of the Lord: every man commemorating his
benefits with the Prophet David: Psalm 103.
Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name,
praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth
all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from
death, and crowns thee with mercies and compassions; which fills thy mouth
with good things, making thee young and lusty like an Eagle. These are the
benefits of the Lord of life, who became sin, knowing no sin, that thy
sins might be forgiven thee: the satisfaction of him, who was whipped and
scourged, that by his stripes thine infirmities might be healed: Of him that
was humbled unto death, the death of the Cross, that thy life might be
redeemed from death, from eternal death: Of him that was crowned with thorns,
to crown thee with mercies and compassions: Of him that drank vinegar and
gall, drank amain the cup of Gods wrath, that thy mouth might be filled with
good things: Of him that was pierced and mangled upon the Cross, became a
bleeding carcass, Eagles food, that thy soul therein upon feeding might
become young and lusty like an Eagle, Iouis and Vir gines ales, that great
Eagle that brake the net for us, and we are escaped from death unto life, from
the bondage of Satan to the freedom of the Sons of God, heirs and fellow
heirs with Christ of his Fathers kingdom, crowned with glory and immortality
like one of us: This is the body of the Doctrine contained in this sentence: By
your patience in a word, let me sink it a little deeper toward the heart, and
then I will commend it and you to the grace of God. You see how the edge of
this I conical speech, which otherwise might gall and wound miserable man, is
abated by the indulgence of the son of God: what then? has this sentence
lost his edge? is it become blunt, and to no use? yes (beloved) it is the word
of God spoken by God himself, and therefore sharper then any two edged sword:
but the edge is turned from wounding men, to the cutting down of all those
affections that grow in men: I cannot better resemble it then to Abraham's
knife, which was stretched over his son Isaac, till the Angel of God from
heaven turned the knife from Isaac to the Ram caught by the horns, Genesis 22.10
so was the Ram killed and Isaac saved alive: In like manner this sharp
sentence of Almighty God, sharper then knife or razor to a proud man in misery,
had not the eternal Son of God, The everlasting father, The Prince of Peace
turned the edge of this sentence from Isaac to the Ram, from wounding the sons
of men, to the killing of the rammishnesse of our affections, to cut down
those lofty and aspiring minds that threaten the clouds, and rob God of his
honor.

Wherefore (Right honorable and Worshipful) let us humble our souls under
the sacrificing knife of Almighty God, which will mortify our corrupt and
boystrous affections: let us open our bowels to embrace that two edged sword of
the Spirit, which will cut down both extremes of vice from the golden mean
of our mortified affections. Let us suffer our selves to be cropped and pruned by
our heavenly father, that we may bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance,
lest in stead of a pruning knife to lop off the sprigs that shoot out beyond
measure, there be an Axe laid to the Root, we cut down and cast into the
fire: lest this fatherly and gentle Irony: be turned into a (...), a bitter
derision, when he that sits in heaven shall spy us a far off in heaven,
laugh us to scorn, and the Lord have us in derision. Judge you selves
therefore that ye be not judged of the Lord, give sentence upon your selves,
that ye be not condemned of the Lord, humble your selves, under the mighty
hand of God, lest he execute himself judgment, and humiliation upon you. I am
not ignorant how unsavory these sackcloth Sermons are to flesh and blood, but
I know no other way to heaven, since man lost heaven by lifting himself aloft,
then must he get it again by humbling himself in sacke-cloth and ashes: no
passage into Paradise but under a fiery sword, the sword that cuts away the
branches of our corrupt nature: no climbling into heaven but over a cross, our
Masters beaten way and his Disciples: He that will look ever to attain to
that place of bliss, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes must have
his eyes like the fish ponds of Heshbon standing full of water, which makes
them more beautiful in the sight of our beloved Spouse. He that with David
will have God to put off his sacke-cloth, and gird him with gladness, must
himself put it on and mourn with sorrow: Capernaum (says our Savior) which
art lifted up to heaven, shall be brought down to hell, for if these things
which are done in thee had been done in Tire and Sidon they would have
repented in sacke-cloth and ashes, therefore the only way to keep Capernaum
out of hell is sacke-cloth and ashes; when the Judge of the world shall give
sentence at the last day, see the goodness of God to mankind even in the
sentence of condemnation, Go ye cursed into hell fire, prepared, for whom?
for you? no: for the Devil and his Angels: when thou will become one of
Lucifers Angels, mount thy self into the seat of God, Esaias 14.
Ero similis altissimo, become a God like one of us, Then shall thou fall from
heaven like lightning, pierce the clouds as a thunderbolt, and come down with
such a vengeance.

Therefore let us tread the steps of our Lord that has broken the Ice, and
trod out the way for us, who desires us to learn but one lesson of humility
for the rest of our souls: It may seem a strange speech delivered from Christ;
When I am lift up, I will draw all men unto me, John. 12.31
signifying what death he should die, is it like that himself hanging upon the
cross could entise others to that cursed tree? It must be a great humiliation
surely, and so it must be, Non decet sub spinoso capite membrum esse delicatum:
If the head of Christ wore a crown of Thorns: It is no dishonor for the foot
to catch a thorn: let it not grieve us to tread the steps of the eternal
Son of God, and king of glory, but learn of him, even of him that rid upon
an Ass and was mounted upon a Cross to be humble, and so you shall find rest
unto your souls; The peace of God which passes all understanding shall
possess your humble souls, and the Prince of Peace descend, like a shower
into a fleece of wool, into your meek and gentle souls. Then shall the dew
of heaven water your contrite and broken souls with all celestial graces.
Then shall we reap every grain we have sowed in tears, and these souls that
have mourned and turmoy led themselves in this cloddy and mirie earth of sinful
flesh shall return with joy to the Father that gave them, and carry their
sheaues with them: from which sorrow, to which joy he deliver us, and bring
us, that has redeemed us, and bought it for us, les us Christ the righteous,
to whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be all honor and glory from
this time forth and for evermore Amen.

THE NECESSITY of the PASSION. A Sermon on good Friday at the Cross.
LVKE 24.46. So it is written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise
again from dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins
might be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.


THIS is one of the little Gospels of Christ revealed now in plain words hidden
before in Moses and the Prophets, even from the Apostles and Disciples till it
pleased our Savior Christ to open their understanding, that they might
understand the Scriptures, and then to deliver these words which now by Gods
providence in the Evangelical writings be come unto our hands: For God in his
Divine dispensation thought it meet that Moses face should shine through the
veil: that the Arc of the Covenant should be covered that the Tabernacle
should be ouershadowed with a Cloud, that there should be a veil of the
Temple which should be as a wall before the Holy of Holies, until the
fullness of Time came that his own Son should be manifested in the flesh,
to speak face to face to us. Until the cover of the Arc, that (...), as it
is called, Romans the 3. should be opened at the Passion that we might look
into it, Romans 3.25.
and see what it behooued Christ to suffer: until the Son of righteousness
should rise again the third day to dispell the cloud of the Tabernacle: until
the veil of the Temple should be rent that we might behold the Mercy-seate of
God in stead of judgment, that we might see the Cherub with stretched wings
ready to fly with the glad tidings of Remission of sins to all Nations,
beginning at Jerusalem: So that the Remoouing of those vailes, was nothing but
the revealing of these mysteries which my Text declares. That Son of God our
Savior who opened the understandings of the Disciples to see so much, remove
the veil from your hearts that you may discern as much, and rightly apply the
same: And that it may the better stick by us, and work upon us, observe the
order of the Holy Ghost in the Text delivered in four distinct points, The
Proof of the Redemption. The Work of the Redemption. The Fruits of the
Redemption. The Ministration of the Redemption.


1 The Proof a Testimony of Scripture, So it is written. 2 The work
consisting in two things, the Suffering. 2 The work consisting in two things,
the Resurrection. 3 Out of these two spring two fruits, Repentance out of the
Passion. 3 Out of these two spring two fruits, Remission out of the
Resurrection.
For as the Passion of Christ works in us Repentance, which is the Passion of
a Christian: so the Resurrection dissoluing the bands of Death does absolve us
from the chains of sin which is the Resurrection of a Christian.

4 The ministration of it to the world by public proclamation, The text calls
Preaching.

2 This preaching with authority in his name.

3 This authority gives a large commission to all Nations.

4 Yet not confusedly but in orderly proceeding, beginning at Jerusalem.

This I conceive to be the most easy and plain tract of this Scripture, So it
is written, and so it behooued etc.

So it is written. The proof.
] This sword of the Spirit Christ did take unto him when he first entered the
lists with Satan in the 4. of Matthew, and so now after his resurrection
taking his leave off the Church, armeth his Disciples with the same sword: So
it is written: and as Satan at the first labored to wrest it out of the hands
of Christ, so ever since he has endeavored to drive us from it, knowing it
to be safest for us, and the most deadly weapon against him: So it is written.

1. Great Love of God, Magnus amor.
that he vouchsafed to feed his Church in the infancy so famlliarly with
Revelations, but a greater Love when the is Revelations are upon record, that
posterities might have recourse unto them, to judge of Revelation and decerne
of Spirits, by So it is written.

No marvel therefore though writing the Law made the Devil so mad, that he
set the people a madding upon a Calfe, hoping by that stratagem to put their
Captain Moses into some zealous fury, that he would break the tables or do
some mischief to the written Law: It stung the Serpent that Gods Law should be
written in tables of stone to continue, that from time to time it might
discover all falfe Oracles, and keep the verity of God entire from his
unwritten vanities.

2. A great Benefit to have the Law written, 2 Magnum beneficium:
but greater favor that Comments also of Moses and the Prophets together with
their Prophesies and the Mysteries of salvation given by divine inspiration
should be committed to writing, that Christ in his person might confirm his
Apostles, as here with So it is written, and that the Apostles upon the same
testimony might preach the same Gospel to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

3. 3. Magna misericordia.
But of all mercies this the greatest, that to Moses and the Prophets are added
Christ and the Apostles, that all things needful to salvation be now
perfected, exactly written, admirably preserved, sealed up with a curse in the
end of the book to any that shall add or diminish: whether of the sect of
Montanus or Seruetus, or any fantastic spirit of latter time that expects
further Revelation: or whether they that make the traditions of men or the
voice of a Counsel equivalent, that is, of equal infallibilitye with the Word
written: this is so absolute it self and of it self, that Vincentius
Lirinensis so approved by our adversaries does auerre, Solus sufficit ad omnia
satis superque: An absolute canon it is, but for what? for the mysteries of our
salvation wrought by the death, and perfected by the resurrection of Christ: An
absolute canon for prescript of all essential parts of Gods worship, and the
directing of our souls to everlasting life, for which It is written. Ioh: 20:
21.


But shall we therefore from sufficiency of the written word require the
proof of all particulars without limitation? Doubtless under this pretense we
may go too far: Must ye have a proof out of Scripture, that the plague is
not infectious or will ye not believe it? shall we exact a prescription out
of the word of God, How to build Churches for divine service? or, How to shape
decent garments for the Clergy? shall the Scripture define in particular each
ceremony and circumstance any ways annexed or appertaining to external
Worship? shall the Preacher look for special direction out of Gods Book in
what manner to branch his Text, to order his speech, to enforce the Argument for
the best edifying of each particular auditory? shall the people wait till we
can give express charge out of this Book when to sit, stand, or kneel at
divine Service? what ever is against the second Commandment, I fear this is
against the third, for it takes Gods name in vain, and stands not with the
Majesty of that word, written for matters of greater importance.

Verse. 13.
The Apostle being to reform abuses concerning Prayer, and Prophesing in the
Church of Corinth, 1 Corin. 11.
does for some things refer himself to their own discretion, judge in your
selves, is it comely? does not nature it self teach? as if for decency in the
Church common sense, or the light of reason could say somewhat: to which, if
you add the general direction of Scripture, may not the Church of Christ out
of these grounds determine the particulars? Nature it self teaches, that the
most solemn act in every kind is most solemnly to be performed, and
religion teaches what act of religion is most solemn, may not the Church then
determine of particulars within the compass of General rules of Scripture?
It Was the sentence of that famous Oracle of Geneua in his comment upon the same
chapter, verse. the 2. where showing the Apostle to speak de ijs quae pertinent
ad ordinem and politiam, he infers Scimus enim vnieuique ecclesiae liberum
esse politiae formam inslituere sibi aptam and vtilem quia Dominus nihil certi
prescripserit: we know says Calvin, he makes no Quere upon it for matters of
Order, we know that every Church has her liberty to institute a form of
government fit and profitable for her self, because the Lord has prescribed
no certain thing: Paul planteth, he left Apollos to water: The Master
builders have set up Gods house, and have left the fitting of the rooms by
general directions to the overseers of the building: The eye of the handmaid
waits upon the hand of her mistress not so simple as to be pointed to every
particular within compass of discretion; no she has been better brought up
then so, when she was a child, she was taught as a child, but now she is
stronger by the assistance of that spirit which leads her into all truth:
pray we to God for that spirit of truth and sobriety upon his Church, that she
may so carry her self in all her proceedings that still she have an eye to God
and his word, till he have mercy upon her, and restore her to the Peace of
Sion, and so we come unto the work, So it is written.

2 So it behooved Christ to suffer.
Christ is the Son of the living God, The work.
therefore most free, not subject to necessity, necessary it is therefore that
we in the first place distinguish of oportuit, a necessity was of Christ's
suffering, not imposed upon him, but assumed by him voluntarily: a necessity
not primative but by consequent, not absolute, but presupposing the ordinance
of God, which two kinds were distinguished by Christ at his Passion.

1 In the fourteenth of Mark, Mar. 14.36
Abba Father, al things are possible to thee, take away this Cup, therefore no
absolute necessity to drink of it.

2 In the 26. of Matthew, Father if this Cup cannot pass but I must drink of
it, thy will be done, therefore a secondary necessity there was.

1 Of the first in the 53. verse, Think thou that I cannot pray to my
Father, and he will give me more then twelve Legions of Angels, therefore not
an absolute necessity to yield himself.

2 Of the second in the 54. verse: How then shall the Scripture be fulfilled?
which is the very consequent of this Text, So it is written, therefore So it
behooued: So God has ordained, whose decree is unchangeable: so has he
revealed his Ordinance by writing, whereof one title shall not pass,
therefore, So behooved Christ to suffer.

The reasons of this necessity will appear in the consideration of the three
points implied in this sentence.

1 It behooued there should be a suffering. 2 That Christ should suffer. 3 That
he should so suffer: Sic oportuit Christum pati.
1 The Law of God was broken by sin, which behooued us to have kept,
therefore it must be restored by judgment; the glory of God was obscured by
sin, therefore it must be cleared by expiation: The justice of God was
offended by sin, therefore it must be satisfied by punishment: The wrath of
God was kindled by sin, therefore it must be quenched by water and blood:
the work of God, and the course of Nature put out of joint by sin, therefore
it must be reduced into order by the suffering for sin: Our Nature did thus
offend, therefore our Nature must thus suffer, man sinned, man must die: thus
far does the justice of God proceed.

2 But that this suffering should be translated from one person to another,
from the offender to the innocent, from us unto Christ is a work of mercy, of
such mercy as was denied to our betters, the Angels when they fell, and
suffered in their own persons: yet such a work of mercy as does not any whit
cross his justice.

1 First, it is true that God said by Ezekiel, The same soul that sins
shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4.
the punishment of one man's sin shall not be exacted of another, but Christ
the anointed Priest did willingly enter pose himself betwixt God and us,
volenti non fit iniuria.

2 It Is true again that being innocent, though he would in love, yet in duty
he may not offer himself to die for malefactors, may not leave his station,
Iniussu imperatoris may not offer that injury to the public body whereof he
is a member: but Christ the anointed king of heaven and earth has absolute
power over his life: John 10.18
I have power to lay down my life, and power to take it up again.

3 It Is true, that no creature, admit he loved us, would suffer: so that admit
also he had liberty given to lay down his life for us, yet no creature in
heaven or earth could satisfy God for the least sin: but Christ the Son of
the living God did confer the dignity of his person upon the passion of the
humanity, Oportuit Christum verbum: Christ the anointed Priest of God did in
love sacrifice himself for us: Christ the anointed King had power in justice
to lay down his life for us: Christ the Son of the living God was worthy in
person to answer his Father for any offense committed against him: Christ the
Prophet told us before his death and here again, how it behooved him to
suffer: whereby that mystery is revealed which the wisdom of flesh and blood
could never have found: How mercy and truth are met together, how
righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

3 Come we to the third, Sic pati, so to suffer, and we find more in the
word (...) then the tongues of men, and Angels be able to express which is
the same with (...) in the 26. verse: ought not Christ to suffer these things?
and so it behooued Christ to suffer, all one: who list to look effectually
into Christ's sufferings, let him put his hand into his bosom, and say Ita
fecimus nos quae non oportuit, ergo oportuit Christum haec pati: We have not so
done as it behooued us, therefore so it behooued Christ to suffer: for as
sacrifices were proportioned to offenses, so in Christ the Truth it self, so
many and so great our sins, therefore so many and so great his sufferings:
all sin is unjust, some inhumane, some horrible: For Christ an innocent to
dye against justice: for doing good to dye, is against humanity, for the Son
of the living God to die is horrible: Some are sins of ignorance, some of
infirmity, some wilful sins: As we sin blindfold, so did he suffer; as we
sin of weakness, so did Christ suffer such infirmity, that an Angel
comforted him, we sin willingly, with what alacrity was he pained? For
shameful sin, he suffered shameful punishment: for strange and unnatural
sins, a strange and unnatural grief: the sweat of blood in a frosty night:
for excrable and cursed sins, an execrable and cursed death, the hanging upon
a tree. Our sins as a Leprosy spread over all the powers of soul and body;
the understanding darkened, the will perverted, the affections infected, the
senses corrupted, the members instruments of unrighteousness unto wickedness:
Christ's sufferings as general: His understanding troubled in the 12. of John,
How is my soul troubled, what shall I say? Father save me from this hour: his
will distracted, Not my will but thy will be fulfilled: his affections
tormented, his love abused, his compassions scorned, his grief intolerable:
all parts of his body afflicted: his head with thorns, his eyes with tears,
his face with buffets, his ears with reproaches, his mouth with vinegar, his
hands and feet with nails, his body furrowed with stripes, and his heart
divided with a spear.

O Quid dicam.
Christ paid the transgression of every commandment.

1 We had forsaken the true God against the first commandment, Christ was
forsaken of his Father. 2 We bowed our knees to graven images in dishonor of
God, Christ had knees bowed to him in derision. 3 The name of God had been
taken in vain of man, Christ was so blasphemed that his divine works were
ascribed to the Devil. 4 We had broken his Sabbath, the precious body of the
Son of God was subject unto death, fettered in the bonds of Golgotha all the
Sabbath long. 5 We had dishonored Father and Mother, Christ to whom all
honor is due, submitted himself to the form of a servant. 6 Man had
committed Murder, Christ's blood was shed for it. 7 Man committed adultery,
Christ, as an unclean person, was spit upon. 8 Man had stolen, Christ hanged
among thieves for it. 9 Man bore false witness, Christ had many false
witnesses against him. 10 Man coueted another man's goods, (...) he exhausted
himself, or as it is in the Prophet Daniel, He had nothing to be coueted.
Phil. 2.7. Dan. 9.26.

Illa fecimus nos quae non oportuit, ergo oportuit Christum haec pati: So many
and so great our sins. Therefore so many and so great his sufferings, I cannot
number how many: shall I tell you how great?

Great be the indignities that God received at their hands, on whom he
bestowed so many blessings, enen then dishonored when he showed mercy: Christ
suffered by them to whom he showed much good, even then when he suffered: He
kissed Judas while Judas betrayed him, he healed Malchus ear while Malchus
came to apprehend him: he prayed for them while they were crucifying of him,
he pleaded for them while they were scoffing at him, he saved them whiles they
killed him: There Is a mystery of iniquity, a bottomless, unspeakable,
inconceivable gulf of sin: so were his sufferings, when there was presented
before him Death in his full strength, Hell never mastred before by any that
came within the confines of it, the Deformity of sin, the heavy Wrath of God
unappeased, when he felt and saw himself flesh and blood, left alone to
encounter all these (for the Divinity inseparably united to his humanity, did
notwithstanding contract her beams, and deny the sweet influence of comfort.)
This was the mystery of that passion, which the heart of man can never be able
to conceive: unspeakable were our sins, therefore unspeakable were his
sufferings.

3 Give me leave to take the fruit with the tree, The fruit.
repentance with the passion for more easy passage: for out of Christ's passion
springs our passion, a penitent and godly sorrow for sin: Zach. 12.10
So it behooued Christ to suffer, That Repentance might be preached: That which
God said by Zachary in the 12. He would pour upon the house of David and the
inhabitants of lerusalem, the spirit of Grace and compassion, to look upon him
whom they had pierced, and mourn for him as an only Son, Is accomplished by
repentance: for if the spirit of grace be in us, we will mourn in compassion
for him whom we have pierced with our sins: That which Christ Prophesied of
us, John the 12. When I am lift up from the dead I will draw all men to me,
takes effect in us by repentance: for if we remember his sufferings, we cannot
forget our sins, and if we love him for his sufferings, we must hate those
sins that brought him to it: Let us never bite at the stone with the dog;
whosoever were executioners, whosoever were instruments, every one of us had an
hand in killing the Lord of life: and the more heinous sins we have
committed, the more be our hands imbrued in that innocent blood: let therefore
Peter go weep bitterly, let Mary Magdalen shed a basin of tears, let sinners
weep, let great sinners howl, let the inhabitants of the city mourn like
Hadradimmon in the valley of Megiddo for piercing me, says the Lord; Zach:
12.13
shall we sooth and flatter our selves with slight sorrow then? I beseech you
consider under what terrible terms this doctrine of Repentance is commended
unto us; The Scripture not only speaks of weeping and mourning, Acts 2.37.
but of Pricking the hearts in the Acts of the Apostles; of cutting the
foreskin of their hearts to make them bleed, of Renting the heart as a garment;
of crucifying our affections: see how Repentance is described unto us in the
very terms of Christ's passion: weep for these sins which have caused him to
shed the tears of blood, be pricked in heart for these sins which have
pierced the Son of God; cut off the foreskin of thy heart, and make it bleed
for him which shed his heart blood for thee, crucify those affections which
have crucified the Lord of Life.

I am a fool, Beloved, so often to urge this doctrine of Repentance, it is so
harsh and bitter that you cannot abide it, it makes you heavy and melancholy,
it pinches, it cuts, it rents your hearts, it crucifies your sweet affections,
I know it is so unsavory you cannot abide it: yet let me tell you with S. Paul,
that whom God has foreknowen, them he has predestined to be conformeable
to the image of his son, Rom: 8.29.
in sufferings, for of sufferings he speaks, and that those to whom the
spirit of grace is given to consider his passion, have also the spirit of
compassion to lament as one mourns for his only son, to lament for
offending such a gracious God, who has given his son, his only son Christ
for the sins of the world.

I might dwell all day upon this day, upon this, for it is a Meditation for the
Day, but the time and my Text plucks me forward with more speed,

And to rise from the dead the third day. 2 The works. The Resurrection.


As there was never Priest before had the love to sacrifice himself for the
people, so never any had the power to revive the Sacrifice he once killed, but
our High Priest Christ had Love to lay down his life, and power to take it up
again. By the first he showed himself the son of man after the flesh: By
the second he was declared mightily to be the son of God. Romans 1.3.

1. Many shall be raised from death as well as he, who have lien longer in the
graves then he, yet no Gods: True; but Christ was not only passiuely raised in
his flesh, but did himself actiuely rise in his power, Destroy this Temple and
I will build it: he said, he would raise himself, therefore he did it, else God
would never have raised him by miracle to second and confirm a lie.

2. Diverse did rise with him, but Christ was the first fruits of them that
slept, by whose virtue some few ears that were then ripe, and hereafter the
whole harvest shall be carried into everlasting barnes.

3. Some rose before him, Lazarus, the widows son, Iairus daughter, but they
were delivered to their friends again, conuersed amongst men as before, and in
the end returned from whence they came: Act. 13.34
but Christ was the first that rose to eternal life never to visit the grave
any more More cannot be said for this then is expressed in the Revelation, Reu.
1.18.
I am alive and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore; and have the
keys of hell and death. 1. I am alive and now dead, the first that rose again
from death. 2. Alive for evermore, never to see death again. 3. I have the
keys, to open the grave to whom I list, and to shut in the rest, till the last
trumpe. For the manifestation of which power the bowels of the earth and her
foundations were shaken when the first borne of the dead came forth. Mat. 28.2.
When you have perceived an earthquake, out of your natural observation you
say, some abundance of spirits and exaltations were bent in the body of the
earth, which by force made her tremble: believe it, it is most true: that
Spirit, that abundant spirit of the Diety inseparably united to the precious
body of Christ even in the heart of the earth could not be shut up in the earth:
marvel not then at that great, extraordinary, miraculous earth quake, for then
were the fetters of Golgatha shaken off like Peter's in prison, then was the
womb of the grave rent, and the power of death shaken in pieces: for (says
Peter) it was impossible that Christ should be holden of death: holden he was
for a time, Acts 2.24.
but a very short time, the third day was the furthest of this humiliation, for
the manifestation of the truth of his death he could rise no sooner, his
fathers love to him, and his own love to his Church would suffer him to lie no
longer.

If Joseph in collateral affection to his brethren could not suffer them above
three days in prison, Genesis 42.18.
but the third must call them out: could God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ suffer his only Son to be longer imprisoned in the bonds of death:
who so lately pacified his Fathers wrath for us, and so patiently endured those
bitter passions, in him undeserved? nay to compare God with God, if he taught
his Church to challenge his promise under these terms in the Prophecy of
Hosea, Hos. 8 2.
After two days will he revive us, and the third will he raise us up, and we
shall stand in his sight: may not the head of the Church and his only Son
challenge it much more? Add unto this his tender love to his small, weak and
distressed Church, when the faith of his own Disciples was going out: I will
not believe (says one) we had thought (says another) this had been he that
should have redeemed Israel: verily it was time to rise, to strengthen these
bruised reeds, and cherish these smoking flaxes: upon the day God was to give
sentence upon men for sin, he staid till the heat of the day was over, in
the third of Genesis: Genesis 3.8.
but upon this day being to preach remission of sin, he rose betimes while
it was dark: It was the love of God, and his tender affection to the Church
which he had so lately and so dearly bought, made him rise so soon, and
appear so often the same day to minister comfort to distressed souls.

The sum of which comfort follows: That remission of sins might be
preached:

Remission of sins which springs naturally out of his resurrection, The 2.
fruit.
as repentance out of his passion: for as Christ died for our sins that sin
might die in us by repentance, so did he rise again for our justification,
which consists in remission of sins: this is the sum of the Gospel defined
in the first to the Romans, Romans 1.16.
to be the power of God to salvation to all that believe: for as the power of
darkness showed never more in force then at his death: so was the power of
light at his resurrection: that our Savior Christ could go down into the depth
of death with so many milstones about his neck, with the sins of the world
upon his back, and that he could there shake them all off, Rize up the Son
of righteousness like a Giant, leave all our sins in the bottom of the
gulf, never to rise up in judgment to our condemnation, This I say, is the
remission of sins, and this is the power of God to salvation to all that
believe.

And that we may believe it, The mini stration.
we must preach it: that Repentance and Remission of sins might be preached.

How shall ye believe in him of whom ye have not heard? how shall ye hear
without a Preacher? In the tenth to the Romans: Thanks be to God you hear,
Rem. 10.14.
and I make no doubt but you would be glad to hear the glad tidings of
salvation, the remission of sins preached, for it makes you happy: Blessed is
the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is covered: but I
beseech you consider the tenor, and order of this commission: you must hear of
repentance before remission, else we shall build the roof before we lay the
foundation: for as sure as Christ did suffer before he rose, so must you
suffer the passion of repentance before you can be justified by remission.

Pardon me (Right Honorable and well-beloued) It is my task to provide the
sharp sauce, the sour herbs of Repentance before you can taste, and truly
relish the Paschall Lamb at Easter: you must weep and mourn with Christ at
the Cross before you can rejoice with him at the resurrection, you must put on
sackcloath before Scarlet, humble your selves before God before you can triumph
with him that came from Edom in read colored garments from Bozra, Esaias the
63. and the first.

Think not that that austere doctrine of repentance did end with John Baptist;
or that you can banish it out of the City into the wilderness: for as John
Baptist did begin his preaching, Matthew the 3. In the same manner did Christ
begin his, when John was cast into prison, Mark the first, Repent and believe
the Gospel, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

So by his Example are we directed, and so by his name are we authorized to
preach to you.

2 In his name.
1 If you ask by what authority we do these things, The authority.
my text is our warrant, we come in his name, At whose name every knee does
bow, both of things in Heaven, and in Earth, and under the earth: we are the
Ambassadors of Christ the anointed King of Kings.

2 If you take exception to our weakness, being earthen vessels full of
frailty, men of polluted lips like your selves: Though of our selves we are
no more in us, then empty pitchers or Rams horns, yet we come in the name of
our graund Captain Christ, who by the shining lamps of his Gospel in our
empty pitchers can put our enemies to flight, in the name of the praise of the
high God, who by blowing of these horns with the powerful spirit of his mouth
is able to overthrow the walls of Jericho, nay the very gates of Hell.

3 If you think we take too much upon us, that we are busybodies, that we
are they that trouble Israel, and disturb the Conscience more then needs: we
are sent in his name who has laid this Oportet upon us: So it behooued Christ
to suffer, and so it behooves us to preach, equally are these two applied
together, (...): So it behooued Christ to suffer, who if he had not suffered,
everlasting woe had lain upon you: and so it behooves us to preach: we have
received the ordinance of God by imposition of hands, we be set apart for this
business, we have put our hands to the plough, there is a necessity lies upon
us, we may not be scared away with a white cloth, Woe unto us if we preach
not the Gospel.

4 If our message of repentance be unwelcome, because it sets your Conscience
upon the rack, till you have made a penitent confession of your sin,
Remember we come in his name who suffered greater torment for you, to teach
you mortification by his passion, the sacrifice of a broken heart made
acceptable to the bloody sacrifice of his Son.

5 And then, but not till then; behold we come in the name of him who rose from
the dead, to raise up your souls by the spirit of consolation: In the name of
him who rose the third day betimes; to bring speedy comfort to a troubled
spirit.

6 To conclude, we come in the name of Christ the Lord anointed, whose name
is a sweet ointment powered out, to cure your souls by gentleness: we come not
by force of arms compelling, but by forcible persuasions alluring Iaphet to
dwell in the tents of Sem: yea we beseech you in the name of Christ that you
would be reconciled unto God: So did Paul entreat the Corinthians, and so do
we desire you: for the commission is without limitation, extending to all
Nations.

Among all Nations.
Before his death, 3. The extent.
It was only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but when the stone
which the builders refused at his Death was become the chief corner stone at
the resurrection: then were two walls knit together, the Jew and the Gentile
made one Church: then the Partition wall was broken down, and all respect of
persons removed: then was Jerusalem to be inhabited without walls for the
multitude of inhabitants. Then did the Church of Christ become Catholic,
Zach. 2.4.
dispersed far and wide over the face of the whole earth.

Then was the manifold wisdom of God made manifest to the Angels in heaven by
this mystery which was kept secret in God from the beginning of the world:
hence was the mystery of salvation revealed, and derived to us that dwell in
the ends of the world, shut up in another world like fishes in the Sea, so that
we from the North as well as from the East and West shall replenish the
kingdom of God, and to our comfort be it spoken, Luc. 13.29.
that heavenly Jerusalem described Revelations the 21. has as many gates, and
as open on the North side as any other part under heaven in the 13. verse of
that Chapter.

I have swiftly passed over the former points as more familiarly known
amongst you: give me leave by your honorable patience, now I am come to the
last point, a little to pause upon it.

Beginning at Jerusalem.
By this divine dispensation I perceive the truth of Gods promise performed
unto the Jews: The righteousness of God showed to his Son: The wisdom of
God for spreading of the Gospel, and the goodness of God toward the sinners
of the Gentiles in that it began at Jerusalem.

1 It could not be that the wickedness of men could make the promise of God
of none effect, therefore seeing the inhabitants of Jerusalem were the children
of the Prophets, and of the Covenant made with their Fathers, true Olive
branches springing out of the root of Abraham, to whom did appertain the
adoption, the glory, the giving of the Law, the service of God, and the
promises, Christ to perform this promise begins at Jerusalem.

2 As God a righteous judge honored him in recompense of his humiliation, so
did he honor him in the same place he suffered: In Jerusalem was he despised
at his Passion: In Jerusalem shall he be glorified by his Gospel: In Jerusalem
in the assembly of much people, at the solemn feast of Easter did Christ
suffer a public execrable shameful death of the Cross, therefore at the
feast of Whitsuntide before the assembly of many nations in the famous City of
Ietusalem shall his name be first honored in preaching of the Gospel.

3. The manifold wisdom of God is here manifested as well for the publishing
as the confirmation of the same.

1. If God would have his Gospel spread amongst all nations like the river of
Eden, where shall we make the head of the spring but at Jerusalem, Acts 2.5.
where was dwelling every nation under heaven.

2. If he would have the truth of the Gospel tried before men of knowledge,
amongst the Doctors in the Law and these that were skillful in all science,
where should he make the first probation but at Jerusalem?

The truth of God seeks no corners, nor auoydes the light like the Oracles of
the Devils in the 45. of Esaias, Esa. 45.19.
It seeks not to establish it self in weak places, it creepes not privily
amongst the people like the heresies of the false Prophets: 2 Pet. 2.
but as Christ when he first showed himself was seen amongst the Doctors at
Jerusalem: and as Paul when his Doctrine was called in question, Gal. 2 2.
he went and conferred with the best at Jerusalem: So for this cause also the
Gospel of Christ began at Jerusalem:

3. If he desire to fettle his Gospel in the world, shall not choose the City
before the Country? the famous City of Jerusalem, there is the strongest hold,
get that and the rest will yield. Act. 17.16.
When was the spirit of Paul stirred within him, but when he came to Athens?
There he labored more earnestly with all kind of men, with all kind of
Sects, being the Seminary of learning, a plentiful harvest as at Jerusalem.

4. If he would make a way that the Athenians and the rest of the Gentiles
should receive the Faith, what greater argument could be used then this?

That it was received before at Jerusalem: that the Jew, the very professed
enemies of Christ recanted, embraced the Faith, and believed him whom they
crucified? what secondary means made Paul so powerful among the Gentiles, but
this? That Saul a lew, a learned lew, Gamaliels scholar, a religious lew of
the strict Sect of the Pharisees, a zealous lew, persecuting this way unto the
death, became so earnest a professor of the same?

5. What greater encouragement for us sinners of the Gentiles? that salvation
was first offered in Jerusalem to them that were his murderers, why then
should we sinners despair of his mercy? when the thief on the cross saw him
not only forgive, but pray for those that did torment him, he lays in for
himself; Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: there is hope
for Thieves and Murderers if for these, and doubtless salvation will be
easily attained if for Jerusalem.

It began at Jerusalem, but it flowed over the face of the earth: yet is here
no footing for universality, to be an infallible mark of the truth of
Religion: for the Gospel does not spread at once over all nations like Noah's
flood, but like rivers of waters winning ground in one place, and losing in
another, dried up at Jerusalem and Samaria, and flowing in other places.

The triple estate of Christ's Church is well shadowed in the three famous
figures of the same: She was in her infancy, being a little flock, tossed
like Noah's Arc, in man's judgment ready every moment to be swallowed up. 2.
She shall be in her triumphant estate like Salomous Temple on Mount Sion, that
cannot be moved: but in the mean time she is Moses Tabernacle in the
wilderness mooueable from place to place, first pitched at Jerusalem and in
the East parts of the world, after that in the West, since removed into the
North amongst us, and S. Paul tells us, It shall return to the Jews from
whence it came: so all Israel shall be saved: Romans 11.26
there is not any place or people under the Sun, that can challenge the
Residence of the Church of Christ: Admit Peter lived and died, and was
crucified at Rome: what then? did not a greater then Peter live and die and was
crucified at Jerusalem? did he not rise the third day? did he not appoint
Apostles, send down his Spirit, plant his Church at Jerusalem, yet it is
removed thence long since? It began at Jerusalem, went through other places,
now among us. Wherefore now it behooves us to look about us and consider this
point: what can we say for our selves, why this Candle-sticke should not be
removed from this place also?

A notable place there is in Ezechiel, Ezech. 9.3.
as it was in Jerusalem, so with us, he rose from them twice and then went
away: Cap. 10.4.
change the name and the vision is ours; twice or thrice has he risen from
us, in that year of 88. In the death of our Sovereign: In the plague, and now
he stands on the door, as though our abominations would drive him away,
looking upon us with a ruefull eye: will ye drive me quite away? Shall I be
gone for all ado? yet he dwelles amongst us. And yet for all this what
amendment do you find? How many hearts have bled? How many tears have been
shed? what restitution of wrong gotten goods? what vain fashions and wanton
attires have your Dames of Sion cast off? what crying sins have been
strangled in the suburbs of this place? doubtless the wrath of God is not
appeased for our sins, but is stretched out still: O, beloved, presume not
too much, provoke him not too often, for when we are most secure, at peace with
all at home and abroad, while we least think of evil, so long as this pitch
of iniquity remains, there may breed that in the bowels of the Church, which
may be her overthrow.

Now the God of peace and comfort who sent his son unto us to suffer these
things for us, work true Repentance by his blessed Spirit, that his wrath may
be pacified toward us, and he pleased to dwell amongst us while the Sun and
Moon endures, and that for his sons sake our blessed Redeemer, to whom with
the Father and the holy Spirit, three persons and one immortal God, be all
honor and glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE WISDOM OF THE RICH.
A Sermon at PAVLS Cross, October. 3. 1611.
LVC. 16.9. Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you shall
want they may receive you into everlasting habitations.


THis is the general application or use which Christ makes of a Parable: a
Parable standing between two other Parables: The prodigal Son immediately
before The rich Glutton following after: This of the unjust Steward in the
midst.

1. The Prodigal spent his portion, brought himself into misery, his misery
brought him to humility, his humility found mercy, because he had a Father.

2. The Steward spent another man's goods: having warning to give account, by
wisdom prevented misery, else had he been turned out of all because he was
but his Master.

3. The Rich man had enough to spend, abused it, and himself, dropped of a
sudden into hell, where the most loving father that ever was had no pity on
him: This is the very frame wherein these Parables thus placed by the
Evangelists were made for our instruction, that we should not sever these
three which the holy Ghost has so joined together. When men have run
themselves out of breath in wickedness, and wickedness has brought misery
upon them, they get this Parable by the end: and while they are in the wine of
their vanity, all religion and resolution is but to make use of this one
Parable: That when extremity and the fear of death is at hand, then they
purpose to go to their Father, and say; Father I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, and think the Father must needs hear them because of this
Parable: Therefore Christ annexed this second Parable of the unjust Steward,
who if he had stayed till misery had seized upon him, as the Prodigal did, he
had been turned out of all, and should have had neither house nor tabernacle
wherein to put his head.

Verse 3.
His wisdom is here commended unto us: That we would call our selves to
account before hand, take up his Quid faciam, what shall I do? I shall be
turned out of my Stewardship. I wot not how soon, may be to night before to
morrow: Christ, was borne (Beloved) in an Inn, that Christians might account
houses Innes, here to day, and gone to morrow: The holy Ghost has ever taught
to reckon our life by days and not by years, as one did in the twelfth
chapter, Cap. 12.19.
for many years: but not only accounted a fool for so reckoning, but his many
years were contracted into a piece of a day, Stulte hac nocte: To day then if
we hear his voice, let us not harden our hearts, but every one reckon with
himself, Quid faciam? Thus and thus have I spent my time, strength, wealth,
powers and faculties of soul and body, not so much to the honor of my Lord
and Master, as to satisfy my humor, and give my self content, if mine
account be taker. I cannot answer one of a thousand. Thus to cast, and never
leave casting till we come to his Scio quid facians? his resolution, Verse 4.
I know what, He take another course then bitherto, I Will forsake my darling
sins and nail them to the Cross, I Will crucify my sweetest affections by
true repentance, I Will do my poor endeavor while I live to do good, I Will get
me friends by Gods blessing, and such friends as may stand me in stead when I
need. This is Christ's advice. But we are yet taking of the frame wherein my
Text stands according to the old rule, Vide quid supra, vide quid infra. This
Steward for all his wisdom in one point of wisdom was defective, in that he
deferred his resolution till his Master had given him warning, Give an account
of thy stewardship, Verse" 2.
for thou must be no longer Steward: for if we defer our reckoning till
sickness, or some other Messenger of death arrest us, it may be we shall want
either Time or Power to provide for our souls: Therefore follows the third
Parable of one that fared deliciousty every day: had no admonition before,
Verse 19.
neither misery to bring him home, nor warning to prepare himself, but died
suddenly and went to the Devil: fearful examples we have every year, of
some that are snatched away by sudden death, Qui in momento descendunt in
Infernum, take the easiest translation, which in a moment do descend down
into the grave: Thus is the King of Heaven, a Father to one, a Master to
another, but a just Judge to the third. To the penitent Conuerts a loving and
merciful father, as to the prodigal Son, more ready to receive us then we
to offer our selves, I Will go to my Father, says the Son, the Father ran to
meet him, the young man goes, the old man runs; runs and falls upon his
neck and kisses him. But if this tenderly and fatherly affection be abused,
and overmuch presumed on, then the second Parable makes him a Master that will
call us roundly to account, and bid us give over our Stewardships: and if the
servant of that Master defer, will not believe Moses and the Prophets, but
say his Master will be long a coming, then the Master of that servant shall
come in an hour, when he looks not, and give him his portion with the rich
Glutton and Hypocrites. Therefore it is good to be wise in time, and rather
then fail, to learn wisdom from the children of this world, Verse. 8.
who are wiser in their generations then the children of light: if they will
not learn righteousness from us, yet we must learn wisdom from them,
innocence from Doves, and wisdom from Serpents.

It was none of the honestest resolution this Steward made, though the wisest:
when he had spent all, he was too idle to work, fodere nescio, I cannot dig,
I was never brought up to take pains; he was too proud to beg, mendicare
erubesco, I that have lived so gallantly amongst my companions am ashamed to
beg, so in the end he resolves to rob his Master: a wicked resolution, yet
out of this wickedness does Christ teach us to extract wisdom.

Wisdom in three points.

1. To provide for our selves by making us friends, one great point of wisdom
in making good choice. 2. To use the best means to get them: Unrighteous
Ma^mon. 3. The End, sapient is est ordinare in finem, that when we want, they
may receive us into everlasting habitations: of these three (by your honorable
and gentle patience) as God shall assist me, and my strength with the time
permit.
Make you friends] Friends enough no doubt so long as Mammon is our friend,
multos numerabis amicos, but such friends as Job in his sixth chapter complains
of, like the brooks by which the Merchants do travel unto Teman, Job 6.16.
frozen in winter, and dried up in summer, in the time of rain they ouerflow,
Job 6.17.
surely (says Job) you are even like unto it: Job 6.20.
In my prosperity you were mine only friends, when I had no need of you, when
I had showers of blessings from above, you ouerflowed in kindness, but in
misery and drought, when I have most need of refreshing, you add affliction
to affliction. But we must make such friends as will be sure to help when we
shall want, such as shall be both willing and able to help: where shall we
find them? where, but amongst the great and mighty ones of the world? surely
the holy Ghost means not such friends: for, Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in any son of man, for there is no help in him: his breath departs, he
turns to the earth, and then all his thoghts perish. He had thought to have
promoted his favorites, and made his followers great: He thought upon me
amongst the rest, for I studied his humors, and applied my self unto him, but
his breath departs, he turns to the dust, and all these thoughts perish: Nay,
these great ones are as the flowers of the field, which commonly fall before
the common grass: All flesh is grass (says the Prophet Esaias) but the Word of
the Lord endures for ever: Esa. 40.8.
let us then come to that Oracle to know the best friends.

Verse. 14.
Christ who is the Word it self makes it plain: The friends he would commend
unto us are poor and needy, if we can bribe those well, they will stand us in
better steed in the time of need, then all Judges and Princes of the world:
Poor and needy? alas these are but poor friends: This seemed such a Paradox
to the Pharisees when Christ spoke it, that they mocked: whose laughter, as I
take it, was the occasion of the third Parable: Do ye think it bootlesse to
make the poor your friends? There was a rich man in scarlet, a beggar at his
gate, had not he better have made this beggar his friend, a few crummes would
have done it in time, he neglected this, therefore when he wanted a drop of
water, he could not obtain it: not because the poor are able of themselves
to be friends, but God does undertake for them, he has given his word for
every work of charity, whether it be a work of Piety or of Mercy, of Piety to
his Church, or of Mercy to the miserable, we have bountiful rewards promised
for both.

1. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Prou. 9.17.
and the Lord will recompense him: Christ a greater then Solomon pawnd his
word, Matthew 19. Mat. 19.21
Thou shall have treasures in heaven: There Is for Mercy.

2. For Piety, Matthew. the 10. Mat. 10.41
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets
reward, like the Shunamitish woman, 2 Kin. 4.10.
which persuaded her husband to provide a chamber and some furniture for the
Prophet.

Its a work of piety well begun in this place: Was it not pity that the poor
scholars should be fetched from the Universities upon bare exhibitions? That
Ministers should be called out of the Country from such poor single Benefices
to feed your souls, and have no more refreshing for their pains, but a poor
dinner? Its remembered that some have come above forty miles on foot to furnish
this place, yet could they not say, Quam speciosi, but quam lutosi sunt pedes
Euangelizantium: Should themselves have complained who were ashamed to be so
known? then it would be said, we beg for our selves: Thanks be to God, the
world is somewhat amended in this, I would it were so in the rest: Its no small
encouragement that what good soever we do, whether it be by works of Piety
to the Church, or of mercy to the miserable, shall not go vnre warded.

Get you friends] but what is the way to make them sure friends? the shauing of
the head and paring of the nails? I may say with the Poet.

Creed mihi res est ingeniosa dare. Blessed is that man that considers the
poor and needy, Psalm. 41.1.
that does study and consider how he may do the best good: we may learn
five precepts from this unjust Steward.

1. Verse 5.
He called his Masters debtors, and stayed not till they called him: Abraham and
Lot are said to sit in the door of the Tent, to call in strangers, they needed
not to knock: commonly they that crave the least have the most need: Cast thy
bread upon the waters, says Solomon, but especially upon the standing waters,
says a Father, the running waters will shift for themselves, they that abide
in their places are like standing waters most subject to putrefaction.

2. That he did, he did it quickly, he called them and bad them first set
down quickly: Bis dat qui cito dat, vt hilarem ita celerem datorem diligit
Deus, Verse 6.
Expedition as well as cheerefulnes.

3. The extent is, he called every one of his Masters debtors, we must not
heap all our liberality upon one, Verse 5.
but so contriue it, that it may extend to many, Aliud est dare pauperibus,
aliud ditare pauperem: dispersit, dedit pauperibus, Psa. 112.9
in the Psalm, there must be a distribution, and then all is well.

4. As he called every one, so he dealt bountifully, for which we have no
certain rule, because charity is not cut by a thread as Justice, but only in
general.

1. That it be proportionable to our ability: 1 Cor. 8.12.
according to that which a man has. 2. That it be a good proportion, 2 Cor 9 2.
for he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly.
5. Though he was bountiful to all, Verse 6.7.
yet with discretion and difference, fifty to one, and twenty to another, the
most to those who were most likely to help, Do good to all, but especially to
those of the household of faith: help the most. If then we first have a
willing mind in casting with our selves how to do good before we be called to
it: If we dispatch it quickly, and neither leave it for our executors to do,
not let it hang long betwixt our fingers: If we contriue it so as it extend to
many: If to many generations, if bountiful to successions as our forefathers
were, so much the better: If in wisdom we give most, where the best bestowed;
then shall we deal wisely, and make our friends sure against the time of
need. I come to the Instrument, (...), of unrighteous Mammon: And so much for
the first.

2. I Will not strain at the word, Aug. sermon. in meant. Ier. 151. Ep
Augustine tells us that in the Punique tongue it is taken for lucre: S. Ierom
in the Syriack for riches, so the word is common for wealth. But how comes this
Epithet unrighteous in this place? may we procure these friends by ill gotten
goods? God is not pleased with such sacrifice, you know Zaccheus his division,
Luc. 19. Half my goods I give unto the poor, Luc. 19.8.
and if I have wronged any man, I restore it fourefold. Restituit aliena, dedit
sua, he restored other men's and gave his own. In the fourth to the Ephesians,
Let him that steals, steal no more, but let him labor with his hands that he
may have an hand to give, as if before he had nothing to give, because nothing
well gotten: That Is given to the poor is given to me, says Christ, shall we
then make Christ a receiver of stolen goods? God forbid: yet one case there is
I confess where ill-gotten goods must be bestowed upon good uses of necessity,
else they will bestow our souls in hell fire: Its but one case, and I fear
that it is the case of many in these days, who possess much wealth
ill-gotten, who have deceived so many by bargain and sale, oppressed so many
by their place and office, received so many fees either for saying nothing, or
doing no hurt, as the Devil takes gifts of the Indians ne noceat, so much
wealth have they gotten wrongfully, that they know not the right owners, nor
where to find them. In this case they must be their Executors to bestow them as
themselves would, or rather should to godly uses. For thy conscience tells thee,
the owners of these goods, would not willingly bequeath them to thee nor thine,
thou know neither them nor theirs: then it follows as a Father says,
Acquisisti male, impende iam been: whosoever owes them, thou art not the right
owner, therefore as long as thou keep them, thou keep the curse of God
with the^, Esa. 3 14. Till thou disburden thy self of them, thou can look
for no certain remission in Christ: For his blood was not shed to pay men's
debts: If they be able, restitution must be made besides the Ram for
atonement in the 5. of Numbers. Numb. 5.7.
It cannot be made to them nor their heirs, because thou know them not,
therefore they must go to good uses; thou have gotten them ill, bestow them
well.

This doctrine is most true, but it is not the meaning of this Parable:
Restitution is an act of Justice, but my Text intends Charity: If the Steward
had given the Debtors no more corn and oil then their due, they would never
have received him into their houses, but it was out of bounty and liberality
more then he ought them, therefore of free liberality is this understood: for
the more easy passage Beza reads it ex Mammona fallaci, of deceitful or
unconstant Mammon, which will fit riches well enough, but it cannot so well
stand, neither with the received use nor property of the word (...), nor with
the current of Interpreters, who term it unrighteousness, because commonly
it is so, (...), will make an Epithet.

For 1. The holy Ghost in Scripture does speak very suspiciously of riches and
rich men, and the Latins call them diuitiae, quasi de vitijs, riches of vices.

Nomen idem vitijs diuitijsque datum. Dives, aut iniquus, aut iniqui haeres: a
rich man is a wicked man, or a wicked man's heir: true as proverbs be for the
most part.

2. As they be often male parta, so male locata, ill gotten and ill bestowed:
the world is a bad steward in dispensing worldly wealth, tam inique comparatum
est, vt qui minus habent semper aliquid addant diuitioribus, so little
equality, or desert is respected, as the heathen mades the goods of fortune to
have a blind Mistrisse.

3. Because wealth is an instrument of much iniquity, it peruerts Justice
wheresoever it comes: Dives est qui perturbat omnia: Ezra 4.5.
In Cyrus Court the Councillors shall be feed that the building of the Temple
shall not go forward: In the seats of Justice, if Paul would but have said
tantum dabo to Foelix, Act. 24.24
there would have been more virtue in these two words, then in all Tertullus
eloquence: Simon Magus trusted more to his Ma^mon then all his Familiars, Act.
8.19.
he thought there was more power in money, then all the Devils in hell, to have
coniured the Apostles themselves.

4. It is called unrighteous Mammon, ab effectu, it endangers the soul of the
possessors, Vt mors pallida, sic iniquae diuitiae, quia diuites iniquos faciunt.

There is as great danger in the multitude of those temporal blessings, as
there was in the multitude of fish, Ioh. 21.6.
Ioh. 21. for if Christ had not seconded their great draught with divine help,
they had broke the nets, sunk the ships, and and lost their lives. So when
Christ tells his Disciples, how hard it is for rich men to get into heaven, and
they reply, who then shall be saved? Iuc. 18.27.
In the 18. of Luke Christ's answer is: The things that be impossible to men,
are possible unto God, Mat. 19.20
All things are possible to God, Matthew. 19. as if God did use his omnipotent
power to bring a rich man into heaven: 1 Timothy 6.9
The reason is given in the 1. of Timothy the 6. They that will be rich fall
into temptations and snares: imagine an house full of cobwebs, every cobweb
with a spider in a corner, what danger think you are the poor flies in it,
that fly so busily up and down that house? so when men busy themselves up
and down to get wealth in this world, which hangs so full of nets, totus mundus
laqueus, every net has a Devil like a spider in a corner which sucketh out
all goodness and grace. In so great danger are we by getting wealth to poison
our souls, that it may well be called unrighteous Mammon. Therefore does Christ
teach how to make friends of this dangerous enemy, to make treakle of vipers
flesh, to make a box of precious ointment to annoint the feet of our blessed
Savior: those surbated feet which tred upon the earth naked and miserable,
that when we shall want they may receive us into everlasting habitations: that
third and last branch of my Text being the end and motive to good works.

3. This last end is a motive to any good work, answering 3. Quaeres.

1. Cui bono? What good of well doing? Everlasting habitations, a royal
reward. 2. But when? When we shall stand in greatest need, want. 3. By whose
means? They shall receive you: They.
1. Prou. 23.5.
First, Proverbs 23. Riches take wings as Eagles, and fly into heaven. If they
fly thither, let them fly. There neither rust nor moth does corrupt: there
thieves do not break through and steal. Quod non dederis, aut vivus amittis,
aut mortuus dimittis. That which is not given, is either lost while we live,
or left when we die: but that which is given, is as seed sown; it increases
an hundredfold: Panis frangendo crescit. Its like the bread broken to the
hungry multitude: It multiplieth not unto bread that perishes, but unto
everlasting life.

But shall good works purchase heaven? Not by the virtue of the works; they
be but the fruits of charity; nor by the virtue of charity, that's but the
fruit of faith; nor by the virtue of faith, that's but an instrument to
apprehend Christ, who alone by his merits has made this purchase, and prepared
these mansions for us.

By faith in Christ we are justified before God, and made heirs of these
everlasting habitations; our faith justified to our selves to be a lively faith
by charity in our hearts, which to us is a more sensible quality then faith.
Our charity is justified before the world by works, which to the world are
visible, and more apparent then charity. Our works shall be justified before
men and Angels by our reward, if they proceed from true charity and faith in
Christ.

So then we are adopted sons of God, and made Inhabitants of heaven only by
Jesus Christ: we are justified by faith in Christ, we are sanctified by
charity from faith, charity shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, we shall
be glorified by the works of charity, and we are enabled to these works by
the riches of iniquity.

Thus worme-eaten Mammon may procure us an incorruptible crown, by being an
instrument of those Good Works, which are fruits of that tree of Charity,
which springs from that root of Faith, which grows in our hearts from that
seed of the Word, which reuealeth unto us that Savior of the World, who is the
only author of all these blessings and graces.

But when shall we enjoy these blessings? When we shall stand in greatest
need, when we shall be turned out of our Stewardship; for we are but Stewards,
nothing that we have is our own.

1. Because we must part with it. Si vestra sunt, tollite vobiscum. We
brought nothing into this world, neither may we carry any thing out of this
world.

2. Because we must give account how we spend them. May not I do with mine
own what I list? Mat. 20.15
Matt. 20. Therefore not ours. Saepius risi testamenta legum dieentia, Hic
habebit agrorum vsum, ille dominium. Chrysostom was wont to smile when he read
men's Wills; Such shall have the use, such the Lordship, such for a time, and
such the fee simple. Terra Domini est and plenitudo eius: We are but Tenants,
or rather Stewards at will.

Pardon me (honorable Lords) though I count you but Stewards: you are no
more, and we are no less. The Parable extends to all: Every one has a
portion for which he must answer, and out of which he must be turned. Either
the birthright of Reuben, or the government of Judah, or the iudgement-seat of
Dan, or the eloquence of Nephthali, or the rich blessings of Joseph, or the
pleasures of Asser, or the strong bones of Isachar: Either wealth, or wit, or
strength of body, or authority, or portion, or other things; which if we
employ to the honor of our Lord and Master, we may gain a Kingdom by it when
we want: and that want shall be at the hour of death: Then shall we want
every thing, when we shall have nothing. Our friends will leave us because
they cannot help us: perhaps they will shed a few funeral tears after our
corpse; they will stand you in no stead if you would: there is no water sooner
dried. Happily you have a stately Tomb over your dead bones, Picta domus
coeco: or some few words in your commendation, Philomela surdo. Then shall we
want indeed, when we shall have neither wealth to relieve us, nor friends to
comfort us, nor so much as these earthly Tabernacles to shelter our souls, but
poor souls shall be turned out of house and home. Then happy shall they be
who shall be received into those everlasting habitations.

But who shall receive us? Shall the poor? Can they bestow mansions? Much ado
to get places themselves. Christ shall say at the last day, Mat. 25.35
Matt. 25. I was hungry, etc. In as much as ye did it to one of those, ye did
it unto me. As Christ therefore is said to receive these alms on earth which
the poor receive and not he, so the poor in heaven are said to receive us
into everlasting habitations, which Christ shall bestow, and not they. Does not
Christ tell his Apostles, They shall sit on twelve seats, Mat. 19.28
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel? Does not S. Paul tell the Saints, that
they shall judge the world, yea the Angels? Conceive that, 1 Cor. 6.3.
and understand this, that those poor souls to whom you have done any good in
the name of Good, either by your wealth, or counsel, or any comfort
whatsoever, that all these shall testify what you have done, before the
eternal Judge, and approve that sentence which shall crown you with glory.

Can you imagine how the Queen of Saba and the men of Niniue shall rise up at
the day of judgment, and condemn the Jews, Matthew. 12. So shall the men,
women, Mat. 12.41
and children of your Hospitals rise up and testify, Sweet Jesus, had it not
been for these and these benefactors, we had perished for want. Then shall a
multitude of poor Scholars rise up and testify, Sweet Jesus, had it not
been for these and these, we had never been enabled to preach thy Gospel, or
enlarge thy kingdom. Then shall Jesus say, Come ye blessed of my Father,
receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. As Paul,
and Siluanus, and Timotheus, said to the Thessalonians, in the first Epistle,
and the first chapter, You are our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing in
the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 Thessalonians. 1.19
because the Thessalonians would then testify how these had labored in the
Gospel for the good of their souls: so may every one of you (right honorable
and well-beloved) say of all those to whom you have done good in the name of
good, You are our crown in the day of the Lord Jesus, because those shall
testify your good works before men and Angels, and justify that sentence
which shall receive you into everlasting habitations.

Christ's counsel then is good, That we make friends of poor Saints with
unrighteous Mammon. But how shall we know the poor Saints from others? As all
rich go not to hell, so neither shall all poor be Saints in heaven. Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. If then thou be
poor and proud, poor and envious, poor and murmuring, poor and malicious,
that Kingdom belongs not to thee. But our rule in doing good must be a rule
both of wisdom and charity; of wisdom, in making good choice of the parties;
of charity, in deeming and hoping the best of them. If we be deceived in our
choice, that shall not prejudice our good deed: Charitatis error salutaris est,
Eccles. 29.12.
we seldom sin in charity. Claude eleemosynam in sinu pauperis, and ipsa
orabit prote. Admit their prayers whom thou have relieved be not acceptable to
God, yet as Abels blood did cry for vengeance against Cain, so the Alms deeds
themselves shall go up into the presence of God for Cornelius, Act. 10.4.
Act. 10.4.

To conclude: See the wisdom and goodness of our God, who has opened the
gates of heaven both for poor and rich, that the poor by poverty, and the
rich by wealth may attain a kingdom. Art thou poor? He that wore a crown
of thorns for thee, has taught thee, of thorns and tribulations to make a
crown of glory. Art thou rich? He that is Lord of heaven and earth has taught
thee in this Parable by wealth to attain an eternal Tabernacle: So as poor
and rich, one by suffering, the other by doing well, may meet at the last day
with rich Abraham and poor Lazarus in the Kingdom of glory. To which Kingdom
the God of all righteousness bring us for his Sons sake: To whom with the
blessed Spirit, three persons and one everlasting and only wise God, be all
honor and praise both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

