A SERMON of Simonie and Sacrilege, Preached at Paul's Cross March 18: By
ROGER FENTON Preacher of Graise Inn.



LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield.

1604.

To the right honorable Sir THOMAS EGERTON, knight, Lord Chauncelour of England
my very singular good Lord.
RIght honorable, I am enjoined, by that reverend authority which in all duty I
stand bound to obey, to publish these small endeavors: which albeit they may
pass inuisibly unregarded of the meanest, because they are so small; yet the
subject requires the Patronage of the most honorable. Not that it is a
controversy (for amongst writers I find not mine adversary) but because if
actions interpret men's minds, the most part of the world be against me. Such is
our conflict while we use the sword of the spirit. Many respects have moved
and encouraged me to crave your Lordships Patronage. Your integrity, who I
persuade my soul may safely wash your hands of these spoils. Your honorable
place and authority, in whose power it is to cherish the tribe of Leui, and
protect a great part of our body. Your love and affection extending it self
to many worthy members of the same. My duty, your unworthy Chaplain, who
if I should signify to the world what encouragements I have received from your
Honor, it might seem in me ostentation, as if I deserved somewhat. Then let
that favorable countenance which has ever shined upon Scholars, vouchsafe the
acceptance of a simple Scholars mite, for want of larger offerings. Accept this
little testimony of my greater desires, who shall never cease to offer up
prayers unto God for all such blessings and happiness upon you, and your
honorable family on earth, as may be undoubted forerunners of your heavenly
bliss.

Your Lordships most bounden and dutiful Chaplain, ROGER FENTON.

PROVE. 20. 25. It is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified, and
after the vows to enquire.
MY Author tells me in the five and twentieth chapter of this book the
eleventh verse, That A word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with
pictures of silver. That is, as the outside is beautiful, so the inside is far
more precious, as gold excels silver. So are the words of Wisdom every
where glorious: yet being fitted with time and place they have an inward and
secret operation far more forcible and effectual than otherwise they would,
they be apples of gold with pictures of silver. Now as these silver pictures,
I mean the ornaments of speech are not to be neglected (especially in these
honorable assemblies) so the golden substance which by a secret operation is
directed to the heart and conscience is every where to be preferred. Wherefore
when I gave all diligence to speak unto you (right honorable etc.) not only
things profitable for Christians, but seasonable for time and place, I was
directed to this choice concerning the profanation of things Hallowed, and the
dangers thereupon ensuing. Toward the unfolding whereof I am deprived of that
usual help which other Scriptures do aforde: namely, that current of speech
and sequel of argument whereby one sentence follows upon an other in so good
consequent, that the occasion and premises of the place do serve for a key to
open our text. But these Proverbs be certain drops of divine wisdom (or
golden apples you may call them) each making an entire globe or ball within it
self, whereof this is one. We may divide it in the midst.

1 The one half compasses him in the snare of destruction who spoileth God of
his right in things hallowed. 2 The second, catches him who seeks euasions
to unwind himself out of those vows which are solemly made before unto God:
wherein the more he strugleth, the faster he tieth himself: for the first word
is indifferently applied unto both parts, and so make a double snare. Laqueus
est deuorare sacrum; laqueus post vota inquirere.
This kind of sanctified things intended by Solomon is by consent of all
expositors taken to be of an inferior degree, whereunto we may descend by these
few steps.

1 That sacred Majesty which is holiness it self in the abstract, is then
profaned by man (as much as in him lies) and injured in the highest degree
when it is blasphemed. This is destruction in it self with God who raineth
snares upon such for their portion, and their arrows shot against heaven fall
back upon their own pates.

And it were to be wished that this were also a snare of destruction amongst
men: for nature has so prescribed, and graven it in the hearts of men from the
beginning, that blasphemy is punishable by death. That cursed speech of Jobs
wife, Curse God and die, 29. Job, was grounded upon a common received Maxim in
that time of nature, that a blasphemer must not live. And that Hethnish king
Nabuchadnezar had no sooner acknowledged the true God, but made a decree, that
whosoever blasphemed should die a violent death.

But admit there be no such law established: and that upon this charitable
supposition, that a Christian commonweal will breed no such monsters: shall
this be imputed for a want? Not until those mo^sters appear. For in the
Commonweal of Israel there was no positive law against blasphemy: until
such time as a blasphemer was discovered 24. Leuit. and than upon that occasion
the law was made. So if this wicked age wherein we live shall bring forth such
miscreants and execrable wretches, as shall dare to breath direct blasphemy
against the God of heaven, to the utter deriding and denying of him: then I
take it to be a thing not unworthy the highest consultation, whether that
judicial law of God be a pattern for us in this kind. for if we add to the
law of God concerning Theft, for the better preservation of the public peace;
let us not diminish the law of the same God, for the preservation of that
sacred name whereupon the public good both of Church and commonwealth does
depend immediately. If there be a power established de Haeretico comburendo,
why not de Blasphemo, much more? since the one sin is a partial, the other a
total eclyps of Gods glory. If the civil Magistrate do carry a sword and not
in vain: not a rod for correction only, but a sword to punish with death:
then let not that sin which by the general consent of all Divines, is of all
sins absolutely the greatest, let not that escape the edge of this sword.
Thus much is inferred upon necessary implication, that it is destruction in
the highest degree to profane Holiness it self. Yet this is not intended by
the direct meaning of this text.

2 As God is holiness in himself, so has it pleased him to communicate the
same unto his Church: to make her not only a Catholic but a holy Church.

To this end has he sanctified special means; that is, separated them or set
them a part from common use to effect holiness in the hearts of the people.
Whereof there be three degrees.

1 The Word and Prayer, together with the administration of Sacraments have the
first place, wherefore the Archministers of the Gospel the 12. Apostles
leaving all other business, gave themselves to prayer and the administration
of the word, 6. Act. 4. To devour these is apparent destruction, for where
these be wanting the people must needs perish. Yet such is the malice and
subtlety of the serpent, that rather then this shall stand entire, he will so
work as one shall devour an other. The time was when Prayer being turned into
a Mass, and the Mass into an idol did swallow up the preaching of the word;
the time is, when preaching has well nigh swallowed up Prayer, as if there
were nothing holy in the Church of Christ but a Sermon. Such is the
peevishness of our corrupt nature, that where God has combined such a lovely
pair of virtues together, we can not lean to the one but we must despise the
other. Whereas in deed there is such a sweet concord and harmony between
them, that who so despises the one, shall be deprived of the comfort of the
other. They be the ascending and descending Angels of commerce between God and
us. The Word teaches us to know his truth. Prayer testifies that we
acknowledge his goodness to be the only fountain of all our blessings.
Preaching brings knowledge, without which devotion is blind: Prayer
exercises devotion, without which knowledge is lame and unprofitable, the one
sows the seed, the other fetches a shower of graces from heaven to make it
grow. By Preaching God does serve us with that heavenly Manna, the food of our
souls; by Prayer we do serve God which is the end of all our preaching. Be it
far from us then to make a divorce between these two which can so well agree.

2 That these sacred means might take effect in working holiness in the Church
of God, he has sanctified or set apart in the second rank, Time, Place, and
Person, for the ministry of the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, for Time, he
has selected the Saboth: for Place, the Temple: for Persons, the Clergy.

1 The Saboth sanctified or set apart from common use to Gods service, is then
devoured when it is profaned by weekly business, or lewd sports, as about this
place it has been too much. But his royal Highness whom God has crowned
over us, no doubt to crown us with mercies and compassions, as hitherto it
has been his manner in all his proceedings to begin with religion: So has he
in his first proclamation caused the reformation of this point to be proclaimed.

Pray we to God to continue and increase and establish the reformation of those
things, which without all controversy are to be reformed.

2 The Holiness of the place is devoured, when the temple of God is made an
Exchange. John. 2. 16. I mean not only the temple at Jerusalem, but every
place consecrated to Gods worship is Holy, and therefore (says the Apostle)
not to be profaned by common imploiments, 1. Cor. 11. 22. verse. Have ye not
houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God?

3 Sanctified persons set a part for the Ministry of the Gospel are devoured
a thousand ways: yea, rather then fail we our selves will devour our selves.
That unhappy faction amongst us about mynt and annice, Romans 1. 1.
had brought such a snare upon this Church, as if Gods especial providence had
not preserved us, the Papist on the one side, and the profane Atheist on the
other, had devoured both sides with open mouth.

Verily it is a snare to devour any thing that is sanctified; but yet I am not
come to the dint of my text.

As the sacred ordinance of God, the Word and Sacraments can not be ministered
without convenient time, place, and person, set a part for that purpose: so
neither can place, nor person, be fit for that Ministry without convenient
maintenance.

Wherefore God of his goodness out of those temporal blessings in abundance
bestowed upon the sons of men, has resumed a portion for this purpose. Which
portion is said in my text to be sanctified, because it is set a part from
common use, to the maintenance of Gods service. For it is laid down for a
principle in Leuit. 27. 28. Every thing separate from common use is holy to
the Lord. so that where the Scripture speaks of this portion there to be
separate and to be Holy, be Sinonyma, diverse terms expressing one and the same
thing.

These lie open to be devoured by covetous and needy persons: these be
alluring baits to intise a man to devour them, but Solomon gives us a Caveat,
that under this bait there lies a hook to ensnare the conscience of the
deuourer: so as he may swallow the bait and wound himself: win the world and
loose his soul.

Be it far from me to ensnare the judgment of the weak, or any ways to
darken the truth by Ceremonial or Leuiticall shadow. I know where I speak,
in the presence of God and of those who are able to discern and judge what I
say.

Give me leave (by your Honorable patience) to inlighten my self in the
unfolding of this text, so far only, as the Moral law of God which is
perpetual, and the evidence of his gospel do second the same.

That precept of Wisdom to her son in the third Chapter of this book 9.
verse. Honor God with thy riches: albeit she had written it in the hearts of men
by nature: yet she had need to renew it, since many endeavor to blot it out:
for it is a conceit commonly conceived, that for those temporal blessings we
possess; if we use them soberly without excess, justly without oppression
of others, and charitably with some portion relieve the poor: we are thereby
discharged, as if no part thereof were due unto God, or did any wise appertain
to the first table.

The Nicodemites were content to become Christians thus far, that they would
give their hearts unto Christ, so they might dispose of their bodies as occasion
served. These go a degree farther, they will worship God in soul and body
both, that of the abundance of the heart the mouth may speak, the knee bow,
the hands and eyes be lifted up, but for honoring God in their riches, they
think it is more then needs, they will offer to God the oblations of their
hearts, and calves of their lips too; but not of their stalles. We will go
with the wise men (says Barnard) to seek Christ from the East, yea we will
fall down and worship him: but we be grown too wise to open our treasuries;
that is, the renting of our hearts, we cannot endure to be tied unto it. If
Paul therefore will make Agrippa a Christian, he must except these bands too.
But God will not release us.

For as God is the owner and giver of all, so he will be acknowledged by * a
sacred Sacrum ^ect^gal. ^aluin. in ^eb. 1. 4
rent to be Lord of all. He gave blessings to Abraham, Abraham repaid part in
acknowledgement of that gift, 14. Genes. The land of Canaan was given unto his
posterity, but that sacred tribute was reserved as holy to the Lord. For want
of the paime^t whereof God does often destraine, and reenter upon his own:
restraining the influence of the heaven and sap of the earth, as 3. Mal. 10.
Bring the tithe, and see if I will not open the windows of heaven, etc.
Therefore the windows of heaven were shut before, because this duty was kept
back. Si Domino decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam Sermon. de temp. 219.
reuoceris, (says Saint Augustine) when the tenth is denied to God, he
resumeth 9. parts, and leaves us the tenth, as in many famines he has done;
for the quantity which portion is due, I aver not precisely, because I have
not proved it. Only thus much arises without question. That as God is the
giver of all our wealth, and he only who blesses the works of our hands: so
in acknowledgment of his universal dominion, he will have a part thereof set a
part for his honor and worship.

2 Secondly I hope, ye will not determine any contemptible portion for God, as
if it were decent for us to dwell in houses of Cedar, and the ark of God to be
wrapped in goats hair, 2. Sam. 7. Or to honor God as we honor the poor, with
some cold benevolence. If any be of that religion, he is not far from
Ieroboams: for he made the base of the people the Clergy; these make the
Clergy the base and meanest of the people. Is this to give to God that which
is Gods, or to Honor him with our riches? But what tell we you of God? you
profess to honor him with all your hearts: but does he eat bulls flesh or
drink the blood of goats? does he dwell in temples made with hands, or feed of
the fruit of the land? Not so, yet he has right and interest in all, and has
taken into his own possession a part to dispose of at his pleasure, 27. Leu.
30. verse. and when he has set his mark upon it, All this is mine, he after
disposes of it. Number. 18. Behold I give it to the children of Leui, for what?
for their service in the tabernacle of the congregation, verse. 21. to what end?
to encourage them in the law of the Lord. 2. Chron. 31. 4. What is all this to
you? the Levites are gone and their law is vanished. It is true, yet this
ordinance is in force still ratified in the Church of Christ, by Saint Paul, 1.
Corint. 9. 14. verse. (...): God has so ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel: that is to say, as that right which God
then had in his portion he conferred upon the Priests and Levites for their
service at the altar: so God has ordained that that right which he now has in
your wealth, that reasonable portion now set a part for his worship, be it what
it will be, is conferred upon the Clergy, for their service in the Gospel:
Sic ordinauit Deus: and that upon the same moral considerations as before.

God is the owner and giver of all we possess still, therefore unless with some
portion we acknowledge his supreme dominion, we shall not only transgress
natures law; but in time forget whose tenants we are.

2 This God has a Clergy still, who be (...), set a part for a more excellent
worship then that of the Levites, Romans 1. 1.

3 He keeps the same love and affection toward his Clergy still, Mat. 10.
40. He that receaueth you receaueth me, and him that sent me.

4 There is a service to be done in the tabernacle of the Congregation still,
and a more painful service then that of the Levites, they served by turns,
we continually labor in that which spends a more precious humor then the
sweat of our brows.

5 We have need to be encouraged in the law of the Lord still, and as great
need as ever the Levites had, 2. Chron. 31. 4. Therefore that ordinance of God
stands still upon the same grounds. That we must live, (...) (as the Apostle
speaks) of that portion which is sanctified by the temple. Or as he speaks
more emphatically of our times, (...), of that which is hallowed, or sanctified
by the gospel it self.

By this you see (right honorable and worshipful:) First, that the right and
interest in Church livings is Decima* sacru^ vectigal. qui eas recipit in loco
dei est subrogatus ergo quod Mel chizadec, Abraham obtulit decimas eo confess^^
est Honoris gradu suprae se excellere. Calvin in Heb. 14.
originally in God, not in us: which therefore is said to be sanctified in my
text; it holds in Capite. Therefore if any shall devour it by alienation or
sacrilege, they stand answerable to God himself, and not unto us, in that day
when all Courts shall be judged over again.

Secondly you see that this right and interest in Church livings which we have,
we have by grant from God, we receive it immediately of him: so is it the free
gift of god; not as he is the author of nature only, Finis proximus dat
speciem in mor.
for so are all other gifts; but as he is the author of grace. For to this end
has he given it, that by our Minsterie grace might be wroght in the hearts of
the people. Deus qui dignatus est totum Tractat. de Beatitudine Cathol.
Conuersionis.
dare, decimam a nobis dignatur repetere, non sibi sed nobis sine dubio
profuturam. God vouchsafes to give us all things in abundance. 2. He accepts
one portion back again, in acknowledgement that we hold the rest of him. 3.
That portion he has bestowed again in behoof of our souls. So the^
(beloved) with a part of your temporal goods you honor God: that part he
sanctifies and returns into your bosoms, for your spiritual and everlasting
good.

What injury is it then to God that his sacred portion, by alienation and
profanation should be devoured? What indignity is it to the goodness of God,
that this right we have in things sanctified, derived from God for his
service, should be bought and sold. That that right which is the gift of God,
the free gift of God, the gracious gift of God, given for the perpetual
maintenance of the Gospel should be obtained with money. I doubt it does taste
of the gall of bitterness, Act. 8. 23. and sometime incurreth that snare of
destruction there threatened. Pereat pecunia tua tecum: for even that money
does seldom prosper.

Doubtless to spoil God of his right, is to swallow our own bane: yet because
lucre does blind our eyes, the danger of this destruction is not conspicuous.
Wherefore Solomon does here call it a snare. Laqueus est deuorare sacrum. I
would gladly know some real and material difference betwixt Simon Magus his
bargain and some of ours; saving only that he dealt plainly, and we devise
shifts to ensnare our selves, Act. 8. 19. Simon offered money, and said; Give
me power that on whomsoever I lay my hands he may receive the holy Ghost.

We offer money and say, Give me or get me power, that on whom I lay my hands
he may be sanctified or set a part for the Word and Sacraments. What difference
between these two powers, saving that that was extraordinary and temporary
for that time, this is perpetual and essential to the Church of Christ, and
so co^seque^tly of more worth.

It will be said, Barnard spoke like a fool in obiecting Declam. super
Reliquimus omnia.
this to the Clergy, there was never money given nor offered for that sacred
power, but for some honor or commodity thereunto annexed. It is true. And shall
we think that Simon Magus did offer his money for the holiness of that power
which he then desired. Or was it rather for that honor and commodity which he
supposed were annexed? It was that honor he ambitiously affected, that he
might be accounted, (...), v. 9. assuring himself withal, that though he had
offered very largely yet if he could bestow such visible gifts of the spirit at
his pleasure, he would make himself hole again in a short time.

Yet I make no doubt, but the sin of Simon was Simonie. And who list to open
his eyes and look about him, shall find that Simonie is not a school term,
or word of art, but a snare to entrap the consciences of corrupt men.

Ask a Patron who uses to merchandise his Benefices: and he will protest unto
you, that for that right of Church livings, derived upon the Clergy, together
with their function, he knows not what it means, neither does he intend
any indignity to God or holy things* he deals only for that which is
valuable and money worth. And I do verily believe him, for here is the snare.

Neither do I think that Ananias or Saphira his wife did intend any injury to
the holy Ghost, in retaining part of what themselves had given. Only they
thought that a piece of money was as well saved as not.

I verily persuade my self that Gehezi meant no disgrace to that sacred power
of clensing the leprosy: but only perceauing the liberal disposition of
Naaman, he knew that two suits of apparel, and a tale^t or two of silver, might
be taken with as great thanks as left. The Scripture puts us out of doubt,
Mal. 3. 8. that when the Jews kept back their tithes and offerings, it was the
furthest end of their thought to spoil God. Wherefore when God expostulateth
with them: You have spoiled me, they wondered, and said, Wherein have we
spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings (says God.) We know we had beguiled
certain fat Priests and Levites, who have enough besides: but we never dreamed
of spoiling thee. Well (says God) you have spoiled me. Hinc ille laqueus.
Sacrilege and simonie be spiritual sins and sensual men will not conceive
them, so much of the first snare.

2 They who persuade themselves they can very cunningly and smoothly wind
themselves out of the former snare, are taken in this second. For having got a
hint from some, that tithes are not due by divine right, they resolve their
consciences on this manner. Albeit by the law of Moses God did bind the people
of the Jews to the precise payment of tithes) which was also zealously urged
by the Prophets) yet in the time of the gospel it is a thing more arbitrary and
indifferent. So long as they live of the Gospel, and are partakers of the
Altar, it is sufficient. Well, live they shall: a certain pittance they shall
have, wherewithal they must be content, and there an end. For when Moses,
Elias, and Christ met upon mount Tabor, the first two vanished. Moses his law
was very chargeable, whereby that tribe of Leui was grown too rich, Elias also
was a hot vrger of Moses law: but there came a cloud which carried away Moses
and Elias both together with their Ceremonials and Judicials, and Christ was
left alone, who was content to be poor enough, and so we mind to keep him.
Admit all this were true, yet the second part of my text makes a sufficient
answer to these repliers. Post vota inquirere.

Our progenitors and forefathers being taught by Nature to honor God with their
substance, directed by Gods law what proportion was fittest for that purpose;
animated by the examples of the primitive Church in their voluntary oblations,
did consecrate a certain portion of their temporals by solemn vow unto God,
delivering up to him their title and right, from themselves and their heirs
for ever. Annexing commonly ^apit. Ca^ul. lib. 6. ca. 285.
some words of fearful execration, that if any attempt to alien or take them
away, that his account should be without favor in the last day. If after these
solemn vows, any shall inquire, that is, shall devise colors and shifts to
alien or take away things vowed unto God; to wash or clip that sacred tribute,
which has Gods mark upon it, he falls ineuitably into Solomon his second
snare of destruction. Laqueus est post vota inquirere. For as Leui paid tithes
in the loins of Abraham, so did we vow tithes and Church endowments in the
loins of our forefathers. They for us, and we in them, have invested God in
that portion, whereby we stand eternally Quod diuini iuris est, id nulli^^ in
bonis est. Instit. lib. 2. tit. 1.
bound never to claim interest therein again.

Albeit we had liberty before to use ecclesiastical livings, as mere
te^porals: yet after these vows our case is the very same with that of
Ananias, Act. 5. 2 who for keeping back that which himself had consecrated to
the Church, and coloring the same with a lie, was taken in this snare of
destruction, fell down at the Apostles feet, gave up the ghost. The same
snare falling upon his wife, for partaking with him in that counsel. 1. For
inquiring after the vows were past. If you inquire a further ground of this
assertion, let it be the rule of common Offerimus Deo quod Ecclesiae tradimus
cap. carul. lib. 6. ca. ^84.
equity, that No man having passed his consent and deed, may change it to the
prejudice of another. That which is given to the Church is passed over unto
God; therefore he that shall take it again, without the consent of God whose
it is, co^miteth direct sacrilege against him, and deals worse with God,
then God will suffer any man to deal with us: shall not this bring a snare upon
him? He that will be rich (says the Apostle) 1. Tim. 6. 9. Not he that would
be rich with honest endeavors, but he that resolves, He will be rich by hook
or crook, though he spoil god himself, shall fall into temptations and snares
and noisome lusts which drown me^ in destruction and perdition.

2 Admit after the vows it be none of ours by right which is given to God: yet
let us inquire if we can compass the consent of the Ministers themselves; to
get or part away somewhat. Volenti non fit iniuria. Alas beloved, our consent
for the alienation of Ecclesiastical Mentitur Ananias Deo quia Ecclesiae fucum
fecerat Apostoli Homines ^unt sed non priua^^ quum Deus illis vices suas
nandaue^at. Calui. tu ep. 5. 4.
things from that religious end to which they were given is nothing, because
the right originally is in God, and not in us. For the act of Ananias in paring
his own donation, was not done unto men but unto God, Act 5. 4. because after
the donation, the right was not in men but in God, and therefore cannot be
taken away without his consent. Let me parallel this point with the like.

Tell me, what is the reason, that after the knot of matrimony is duly tied
by consent of their parents and friends, ratified by the Minister: what is the
reason (I say) that afterward the consent of both the parties, of all their
friends, seconded by the Minister himself, is not able to vnty the same knot?
Your answer will be, because marriage is not of the nature of a civil contract,
where God himself has a hand. Therefore whom God has joined let no man
separate without Gods consent. Neither be Church endowments civil where God
is a party. That which God has therefore received, let no man take away
without his consent.

3 If this will not serve their turns, after the vows men will inquire yet
further, whether God did ever receive them or no? for the silver shrines of
Diana were never given, because never accepted of God. It is true. But extend
not this limitation too far. That is dangerous. First then let not us sit
Judges upon the consciences of our forefathers, it is a snare after their vows
to inquire. 2. Admit their 2. King. 10. 29. 30.
purposes were stained with imperfection, shall that make their deed void? God
forbid. What act of man is without imperfection? that devout zeal of Jehu was
accepted notwithstanding his golden calves in Bethel. Look to the other
Parallel. How many exceptions might be taken unto marriages in these days? if
we should inquire after the intents and sinister affections of the parties
married, with other by-respects, which make them not so acceptable to God, as
otherwise they would, yet does the bond stand firm before God and man; for
there is more virtue in the good of an act to confirm, than imperfection can
dissolve; else Jacob had missed of his blessing. Genesis 27.

4 If this will not do, men will inquire yet further after the vows, if God
will not in some cases give his consent to part with his right. No doubt, he
that is so ready to convert his own portion to benefit the Church in saving
souls, will be as willing for our good to forgo as he ever was to receive.
But these cases be rare, wherein it is not dark what God does warrant. As in
that other Parallel of matrimony, there is a case wherein God grants a
dismission, Math. 19. 9. So there is a necessity where David may eat the
shewbread, which otherwise is not lawful but for the Priests. Math. 12. 4. But
to make God speak where he is silent, and to extort his consent where he is
most unwilling, this is a snare.

5 If every way our consciences be ensnared, the next inquiry must be, how we
shall be delivered. Admit we have robbed or beguiled the Church: it is past,
we are sorry for it. Will not God of his mercy break the snare, that our souls
may escape in the day of the Lord? No doubt he that was ready to break the
snare of death, will be ready to break this snare also. But upon what
condition? Ezekiel makes a direct answer 33. 15. If he return from his sin
and do that which is right, to wit, if he restore the pledge, and give again
that which he has robbed, and commit no iniquity, he shall surely live and
not die. If he restore, may not these Ifs be dispensed withal? No surely.

That of S. Aug. is firmly grounded upon the book of God. Non remittitur
peccatum nisi restituatur ablatu^. For as in Moses law Number. 5. 7. they were
bound to restore the damage with the principal besides the ram for the
atonement, which was the shadow. So in the truth of the Gospel besides the
atonement made by Christ upon the cross, restitution must be made by us.
Christ has satisfied the justice of God for us? which was not in our power to
do: but we must satisfy the church and our own consciences, besides the
atonement. We will amend and be sorry for that is past. Will not that satisfy?
True. But can we amend so long as we abide in the sin? As the taking of it
from the Church does begin, so the keeping of it does co^tinew the fault. So
long as the spoil is in thy house, the sin remains, when the act is past.
Esaias 3. 14. and where the sin remains there is no amendment.

For the act we are sorry. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Thou can not
be sorry for taking of that which thou keep voluntarily. Sine restitutione
poenitentia non agitur sed fingitur, says Augustine. Without restitution no
repentance, without repentance no salvation, unless we cast that down at the
apostles feet, which was got by sacrilege, we are further from repentance then
Judas, who notwithstanding passed out of this life in a double snare of soul
and body.

Unjust dealing is dangerous against whomsoever: but beware of Sacrilege. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God. Thy money may perish with
thee: but to save thy self together with thy money it is impossible. A rich
man can not pass the needels eye without a strain, nor a sacrilegious person
without detriment. It is a snare every way to devour that which is
sanctified, and after the vows to inquire how to take that from God which is
once given. It is a snare to inquire how to extort the consent of the Clergy,
to rob God of his own. A snare to inquire ouerstrictly after the vows, what
God did take, and what was given to superstitious use. A snare to inquire
colors and probabilities for Gods consent where he is most sile^t. A snare
after the sin to inquire how by some slight repentance we might save our
souls and our money too.

It is a world to see what a world of Inquiries the subtlety of the serpent
has suggested to inta^gle poor souls. We make quaeres and put cases, and
beat our brains and all to ensnare a troubled conscience against the day of the
Lord.

I protest unto you (right honorable and worshipful) I have brought a doctrine
unto this place which is neither new, nor to my knowledge controuersall. I
have purposely contained my self within the compass of common and received
grounds, laying them open according to my poor skill. Wherefore in the name
of God and his Church, let me commend unto you the exhortation of God himself,
Malac. 3. 10. v. Bring in all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in my house says the Lord of Hosts, and prove me, if I will not open
the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing without measure. Bring all the tithes, that were a bootlesse exhortation, bring some reasonable
proportion, and it shall be easier for you in the day of judgment. And seeing
God would have us to prove him, let us try him if he will be as good as his
word. Prove him if he will not open the windows of heaven, and power us out a
blessing without measure. Prove him if he will not prosper the 9. parts ten
times more then before. Prove him if he will not send a learned Ministry
into this land, such as shall be able to stand in the gap against an
adversary, when pregnant wits shall receive encouragement from the altar.
Prove him if we honoring him in soul, and body, and goods, he will not
honor us with a flourishing Gospel to feed our souls with health and peace,
to preserve our bodies with wealth and prosperity to our lives end, so far
as shall further our souls and bodies to eternal life; Which God grant unto
us for his (...) sake, Jesus Christ the righteous: to whom with the Father and
the holy Ghost, three persons, one eternal, everliving, and only wise God,
be all glory, praise, power, and thanksgiving, now and for ever.

Amen.
Errata.
For consequent, read consequen^^, pa. 4. for (...), read (...), page 29.


