A SERMON PREACHED AT. St MARY SPITTLE on Easter Tuesday 1613.

BY ROGER FENTON D. in Divinity.



LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1616.

GALAT. 6. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows
that shall he also reap.
THE words as I have read them are a general instruction, absolute in it
self, springing or growing of a particular precept in the former verse, and
again dividing it self into several heads in the verses following. Let me
consider it a part by it self for entire: then if I dare I will tell you how
it grows. In this place a preface to move your attention I shall need to use
none; for my text it self is but a preface, and a proposition; the preface
does prepare the heart with faith and reverence to receive the sentence; be not
deceived God is not mocked, and you shall find this that follows to be most
true; that whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap. A saying whereupon
the Holy Ghost has reposed more than ordinary. It is but a plain sentence;
yea see, it presents it self in the country method of sowing and reaping, but
it is a sentence of that note as is not marked with a common ecce, but set in
the forehead with a double sentence, be not deceived. The preface then, and the
proposition, make the two parts of my text: the preface imports thus much,
that not to embrace the truth of this saying is a dangerous error, dangerous in
two respects.

First, because it does not deceive others but our selves, yea our own souls.

Secondly, it is a fallacy so much affected, so wilful an error, as is
reported to be the deluding of God himself, who will not be mocked. Then
follows the sentence, and it follows upon this preface. First, as an
undoubted truth, that as a man sows so he shall reap; and secondly, as a
general truth without exception, that whatsoever a man sows that shall he
also reap. Of which and of the branches in the ordering of my text, I will
speak by Gods holy assistance, and your honorable and christian patience, so
far as the time will consent, or the poor strength of my spirit shall be
able to subsist. In those many several places in the Epistles, where this word
(...) is used for the error of the mind, it is no where taken for any common
error, but for that which is a damnable, and fundamental error seducing the
soul unto eternal perdition; and so I would desire you to take it in this
place, that you may take it to heart. Neither does the Apostle speak these
words unto those that are without, but unto Christians, such as had bin
catechized, as it is in the former verse, and brought up in the bosom of the
true Church, as you all are this day. How were they deceived so grosely and
dangerously? Even by those false teachers, that took to themselves a liberty
and boldness to prescribe unto their brethren a secret form of religion, that
so long as they kept within compass of the general faith, so long as they did
believe and profes the true faith of Christ, though they had certain
reseruations by the way which were not alowable; yet that they might be saved
notwithstanding. Dealing and dallying with God Almighty, as Naaman the Assyrian
did, God be 2. King. 5. 18.
merciful unto thy servant in this point, in this darling sin, in that
reserved affection, herein God be merciful unto thy servant. The fallacy it
self I find in those other places which shall serve for a sit commentary and
does fall directly upon this text. The first, in the 6. chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians verse. 9. Be not deceived neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God; the parallel with the 5. to the Ephesians: the 5, 6, verses, This
you know, that neither whoremonger nor unclean person nor covetous person
which is an Idolater has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, for for such things comes the wrath
of God upon the children of disobedience. It seems there were some in the
Church of Corinth, that were of Herod's religion, who thought that so long as he
heard John Baptist in many things gladly, he might commit incest with his
brothers wife, and there were some in the Church of Ephesus, who were seduced
by vain teachers, that sowed pillowes under their elbowes, and drew the
curtains to lull them asleep, and persuaded men out of the Stoikes Paradox,
that all sins were equal, alike mortal, and all alike venial, putting
little difference between sins. Confounding infirmities with sins of
presumption, and says the Apostle, for such things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience, and to the Corinthians he says, Such as
these, some of you were before you were in Christ, but now ye are washed, but
now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified in the name of the Lord, for
such as these cannot be actually true and natural members of Christ; they may
crowde in amongst us, but they are not of us: they may carry the name, and
wear the livery, but they have not the souls of true Christians; who while
they are in the flesh, all are sinners, but yet not so gross sinners as these;
subject they are to manifold infirmities, but not to presumptuous sins, sin
will dwell in them; it will live in them, and sometime it will tyrannize over
them, as in the first to the Romans 7. 20. but it shall not reign in their
mortal bodies, they will not yield the Scepter unto it, and become voluntary
subjects thereunto. Romans 6. 12. bad weeds will grow in them, but they will not
plow and sow iniquity, as in the 22. of the Proverbs verse 8. The world will
catch hold of them to make them (with the Prophets wife) to desire one vessel
more, when all is full, as in 2. King. 4. 6. but every covetous desire to have
more, does not exclude a man from heaven, but that covetousness which is
idolatry, which preferres a man's gain before his God, which dares make
ship-wracke of conscience, rather then part with his gold. Such have no
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ nor of God, they that will be rich fall
into temptations in 1. Tim 6. 9. not they that would be rich if it pleased God
by good means; but they that will be rich, by hook or by crook; by Hophnies
1. Sam. 2* 13. Abac. 1. 16.
flesh-hooke, or the net, Habacuck speaks of, they shall fall into noisome
lusts that drown men in perdition. The Apostle James has yet an other manner
of speech in the first of his Epistle the 13. verse, Let no man say when he is
tempted that he is tempted of God, as if these seeds of temptation were of
Gods sowing, and not of our own growing, and so we might happily escape this
bitter harvest; err not my dear brethren, says S. James, for this is a
dangerous error; it is that imputation, which old Adam by way of insinuation
laid upon God, as if God had made him a wife for to tempt him; and it does
stick fast in the hearts of many of his sons until this day; that in every
sin that a man commits, there is some fatal necessity from above, that
drives him thereunto, but if there had been no other book written but that
which every one carries about him, in his own bosom, it would convince him of
this error. For my conscience tells me that I have omitted many duties which
I might have done, and have committed many sins which I might have left
undone, does my conscience err in this accusation or not? if it err, how can
it justly be mine accuser at the last day the 2. Romans the 15 if it err not,
then err not my dear brethren says Saint James; be not deceived, says my
text, for there is no place for excuse or extenuation, but as a man sows so
shall he also reap, be not deceived; for if thou be, thou can not deceive
God; he is not mocked; is it not a mock and an indignity both for to account
the blood of Christ an unholy thing? as if it had been shed to Heb. 10. 29.
wash swine withal that delight to wallow in the mire, or dogs that return
back again unto their vomit? Such sins of recidiuation as those whereof the
Apostle speaks Heb. 10. 26.
before, what is the reason, that the holy Ghost has not recorded in the book
of God any one example, of any that received pardon and was restored, for any
gross sin by him committed that ever fell afterward into a relaps and was
saved? what is the reason of this? Surely because it is to be feared that the
repentance of such a one was but a mock-repentance; the burned child dreades
the fire, and so will a true penitent shun that gross sin whereof he has
had a true remorse. If this clause of my text shall seem obscure unto any, how
God is mocked; this City will yield us too large a commentary, for to make the
same plain unto you A man with an ill purpose has gotten and does keep an
other man's goods in his possession (no rare-example); his conscience tells him,
this is a great sin; for if others should deal so by him he would be justly
and greatly offended; now for this sin amongst the rest, he does ask and
hope for pardon at Gods hand, as if he did repent, but it is but a
mock-repentance, for says S Austin a thief takes my purse, he says he
repents and does ask pardone, but he keeps my purse, and holds it still,
does he not mock me? I may put up this flout because I cannot remedy it,
but God is not mocked, he will have justice satisfied. So I understand my
text. A Merchant lives riotously not like the prodigal Son, upon his own
Luke 15. 13. Luke 16. 6.
portion, but as the unjust Steward, upon other men's; in the end either for
necessity, or in policy which is worse, he becomes Bankerout, no rare
example; he agrees with his Creditours for the half, for the third, yea for
less; he does not observe the Prophets rule, first sell, and pay, then 2. King
4. 7.
live thou and thine on the rest, but first he reserues a rich portion for him
and his, then he paies of the rest, so the world is blinded, his Creditours are
deluded, but God is not mocked; there will come a day when all reckoings shall
be cast over again, when justice must be satisfied to the full; then, shall
this debtor be cast into prison, that is, into a prison out of which he shall
not come, till he have paid the uttermost farthing, and yet shall not have a
farthing for to pay it. Therefore beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
this we do say and affirm and I beseech you for to carry it home with you,
for one sound point of doctrine, that the blood of Christ was not shed upon the
Cross for to pay men's debts ciuilly understood: not because it wanted virtue,
for there is more virtue in the seed of the woman, then there can be poison in
the head of the Serpent; but it is, because that debt was paid unto God, and
not unto men; It was because thou could not perform the least part of that
price that was tendered upon the cross; but this debt to thy Creditour thou
may; It was because by a counterfeit repentance thou had made thy self
incapable of pardon; and it was because thou did offer an indignity unto
thy blessed Savior, in setting such a reckoning upon his score. Let me
conclude then in one word, these debts Christ does not pay, for the reasons
alleged, thou can and wilt not discharge thy contracted debts; justice one
day must be satisfied unto the full; therefore look thou to it, and look to it
before thou die, for after death comes judgment. So I understand my text, let
me speak unto you beloved as the Apostle speaks in this place, not unto
those that are without, whom God shall judge; but unto those that are in the
Church, unto you that call upon the name of the Lord, who call Christ Lord as
Professors of the true Christian religion; who as zealous Professors of the
same, can double it, and cry Lord, Lord; if any of you desire to put off
almighty God with a slight and a sly repentance for your great sins committed
against his divine Majesty, or seek to defraude his brother of his own right
and therein does persist, such a one, does but deceive his own soul, God is
not mocked for as a man sows so shall he also reap: Now this that has been
said it does only make way unto that which follows, it is but a preface, be
not deceived, God is not mocked, etc. Then wherein should we not be deceived?
what is that truth that we should take so seriously to heart? whatsoever a man
sows that shall he also reap, a firm truth without doubt, that as a man
sows so he shall reap; either the same in kind, or the like in proportion;
and it is a general truth without exception, that whatsoever a man sows
either in kind, or proportion he shall be sure to reap the same.

To begin with the first, and first in kind: the very inference of this
sentence upon the preface does argue a very pregnant instance, that whosoever
does go about to delude or mock God, as has before bin said, he shall find,
that in the end God will mock him; he that sits in heaven shall laugh him to
scorn, and the Lord shall have him in derision the 2. Psalm the 4. verse: he
shall reap the same at Gods hand.

Again, Solomon going about to persuade the young man to sow his seed betime
in the morning, the 11. of the Preacher the 6. verse, the seeds of virtue in
the morning of his youth; the young gallant is not disposed; he is no fit
auditour of that doctrine; he hopes for to live many years; and in them all to
rejoice, as it is at the 8. verse. And therefore if we come to urge his
conscience so soon, he thinks of us, as the Devil said to Christ, that we
are come to torment him before his time; But Solomon tells him, that though he
live many years, yet they are but vanity, and they come to the end of
darkness; he cannot prevail with his many years, mark what follows at the
9. verse, says GOD by Solomon, Rejoice oh youngman in thy youth, let thy heart
cheer thee in thy young days, so God says, but he does but mock him, for
if God laugh, it is time for the young man to weep, for there follows a most
fearful Catastraphe: for know and be thou sure, that for all these things
GOD shall bring thee to judgment. But most excellently and fit for this
purpose, is that that wisdom herself delivers, or rather GOD, who is wisdom
it self, in the first of the Proverbs at the 20. verse, she calls without,
she utters her voice in the streets, she stretches out her hands in the
high street among the press of the people, and utters her words in the city,
the 21. verse, as if he had said in your Churches, at the Cross, or in these
places, and The Spittle.
what be her words? because I have called, and you refused, because I have
stretched out mine hand and none would regard, yea, despised my counsels and
would none of my corrections, at the 24. verse, Therefore I will laugh at your
destruction; when fear comes like sudden desolation, and your misery and
destruction like a whirle-winde, when affliction and anguish shall come upon
you, then shall they call, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me. Mark these that mock God, how God mockes them
again; For they reap the same in kind, they would not hear him, when he
preached unto them in their health, therefore God will not hear them when they
shall pray to him in their sickness: they heard God preaching by his word out
of the pulpet, but they would not obey, therefore God shall hear them cry from
their deathbeds, but he will not answer them, they shall seek him early, but
shall not find him, and as they sowed so shall they reap; the same in kind,
if not the like in proportion, as you may read the quality of the sin in the
nature of Gods punishments, be it temporal or be it eternal, if temporal,
look upon the root, was not Adams temporal punishment well fitted to his fall?
He did eat in wantonness, he shall now eat in sorrow, in sorrow shall thou eat
of it all the days of thy life: The shame of his soul it was the sin of his
soul, it was expressed in the nakedness of his body. His aspiring mind in
affecting to be above a man, was pulled down so low, that he was beholding to
the poor beasts for a covering, and we his sons, if our coats be of wool,
the sheep wore them first; if of silk, the poor silke-worme may pull down
our pride. The hardness of Adams forehead, in excusing and defending his
sin so obstinately before God, face to face, was well dissolved into the
sweat of his brows; his brow also remaining the seat of shame. That
extraordinary delight the woman took in the forbidden fruit, multiplied her
sorrows. Oh it was pleasing unto the eye, in the 3. of Genesis the 6:
therefore the eye is the catarract and floud-gate of sorrow; sorrow shall
remain in her eyes more than ordinary. She had a longing desire to that
fruit, oh the fruit in the midst of the garden worth all the rest; and what
else is the reason that so many quames and unnatural longings are yet in that
sex. She so abused her liberty in ouer-ruling her husband, to whom before
she was sweetly subordinat without renitencie; therefore now, will she, nill
she, she must be subject, and he must rule over her. Look upon the tree
that springs out of this root. A deluge of sin ouerflowed the old world,
which brought a deluge of water to wash the same, and that which the water
cannot wash the fire shall purge. Behold the builders of Babels Tower conspired
against heaven; therefore were they scattred upon the earth By that conspiracy
they had thought to have gotten them a name; therefore God makes them so
ridiculous, that one man knows not an others language, and all this in the
very tongue, which is the very instrument and trumpet of fame. And that burning
lust of the Sodomites was fitly punished with fire from heaven; that unnatural
lust, with unnatural fire and brimstone from heaven; that now it remains a
monument of that their filthy abomination until this day.

I could hold you too long in the proportion of Gods judgments unto the sins
of Countries and Nations. As of the Egyptians, the Edomites, the Cananites, the
Jews themselves for killing the Lord of life, whose blood according unto their
own imprecation is remaining upon their children unto this day. But that which
is personal is more sensible to every one of us, and comes home to my text,
that as a man sows, so shall he also reap, either the same in person, or he
shall reap the same in kind; an eye for eye, a tooth for a tooth, a toe for a
toe; 70 Kings (says Adonibezek) with their thumbs and toes cut off, have eaten
meat under my table, just as I dealt with them so has God dealt with me, the 1
of Judges the 7. If not the same in kind, yet in exact proportion, as Abels
blood cried for vengance against his unnatural brother. Nature was offended,
nature will be revenged; as in the 4. of Genesis at the 2. verse, Thou shall
till the ground and henceforth she shall not yield thee her natural
strength. Because Cain would not afford an abiding place for Abel upon the
earth, therefore the earth would not afford an abiding place for Cain, a
vagabond and a runnagate shall thou be upon the earth. That wicked Cham the
spot of nature who against natural reverence dishonored his father Noah, was
accursed in his own son, whose graceles posterity, the Cananites, (for Cham
was the father of Canaan Gen: 9. 18) given over to all unnatural vice became
natures vomit in the 18 of Leuiticus, the land spued them out, v. 28 For a
remembrance of that unfaithful soul that would believe no more of Gods
judgments than she saw with her eyes, there stands a pillar of salt deprived
of all sense for abusing her sense in looking back, for an everlasting
monument; and for an example of Gods judgment, to salt and season all
posterities to take heed of back*sliding into sin. She might pretend that
she looked back to encourage her two daughters that followed her, but because
her heart followed her eye back again into Sodom, therefore was this
punishment upon her, as a dreadful document to answer all turne-backs unto
sin, that they shall not have Gods grace to step one foot forward to the
service of God. Nay the servants of God who have obtained pardon upon their
true repentance, God does notwithstanding proportion his temporal punishments
unto their sins, to teach us that none of us shall ever be any gainers by
sinning. Was not David's adultery well rewarded in Absolons folly with his
Fathers Concubines? And for his murder of Vriah, the sword was not to depart
from his house all the days of his life. And because his son Solomon divided
Gods kingdom and religion, between God and Idols, therefore God divided his
kingdom between Rehoboam and Jeroboam. And because his son Rehoboam would
need be a yokemaker to oppress Israel, so as his little finger should be
bigger, than his fathers loins; therefore God brought it about that his loins
were no bigger than his fathers finger, by cutting off, of ten Tribes at one
blow. So I have given you a taste, and but a taste of this truth, in the root,
in the tree, and in the branches: in nations, and in persons that be
reprobrate, and in the true servants of God; but these are but temporal
judgments, God tempers all his judgments; they be like our quarter Sessions;
here and there some are adjudged in this world for examples sake, and as David
says in the 58. Psalm, the last verse, that men may say, doubtless there is
a God that judges in the earth. For as S. Austin has well observed, if all
sinners should be punished in this world, we should fear no farther
judgment; and if none at all, we should doubt of Gods providence, in the
first book de Ciuitate Dei the 8. Therefore there shall come a day when this
my text shall be fulfilled in plenitudine, in weight, number, and measure, in a
most exact proportion; when the denial of a crum of bread unto poor Lazarus,
shall be requited with a denial of a drop of water in hell fire; When the
vialls of Gods vengance shall be powered out in full measure upon damned
spirits. When infinite torments shall be inflicted upon sinners for their
sins; which as the hairs of their heads are innumerable and infinite, so shall
the punishment be upon obstinate sinners against that divine majesty which is
infinite; And upon impenitent sinners for frustrating and making void that
price of their redemption, which is infinite. And upon those ungrateful
wretches, who have made so little reckoning of the graces and blessings of God
toward mankind, which are infinite. And as infinite torments shall be
inflicted proportionable unto their infinite sins committed against God; so
likewise the omission of our manifold duties, shall there be punished with an
utter deprivation of all comfort: there shall be utter darkness, and no
mitigation of torments, no not for a moment; Where the tormentors are spirits
and cannot be weary; where the worm shall ever gnaw, and never dye: where the
fire shall be unquenchable never going out; where the breath of the Lord like
a stream of brimston does kindle it, Esaias 30. 33. there shall be no hope of
deliverance (and yet were it not for hope the heart would burst) no, there
shall be no hope, yet the heart must hold a root of immortality, continually
feeding both soul and body unto eternal death. What remedy then but patience?
Nay, no patience neither; who can dwell with everlasting burning, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and not lose his patience? seeing that
gnashing of teeth is an effect of an impatient fury. But alas, replies the
unfaithful sinner, what proportion is here? Shall I be punished with eternal
torments, for my momentanie sins? everlasting burning for a few years sinning?
what proportion? Verily a most exact proportion; for he that does delight in
sin, does desire that those delights of his, might continue if it were
possible for ever; now says St Bernard the very desire of sinning is sin it
self, before God; therefore an infinite desire shall be eternally punished.
Besides, that of S. Gregory (I take it) is well grounded, he that dies
without repentance, justice does presuppose that if that man could have lived
for ever, he would have sinned for ever; if thou then wilt offend thy God in
aeternitudine, that is, so long as thou live, then God will justly punish
thee in aeterno, that is, so long as God himself lives, for ever and ever.
For those, that will sin against God, so long as they have any being in this
world, without repentance; they shall be punished by God, so long as they shall
have any being in the world to come, without mercy. The contrary does
illustrate and prove both; whosoever continues to the end he shall be saved,
says the text: By what proportion? Because God in mercy does presuppose, that
that man if he had lived for ever would have continued for ever in well doing.
Therefore as God in his just mercy does crown our perseverance with
immortality; so likewise in his most just judgment shall he punish finally all
impenitencie with eternal vengeance, just as a man sows so shall he also
reap in most exact proportion. And let this serve for the truth of this
proposition.

Now follows the general to be examined, whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap. Whatsoever; be it good, or bad; be it sown to the flesh,
or to the spirit, which is the Apostles distribution in the verse following. If
to the flesh; then is it general without exception, that whatsoever is sown
turns to corruption and to our confusion, as Hosea says cap: 8. 7. they sow
the wind, and shall reap the whirlewinde. Their root is rottenness and
their bud dust, Esaias 5. 24. But mark the phrase, Quicquid seminaverit homo:
Whatsoever a man shall sow. For there are some weeds which grow of themselves
naturally, without sowing; others about which we take pains and employ our
selves with all industry, and are of our own sowing. As S. Bernard amongst
his sentences like wise expounds, semine tuo, i. e. operibus tuis: calling
the deeds which we do, the seed which we sow. And Ioh. 8. 44. our Savior
says, that when the Devil speaks a lie, de suo loquitur, he speaks that
which is as it were of his own sowing and growing.

1. As for those weeds which grow up in us with out our sowing, if so be that
they displease us, as they did the Apostle in the 7. to the Romans, verse 24
(...), O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? if we find in our selves a loathing of our sins, or of our selves for
sin: If we be vexed at the soul for our own sins as the Cananitish woman's
daughter was Matthew. 15. 22.
for her devil: if we labor to suppress them; and learn of our Captain
Christ in the 3. of Gen: verse. 15. to strike at sin in us, so soon as ever
it begins to put out the head; If we dash these Babylonish Brats against the
stones whiles they be young Psalm. 137. 9. (for sin is a nettle, it must not
be dallied withal, or tenderly handled, for then will it stinge us,) if we
do labor I say to weed out these sins that grow in us; then God is
merciful to pass them over, for if thou Lord should mark what is done
amiss who should be able to abide it? we should reap then nothing but gall and
bitterness, if we do that which we would not do then it is not we, says the
Apostle, but sin that dwells in us, sin that is present with us, sin that
grows in us naturally without any sowing.

But on the other side if we plow and sow iniquity; if we do imagine
mischief upon our beds, as David says; if we do study to be naught, and
take great pains to do wickedly as Jeremy speaks cap. 9. 5. if we break up
the fallowes and furrows of our hearts unto sin; and make our eyes Brokers
unto the heart of iniquity; if we go and buy strange seeds at the Theater; and
(I tremble to speak it) fetch home new fashions from the house of God; if we
do delight to be merry in impiety, and to animate and stir up one another as
the Prophet Isaiah speaks the 56. chap. the last verse. Come I will bring wine
and we will fill our selves with strong drink, to morrow shall be as this day
and much more abundant: then what is this but to plow and sow and water
wickedness; and then shall we be sure to reap a most rank harvest?

If it be good seed that we sow, we shall be sure to reap the same at the
hand of God whatsoever it be, whether it be benevolence unto men, or devotion
unto God, be it sown never so secretly; the closer the better, thy father
which sees thee in secret shall reward thee openly. Whatsoever a man sows
there is an other difference in respect of God; For God does sow much good
seed amongst us and he reapes little or nothing at all. When his son Christ,
did sow his seed himself with a most skilful hand, some fell by the way side
and wanting good mold to cover it, it was quickly taken away, that is, the
people would press and throng one another in the gates, and flock unto his
Sermons, but it was out of curiosity or for formalitie (like these times) a
solemn hearing, and a solemn forgetting Some fell in stony ground, and was
well bladed, but not well rooted, and therefore quickly faded, that is, so long
as the loaves lasted, so long as the Ministers of Christ did fill their bellies
they heard the word with cheerefulnes and alacrity; but when the Sun of
persecution arose, they withered, when the cross came they fled. Some fell
amongst thorns which choked his good seed; yea and persecuted the Son of
God the seed-man of the word, with great sharpness and bitterness. Now if the
son himself had no better success no marvel though his servants have great
cause to complain, with the three great Prophets of God with Esaias in the 49.
the 4. verse I have labored in vain and for nothing, our judgment is with
the Lord and my works with my God: with Ezechiel the 33. and 32. verse whose
Sermons were like the songs of one that could sing well and had a pleasant
voice, for they heard him but they did not understand; as if we were called
unto these places only to tickle and fill your ears with a tickling phrase or
plausible eloquence. With the Prophet Jeremy the 6. chap. the 29. verse, who
complains, that his bellows are burned, that the lead is consumed, and the
fire has melted in vain, it seems he had gotten the consumption of the
lungs amongst them; he had burnt a hole in his bellows, had spent his Spirit,
and labored in vain. Thus, I say, God does plow and sow, and call to his
people by his son, by the Prophets, by his ministers, he looked for fruit,
and behold hedge*fruite; such as the heathens bring forth and scarce so good;
he waited for grapes and behold labr^s^ae wild grapes. But now whatsoever good
thing a man shall sow unto God, he shall be sure to reap the same at Gods hand
whatsoever it be; be it sown in piety, or sown in charity; in piety, to
the mainetenance of Gods servants; or in charity to our brethren, whether it be
given to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet; or to the poor in the name of
Christ; it shall have a Prophets reward, to prepare his soul in this life and
a kingdom for to crown him in the life to come, that's for the quality.

So likewise for the quantity whatsoever a man sows be it little or much;
the 9. of the 2. Corinthians. the 6. verse, He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, he that sows bountifully shall also reap bountifully, both shall
be Reapers according to the quantity be it little or much whatsoever is sown;
if it be sown with the right hand; if it begiuen in the right name; be it more
or less, he shall reap the same at Gods hands from a cup of cold water unto
the erecting of Hospitalls; from a crumme of bread given to poor Lazarus at
your gates, unto the continual feeding and clothing of such as these
littly-great friends well purchased by Mammon. If ye will listen to the advice
of our Savior Christ, who is wisdom it self, he tells you, that you cannot
make better use of your wealth nor make a better purchase, then to purchase
such friends as these. Then by his advice, let us be strong in well doing, and
encouraged by the example of others, for whom we are to praise God, and bless
his name, for sending down his gracious Spirit and moving the hearts of many
in this kind, as you heard the last day.

These and others present themselves at this time like Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom; a most heavenly ornament unto this City, and they shall rise likewise at
the last day not to condemn but to commend and by their public testimony
before men and Angels to receive their good Benefactors into those everlasting
Tabernacles. This shall be the thankefulnes these friends shall return if you
will make the purchase. Let us therefore be moved by the wise counsel of our
blessed Savior, and so use these temporal blessings that God has bestowed
upon us; as we may still live in hope of that blessed sentence at the last
day, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Why?
because ye have clothed the naked, and fed the hungry; doing it unto them, is
as unto my self. And let us be assured of the truth of this my text; that
whatsoever we do sow, little or much; we shall be sure to reap the same.

Here right honorable, right worshipful and beloved in our Savior Christ, I
would very gladly have made an end, but as I have viewed my text a part by it
self, so is it my part to set it in frame as I found it; and then I must of
necessity fall upon a point, which I may not touch without a preface. I have
broken the rule of method in making that an Appendix which should have been an
exordium and entrance unto my speech; because I thought that if the time would
have cut of any thing it should cut of that, if I should balke it, or wilfully
omit it. Here be many Scholars and Divines present, that would say, I came not
close home to my text: And when I am come to it, my conscience tells me, that
true preaching is to carry the text home to your consciences. Let me
ingenuously confess unto you, that when I first pitched my meditation upon this
sentence, I did not at all think of the words immediately going before, which
now I must needs read unto you, for they are the very key that open my text;
let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him partaker of
all his goods. Be not deceived God is not mocked for whatsoever a man sows
that shall he also reap. The words are plain enough without a commentary;
let him that is taught in the word, be he whatsoever, (so he be taught in the
word) let him make him, not them; though them also as occasion shall require;
(for the Galathians no doubt had many Teachers, as we also have) but make him
especially, who has the cure and charge of thy soul Partaker of all thy
goods; This is the Apostles precept.

But if thou seek shifts, and devices to defraud him; thou think thou
deceiuest him, but thou deceiuest thy self; Be not deceived; for though thou
be, yet thou can not deceive God, it is his portion, it is set a part for the
maintenance of his service, and God will not be mocked. whatsoever thou sowest
in this kind thou shall also reap. You see, beloved, how this Scripture
falls, and I am afraid it falls heavy upon many in this City.

Be not deceived, first in confounding benevolence and duty, there is a subtle
fallacy in these terms and in these our times. Beneuolance is like their
free will offerings of old: and duties as their ordinary oblation. Benevolence
does remit the quantity of the gift and the comfort of the person to whom it is
given, unto the liberality of the Benifactors; But duties they do prescribe,
and limit, and cut by a thread. For the first, this place, where now we are
assembled is to be commended, and this will reckon and renown you amongst the
virtuous of this City; but this is not the point of my text. The Apostle
speaks of an other kind; We praise God for this, and bless him for the
benevolence of many, unto diverse: But as a duty of all, unto all those whom
God, in his providence, has set over their souls, is that whereof the Apostle
speaks. This appears in the 9. of the first to the Corinthians verse. 4.
Have we not power? that is, have we not right as a duty belonging unto us?
that milk that the flock does owe to the Feeder; that fruit that the vine
gives to the planter, is (in that place) that portion which God takes to
himself if it be withheld from him, he counts it a mocking of him. Let those
(Beloved) who have not in this kind urged the purses of any, nor hope that
they ever shall, let them have leave, something more freely, to discharge their
consciences herein.

What is the part then, the Apostle means or alludeth unto in this place? is
it that portion which God allotted unto the Levites under the law? No, by no
means; that were too much; for the Levites had, besides their tithes and
offerings, beside their first fruits, sacrifices and vows; they had 48. walled
Cities, with large Suburbs for their cattle; large glebes to plant and sow in;
when as their whole land, was not so big as the third part of England, what
then, is it precisely the tenth part, which God does challendge to himself in
mount Sina the 27. of Leuit. the 32. almost 430 years before the Leuits had
any part? no by no means, that were too much; how then? is it any part at all,
of all thy goods? Verily thus much is agreed upon, of all sides; (for now I
must touch no controversies) this I say is agreed upon under the Gospel, that
the Church of Christ, after that it was once erected, did in her continual
practice according to the very letter of Saint Paul's text in this place,
determine a portion, be it what it will be, a portion I say in all thy goods,
the reason was, that the Pastor and the people might stand, and fall together:
that he might have compassion of thy loss, as well as comfort in thy
increase; both alike depending upon the providence of God; that he might pray
as affectionately in a storm as the Merchant; and praise God in time of safety
also. Why, so he should do howsoever; yet because we are men, and not Angels;
the wisdom of God thought it meet to encourage them by allotting a portion
both in town and country, out of all thy goods. So says Paul (...).

Yea but ye will say put out that same (...) and we will compound with you by
house-rent, so shall you be at a certain; exchange is no Church-robery, the
Law has determined it, true and in great wisdom, for the law must of
necessity, to prevent many mischifes, it must, I say, leave many things unto
the liberty of thy conscience, for to be answered in a higher Court. Will thou
perform no more duties to God nor men, then the Law of man can extort from
thee? if we should preach unto you no more Saboth days in a year, then the
Law does exact at our hands, you would think we scarce discharged our
consciences. But to the point; what rent do you mean? that which is in true
value, or that for which, it may be or has been lately let? No by no means,
that were too much; then our Pastors would be so proud that their own sheep
should not be able to rule them; they would tell us too plainly of our faults,
and look over seriously into our actions. How then? it shall be after the old
rent, but so old, that a new rate of all things are since that time increased
fourefold, and our families (by permission of marriage) are manifold. Is this a
fit proportion, when a Citizen shall pay but in proportion but a fifth of the
tithe to that that the country laboring man does pay? When a man shall give a
Comissarie so much toward the poor man's box, for a license to eat flesh in
Lent, as he gives to his Pastor for feeding of his soul all the year long? Is
that a good proportion? howsoever it falls more or less, better or worse, you
will give no more; and by a fraudulent devise under hand, thus you conueigh the
matter; we will pay part of the rent by bond, and the rest by lease, so we
will swear, and swear truly, that we pay no more rent: Or in the same lease,
I will pay part in the name of a fine, For I have learned a pretty distinction
between Fine and rent in that kind, so I will swear and swear truly that I
paid no more rent. And will thou swear this? oh collusion worse then
Iesuitisme.

Beloved, you had better equivocate for all the clothes in your shops; for all
your goods by sea and land, then in this case. It is Gods cause, and God is not
mocked, whatsoever a man sows in this kind he shall be sure to reap the
same. Remember Ananias and Saphirah; for this is done not unto men, but unto
God, did you sell your possession for so much? yea, for so much, says Ananias,
and just for so much says Saphirah; they said so, but they did not swear so;
yet you see what a harvest they did reap presently, by not obeying Gods will;
I would to God we were worthy to move that high Court of Parliament in this
one mischief. If we have too much, let them give us less; only let there
be plain dealing in Gods cause; let them not suffer men to run their souls
and consciences upon the pikes of perjury, upon these nice equivocations which
shall pierce them through unto eternal death.

I am sure I have wearied your patience; but one word more, and I will remove
my finger from this sore. Shall I tell you what is the cause of all this,
besides that root of all evil, covetousness which roots up all piety and
duty, that concerns the purse? beside that pride of heart that makes every
one almost to think himself wiser then his Teacher, and that they are able of
themselves to prescribe Laws unto their own consciences; there is one
especial cause of the transgression of this my text: The very same which was
the occasion that moved the Apostle Paul to write this text. Do you know what
Corban means? it is in the seventh of Saint Marks Gospel at the 11. verse,
it is when as voluntary oblations do dispense with necessary duties: Bring
your offerings to us say the Pharisees, and then for the rest it is no matter;
Corban, such Pharisees did bewitch the Galathians, against whom the Apostle
writes this Epistle; who as they did withdraw them from the truth, so withal
they did withdraw the maintenance from their true Teachers. And our Apostle may
seem by the spirit of prophecy to have directed this worthy Epistle against
our Priests and Jesuits, who cry, Corban unto their Disciples; telling them,
that they are their ghostly fathers; it is no matter for their Ministers;
neglect them as Heretical: and I pray God that Micah, that is, the Courtier
Judge. 17. 10.
and the Church-robbing Patron have not taught his Leuite and trencher
Chaplain also who sits at his table and serves in his house, to say Corban,
that his stipendarie pension which he begrudgeth him out of his benefice is
rather a benevolence then a duty.

Be not offended, Beloved, because I have told you the truth, I have of purpose
abstained from any thing that is questionable; the truth, as I have conceived
it, I have told you plainly and briefly, and as I have discharged my
conscience in this point, so I do humbly and heartily pray unto the God of
heaven, that al of us, may both in this, and all the rest, discharge our
consciences in obeying the truth; that we may so dispose of our selves, as
nether the profits nor the pleasures of this world any way hinder us from this
truth, that we may place our hearts and souls on the certainety and the
generalty of the same, that as a man sows so shall he also reap, either the
same in kind, or in proportion. Whatsoever it be, be it good or evil, sown
to the flesh or to the spirit; be it in piety, or Charity; be it more or
less, he shall be sure to reap the same; partly in this world, but most fully
in the world to come. Let us now desire of Almighty God our gracious Lord for a
shower of grace for this that in some weak measure has bin sowed amongst us
at this time, that it may fructify and be covered and received into our hearts
so as Satan do never steal it away; but that it may take deep root in our
hearts, and bring forth fruit to our endless comfort through Jesus Christ
our LORD

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT Mercers chapel in LENT 1614.

BY ROGER FENTON D. in Divinity.



LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1616.

CANTIC. 8. 6. Set me as a seal on thine heart, and as a signet upon thine
arm, for Love is strong as death, Jealousy is cruel as the grave.
THE sudden change, of the person in this kind of SCRIPTVRE which is penned
Dialogue-wise is the cause of the greater difficulty of it, but for the
understanding of these words which now I have read unto you, they do concern
the Speaker whose words they be, whether the words of the Bridegroom unto his
spouse, or the words of the spouse unto her Bridegroom, whether Christ
speaks them unto his Church or the Church of Christ unto him. And it makes
little difference whether that Christ our Savior do exhort us to set him as a
seal upon our hearts and to wear him as a signet upon our arm, or whether
that the Church do desire Christ to set her as a seal upon his heart or to set
her as a signet upon his arm, the difference is no more then the counterpane
between one and the same lease, for here the same things are delivered up
between Christ and his Church enterchangeably, so has Almighty God in his
wisdom ever provided throughout the whole doctrine of Christianity as Saint
Austine notes, that those places which are of most difficulty there is in them
the least danger of mistaking, and those points that are most necessary to be
known unto salvation they are most plainly of all other expressed in the book
of God. If ye conceive them to be the words of the Church unto Christ, then
they divide themselves into a petition and a reason of the petition, and if you
conceive them to be the words of Christ unto his Church then they divide
themselves into an exhortation and a motive, each of them twofold; for the word
of this affection of love never uses to come single, for he that loves, loves
for to dwell upon it, for to repeat and to reiterate the petition or the
exhortation which is the first part, which is expressed by a seal on the heart,
and again by a signet placed upon the arm; the reasons or the motives being
also double it takes hold of two affections, the affection of love and fear,
the two hands of the soul as Saint Austin calls them by which the soul is
pulled and moved to and fro; either unto good or unto bad actions. Here is
Love, strong love, strong as death, and affection that will move us: if not,
here is fear of Jealousy that grows cruel, Jealousy cruel as the grave,
if love will move us, we shall be knit unto Christ, that way; if not, if
fear will move us, we shall be drawn unto Christ that way; and if neither
of these single will move us: if both together will move us, here is fear that
grows out of love, and grounded upon love; love is strong as death; but if
abused she grows jealous, and that Jealousy grows cruel. But if neither
love nor fear nor both these grafted together, will draw us, then is our case
most desperate, and this I conceive to be the resolution of the text, and the
branches whereof you have heard in my text, Set me as a seal on thine heart
and as a signet upon thine arm: that is the petition of the Church; or the
evidence of Christ his two metaphors, which do most lively express and set
forth unto us. The near conjunction between Christ and his Church, in the
22. of Jeremy the 24. verse, as I live says the Lord, though Coniah the son
of Iehoiakim king of Judah were the signet of my right arm, that is, as near
to me as near possibly could be, yet I would cast him off; The personal
union of the son of God unto our nature it is the first great mystery of
godliness, for without controversy great is the mystery of godliness the 1.
of Tim. the 3. chap. the last verse. God manifested in the flesh. Yet
notwithstanding you may be bold to say that this union whereof Solomon does here
speak it is above that and a nearer union and conjunction unto us in two
respects; first that hypostaticall union, it was the conjunction of God and
man's nature in general, but this comes nearer and does incorporate our
particular persons into one body with Christ. Howsoever the other in his own
nature be great between the things themselves united, yet notwithstanding
this is unto us more comfortable because it brings with it a particular
application to every one, that we may say and pray with David in the 35.
Psalm the 3. verse, Say unto my soul I am thy salvation, not only unto all
in general but unto thy soul and my soul in particular which is more
comfortable. Therefore God he has for this purpose not only ordained the
preaching of the Gospel in public to declare the love of God in Christ Jesus
to mankind, in general; but he has also instituted sacraments which are
ministered unto every ones persons in particular; that as Gods love is unto all,
so he confirms the same love to every one in particular that is capable of
the same.

Secondly, this conjunction which this metaphor expresses, it exceeds the
other in this, that though Christ did take our nature upon him, and our nature
with all humane infirmities, yet he did take it clean void of all sin; but
in this mystical union between Christ and his members, though we be full of
sin and infirmities as well in soul as body, yet he vouchsafed to knit us
unto himself as being one body. Jesus Christ ties us as in an inseperable
knot, which unity is most comfortably in the Scripture set forth by two
Metaphors, both which come short of these meraphors in my text. It is expressed
by the head and the members; and by man and wife, but Nero or some Tyrant may
chop the head from the members; and death does make a separation between man
and wife; but of this union, says the Apostle Paul, I am persuaded neither
death, nor life, principalities, nor powers, shall be able to separate us from
Christ, and in the 8. of the Epistle to the Bomanes the 28. also we know that
all things work together for the best unto them that love God, even to them
that are called of his purpose. But the two metaphors of my text are more
emphaticall; for the heart, it is the fountain of life, it is the first that
lives and the last that dies; and the arm is the instrument of power; if
Christ have set us as a seal upon his heart, and as a signet upon his arm,
let us see what principalities or power, what life or death, is able to make a
separation between us, except he can be overcome who is omnipotent God
himself, this signet shall never be plucked from his arm; and unless he can
die again, who is life it self, the Lord of life, this seal which is
imprinted in his heart shall never be blotted out; this admirable conjunction
between Christ and us, it is here declared in this place, and propounded by
way of a petition, whereof we may be bold to make a position and say indeed
that Christ has set us as a seal upon his heart and that he has worn us as
a signet upon his arm. For that which was the wish the prayer and desire of
the Church, in Salomons time when this song was sung, that is now inioyed by
the Church of Christ; their wish is our Article; their prayer our creed; we
do believe it, because Christ has manifested it; since the Son of God did
take unto him an heart and an arm, that is to say a humane soul within, and a
natural body without, he has in that soul and body fully granted the
petition to the Church, and set us as a seal upon his heart. For were not we
deeply imprinted in his heart when he suffered his heart to be divided by the
point of the spear, when he shed out water and his heart blood in love unto
us, when he was in a manner forsaken of his own Father rather then his father
should forsake us. That Evangelical Prophet Isaiah in the 49. cha: ver. 16.
says in the person of God unto Zion, I have engraven thee in the palms of my
hands; were we not deeply engraven in the palm of Christ's hands when he
suffered both hands and feet to be pierced upon the cross, it was a deep
impression; and Christ would never have suffered it unless this seal had bin
deeply printed in his hands, showing them after his resurrection this print
still, in the 24. of Luke, Behold my hands and feet. It is a question amongst
Divines whether those scarres in the hands and in the sides of our blessed
Savior which remained in his body after his death and resurrection (to the
end that he might show himself unto a few) do not yet remain in his glorious
body being in heaven; that he may show them at the last day of his
resurrection, that they might look upon him whom they had pierced; and this is
without all question the impression spoken of in this place, remaining still on
his hands and heart, and Jesus Christ does even wear us and makes as precious
account of us as the signet of his right hand; for the same affections he had
here on the earth, he has carried them with the same body up into heaven; and
as he remembered us upon the Cross, so does he not forget us when he is now
in his kingdom. He is not like Pharoahs Butler that forgot Joseph (who was so
kind to him in prison) when he came to his preferment; but Christ he
remembered the petition of the thief, thou now remembrest us because thou art in
the same passion with us, subject to the same death, but when this passion is
past, when thou co^mest into thy kingdom, o God remember me then. So does
Christ remember us now when he is come into heaven to the right hand of God;
he remembers us as he did remember us when he was dying and shed his
precious blood for us on the Cross. Wherefore did he take humane affection
upon him, but that he might express this love unto us?

The affection of love is noted to be most vehement in women, as David does
express 2. Sam: 1 26. speaking of Jonathan; Thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women. And because the affections of that sex are natural
and so should be most tender, therefore our Savior when he came to be
incarnated and to take our flesh upon him, he was made of a woman Gal: 4. 4.
and yet because sin does naturally harden the heart, and dull the affection,
therefore he took them from a pure Virgin, and that they might yet be more
tender, he did free them and purge them from all sin: and these affections
has he in his body taken up with him into heaven and set them at the right
hand of God his Father, and therefore I may be bold to say he has set us as a
seal upon his heart, and as a signet upon his arm, and with his stretched-out
arm he has mightily defended us, and preserved his poor Church from time to
time from all enemies.

Thus the petition is easily heard and granted, therefore I will not stand long
upon it; that which happily you are more loath to hear, yet that which is more
needful for me to speak, is the duty reflecting upon it, if we take that
sense, or the very literal sense it self, that Christ does exhort us that we
set him on our hearts as a seal, and wear him as a signet on our arm. And of
this duty here be many branches notably expressed in these two metaphors. For
first there is a heart, there we must ever begin. It is a maxim in Divinity,
that which the heart does not, is not done at all before God: for whatsoever is
done, is but formally done, it is not effectually done, unless the heart be
affected with it: the heart it is the first that lives by nature, so it is the
first that must live again in our regeneration and new birth: It is the first
that God does challenge in the first Commandment of the first Table, Thou shall
have no other gods before me, that is, in my presence, or before me in thine
own affection, but thou shall love me with all thine heart and with all thy
soul etc. It is the last Commandment of the second Table, Thou shall not
covet, in thy heart. God in his Table begins with the heart first, because in
all our actions the first thing that God beholds is the heart: but in the
second Table which is for continual duties amongst men, it is in the last
place, because the last that a man can see, is to see into the heart; so then
to take all ten Commandments together, the heart you see it is the Alpha and
Omega the first and the last of all, and so in truth it is all in all, for give
God the heart and all the rest will follow; a heart therefore he does claim at
our hands in this exhortation in the first place, and this heart it must be
wrought like wax that it may receive the impression of a seal, for so says
Christ here to his Church, set me as a seal upon thy heart. You know the matter
that is disposed for to receive an impression, it must neither be too hard nor
too soft, for if it be over hard it will not take it, and if over fluxible it
will not hold it, therefore the heart must be of a good temper to receive the
impression of the seal of Christ. As a brain if it be too dry it will not be
apprehensiue, and if too moist it will not be retentiue, it must be a well
tempered brain that shall receive both in apprehension and memory: So the
heart that receives Christ and his righteousness must be of a good temper: some
hearts are too hard that will take no impression at all, like the hearts of the
Cheifetaines among the Jews, that nothing could mollify them, nothing would
move them, nothing would persuade them to have pity and compassion on our
Savior Christ. Pilat himself when he had made furrows on his back with
scourging him and crowned his head with thorns, he brought him out before
them, to see if they would have pity and compassion on him to say it is
enough; but their hearts they were hardened they would receive no impression at
all: On the other side the hearts of the people, they were soft and unstable
and unconstant, ready to cry Hosanna one day, Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord; and shortly after Crucifige, Crucifige; the hearts of men
do offend in these two extremities, sometime they are too hard to receive any
impression, and sometimes they are again too inconstant they will not hold it,
there be as a Divine speaks, not only Sabbatarians that were heretics, but
Sunday-Christians also that happily upon the Sabbath will take some impression;
some certain qualme of religion happily may come over their consciences, but it
is quickly gone again; they serve God upon the Sabbath, and serve themselves
and the Devil all the week after: they are resembled unto that goodly Idol
Dagon in the 5. chap: of the 1. book of Samuel the 4. verse, who so long as he
stood in his place in the temple was a goodly Idol to look upon, but the next
morning when they came they found his hands and his head at the threshold of
his temple, so as the text says, there was nothing left but the very stumpe of
an Idol; so is it with many of us who coming into the house of God to hear a
Sermon, and it may be with great show of devotion also to receive the
Sacrament, but at the Church do^e there lies their hands and affections,
nothing remains but a very stumpe of religion, they have neither hands to do
a good deed, nor happily tongues to speak a good word all the week after;
these be Sabbath day Christians. But if we will fruitfully receive the
ingraffed word of Christ which is able to save our souls, as the Apostle
speaks Iam: 1* 21 We must have a heart fit to receive and retain that his
impression; set me (says Christ) as a seal upon thy heart, the image of
Christ and the superscription of Christ must be both upon our hearts, our
Savior Christ says in the 17 of Matthew, when they brought him a piece of
money, Whose image and superscription is this, they said it was Caesar's, why
then give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's and give unto God that which is
Gods: the image that must be upon our hand, it must not be the mark of the
beast Apoc. 13. 16. in token that we subscribe to the doctrine of Antichrist,
but it must be the image of Christ, and the superscription written about it
must be the gospel of Christ. If in our lives and conuersations we conform
our selves to the image of Christ in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians.
4. 24. walking not after the flesh but after the spirit Rom: 8. 1. and if only
to the gospel of Christ which is his true stamp and superscription; then we
are Christ's* For Christ will make a-like difference of men at the last day, as
he did of the money-coines amongst the Jews; he looks upon the heart and
tries the reins, and will then ask Whose superscription have ye on your
hearts, which must either be the print of Christ, or the Devils stamp, those
which are Christ's shall be given to him, and that which is the Devils shall be
rendered to him, to be tormented for ever. It behooves us therefore to look
unto this maine point above all the rest, that we receive the right stamp of
our Savior Christ, and be obedient unto the superscription of his gospel; and
then shall we be sure to give unto him a hand and a heart, but that's not all,
we must have an arm of prompt execution, to an heart of sincere religion. You
know that the heart is the seat of affection, and the hand it is the
instrument of action, and if Christ be imprinted in our affections, then
certainly we will show Christ in our actions; They be the two parts of the
sacred Law of God.

The first table as our Savior Christ teaches* it was thus, thou should^ love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, there is the seal on the heart; and
with all thy strength, there is the seal on the arm, for that is the
instrument of strength. Again, an heart without an arm, you know, it is
impotent, it would feign, but cannot: and an arm without an heart is lame and
maimed, therefore both these must go together, we must have an heart to
receive the impression of Christian religion, and we must have an arm also to
defend it. Religion must have a soul and a body; again, the love that is in
the heart is secret to our selves, so is all affection; the seal upon the
heart is within, but the seal upon the arm is apparent to the world, so that
if we wear Christ in our hearts inwardly, certainly we will show him in our
actions outwardly, as thou wearest Christ upon the heart, that is, as a privy
seal between God and thee; but if thou wearest Christ as a signet on the
arm, that is, as the public great seal before the world. Secondly, how must
we wear him on the arm? as a signet, says the Text, that is, as an ornament;
so far we must be from being ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, that we must
glory in it, and say with the Apostle, God forbid that I should glory in any
thing but in the cross of Christ; Galat. 6. 14. As the Prophet Jeremy says,
Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people have
forgotten me days without number, says the Lord. God would have us to make
account of him, as of that which we most esteem, as an ornament on thine arm.
But what ornaments are signets? a signet is that which makes an impression on
another thing, as you use to wear your rings on your thumbs, not only for
ornament, but to seal letters withal: so a signet was worn on the arm, to
make an impression and seal, in like manner would Christ be worn of
Christians, not only to rejoice and glory in him publicly, and by an
expression of him in their outward actions; but so to set him out, as they make
an impression of their religion and of Christ in the hearts of others. In the
12. of Dan. the 3. those that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars
in the firmament, for as the stars are the brightest parts of their orbs, so
those that are truly wise, not to themselves only, carrying the light of
their knowledge reseruedly in their own hearts, but so show it and communicate
it, as that they convert others: they shall shine in an higher degree of glory
in heaven, then others, and this is a point that does especially concern those
that are in any place of authority whatsoever, according to that talent of
government that God has entrusted them withal and tied as a bracelet about
their arms, that they should in their Christian and religious carriage, make
an impression of virtue and devotion in those that are under them. And this is
to wear Christ, not only as an ornament to themselves, but as a seal to
imprint him in others. It is a point that the school Divines have determined
upon good and probable ground, that as those who are religious in their places,
and have power to do much good in this world they shall shine more gloriously
in heaven; so like wise, they that are in place of authority, and by their bad
examples draw others from God, they shall be cast as deep into hell; Potentes
potenter tormenta patientur; mighty men shall be mightily punished, Wisd. 6.
5. 8. therefore it is said Es. 30. 33.
that Tophet is prepared for great personages that are wicked ones, and by
their evil examples draw multitudes after them. What moved the rich glutton in
hell to become solicitor for his brethren at home that they should convert and
repent, was it any charity or love toward them? No his conscience told him
that he had showed them bad examples while he lived, and if they were damned
his torment should be the greater for it. This is the exhortation that Christ
makes to his Church that we would set him as a seal upon our hearts, and set
him as a signet on our arm.

The motives to stir us up to this duty follow, for love is strong as death
and jealousy cruel as the grave. But whose love and whose jealousy does my
text here speak of? of the jealousy of the Church unto Christ, or of CHRIST
unto the Church? It is the jealousy of Christ without question; for God he is
ielous of us, but we cannot be ielous of God: and to speak after the manner
of men, we conceive jealousy (if it be true and unfeigned) to be nothing else
but an affection of love, tending unto hatred upon suspicion that love is
abused: Now when we do ascribe any humane affection unto God, we must
separate from it all imperfections whatsoever; if there be a jealousy not
grounded in love it is faulty; or if it be a jealousy without cause it is
blame worthy: neither of these faults are in the jealousy that we ascribe unto
GOD, and unto CHRIST: he is a ielous God, but his jealousy proceeds of love,
though it tend unto hate upon suspicion that love is abused; and not without
cause: so God may be ielous of us, but we cannot be ielous of God; the reason
is, because he that is ielous is ielous of a partner in love. I would to God
(says S. Paul to Agrippa, Act. 26. 29.) I would that all that hear me this
day were both almost, and altogether such as I am. S. Paul cares not how many
partners he has in the love of Christ; the reason of the difference is that
the love of God toward us is infinite; but our love unto Christ it is so
straight and so narrow, that if so be he have any partners with him, it is to
be feared he shall not have his due, so that he has cause to be ielous.
Wherefore without all question we must take this motive to be spoken of Christ
and of his jealousy. Love is strong as death, Jealousy is cruel as the grave,
to show the strength of Christ's love unto us, the Holy Ghost has made a fit
comparison. For what is stronger than death that deuoureth all? Surely the love
of Christ unto man. Mark then what is the general effect of death; ye know
it is the separation of the soul and the body; taking the soul out of the
body, and leaving it wan, pale and ghastly. And that is likewise the effect of
the extremity of love; especially of Christ's love toward us. For this pure,
chaste and divine love wherewith Christ loved us, it made him to empty himself
that he might fill us; to go out of himself that he might dwell in us; to die
once in himself that we might live for evermore.

Wherein did death ever show his greatest power? Verily in seasing upon the
Son of God our Savior himself, then was shown the greatest power that ever
death exercised. Yet let me tell you, herein the love of Christ was far
stronger than death. Death seized on Christ when he was become man upon the
earth, but the love of Christ to us, pulled him out of heaven, when he was in
the bosom of his Father; and humbled him and made him so weak, that he might
become a fit Redeemer for us. What ailed thee thou great strong Sampson of
heaven, says Chrysostom, thou that bindest Kings in chains, what means
this, surely it was the love of Christ to our treacherous nature, that dealt so
untruly and so falsely with him, that pulled this Sampson out of heaven, and
made him as weak as one of us. To speak properly, when death did seize on
christ in his weakness, it was not the power of death, but the power of love
Christ tells us so plainly in the 10. of John the 18 verse: I lay down my life,
no man takes it from me. So then take death at the strongest, still the love
of Christ unto us is stronger than death. We have heard sufficiently of the
love of Christ unto us, if this will not draw from us love again unto Christ,
what will? True love is of the nature of a Loade-stone it draws love unto it,
Magnes amoris amor; but such is our ingratitude, though we love to hear of the
love of Christ, yet we care not to show our love to him again. This
unthankfulness of us ungrateful wretches is the the cause that we are ever so
loath to be drawn unto him. David in the 118. Psalm the 27. verse. speaking of
the sacrifice that was offered; when he reckons up the love of God toward us,
he speaks suddenly in regard of our retribution of love back to him again,
bind the sacrifice with cords, yea even to the horns of the Altar. It is a
saying amongst the Hebrews, that the beasts that were offered in sacrifice
they were the struglingst Procul extensum petula^s quatit h^stia funem. Juven:
Satyr. 12.
beasts of all the rest, such is the nature of us unthankful beasts, when we
should love God again, we are readier for to run away from him, we must be
tied to the Altar with cords, to draw from us love or fear. Though it be true
that forced love is no love; Non extor quebis amari. His love is strong as
death, but if we abuse his love by our unthankfulness, then mark what
follows, out of his love, he grows ielous, and that jealousy grows cruel,
cruel even as the grave. Jealousy (says Solomon) it is the raging of a man, it
will not be pacified, Prou: 6. 34, 35. Remember the Law and the sacrifice that
was appointed for ielous persons in the 5. of Number: the 15. verse, there was
neither oil to make it gracious, nor incense to give place of atonement or
reconciliation. For entire love it will not be adulterated, nor yet suffer it
self to be wronged: such is the nature of man's jealousy. Our God he is a
ielous God, and our blessed Savior out of the vehemency of his love, he is a
loving Savior and ielous too; but the ground of this jealousy it is love, and
if his love be abused, it tends unto hate upon just suspicion of a just cause.
Then to sum up all in a word; it is the primarie nature of our good God and
blessed Savior to be most loving and gracious unto us; so is it the nature of
that love if there be just cause to grow ielous, and it is the nature of that
jealousy to be cruel, cruel as the grave, if so be before the grave we do not
appease it, and be reconciled to our husband Christ by true repentance. For we
may assure our selves, that if our Savior Christ find any impression in the
heart, deeper than this set upon it, or any ornament above true religion and
faith in Christ; he will presently grow ielous, and that jealousy will grow
cruel. In the 22 of Genesis, when as Abraham seemed for to be fond of his
son Isaac, God tries Abraham what he would do for his sake: yea he tries
him whether he loved him truly and indeed, or no: Therefore, says he to
Abraham, go and take thy son, thy only son Isaac, and offer him up for a
sacrifice: Abraham shows there though he loved his son Isaac very dearly
and tenderly, yet notwithstanding, it was not to be compared with his love to
God.

In the Decalogue of the Law, God he is so jealous he will not set any creature
in the same table of the Law with himself, there shall stand neither Father nor
Mother, King nor Caesar, Saint nor Angel; none in the same table with God: he
is a jealous God if there be cause. And Beloved, there is none of us but we
have given him just cause many times, and therefore he must needs be jealous:
but yet his jealousy is not cruel, it is not cruel as the grave, if so be
that before hand in time we do prevent this wrath and cruelty; if so be we
humble our selves and be reconciled unto God by true repentance, God is a
ielous God and visits the sins of the fathers upon the children.

We have often provoked our Husband-Christ to jealousy; Oh that now we would
prevent his wrath while there is time of grace; now is there time of
reconciliation if so be we will labor and seek for it, if we will humble our
selves by prayer and humility, by fasting and repentance, acknowledging our
faults unto God and unto our blessed Savior with tears, and resolving never
to give him the like cause again; and as at all times this duty is seasonable,
so especially at these times when as it should be general, to the end that the
more hearts meet in this disposition, it may be so much the more acceptable a
sacrifice to God. Prayer and Humility is required of us at all times before
God; prayer and fasting is required of us upon occasion; for every man's
particular sins present to God and himself is a sufficient occasion of
private prayer and fasting; but public calamity is an occasion of public
fastings.

There be (as a Father calls them when he complains of the time) certain
sins of Church and Commonwealth, which cannot be imputed to particular
persons, when sin is grown so common and general that it is not in the
power of any person or persons to reform the same; The remedy against such an
Epidemicall disease, is the public supplications of the Church, when we
muster up our prayers as an army, not only to beseech God, but to besiege him
too, when we do all agree and consent together by repentance and true
humiliation to prevent the wrath of God upon Church and commonwealth, which we
have deserved; prevent I say that, that jealousy do not turn into wrath; for
if it do, and be not prevented, it will burn into the very bottom of hell
Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Therefore let us humble our selves before almighty God, and
entreat his glorious Majesty that notwithstanding our private sins, we may
be set as a seal upon his heart so deeply imprinted that neither height nor
depth, nor principalities nor powers be able to separate us from him, Romans 8.
38. And that we may be still as a signet upon that arm that has defended
this Church and commonwealth so long. That his righteousness may be imprinted
in our hearts, and his glory an ornament to us, and his word precious among
us, which we beg for his own sake that gave himself for us, that we may lay
aside all ingratitude and be truly thankful unto him through Jesus Christ
our Savior, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory
for ever

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT the Funeral of Mr. John St^kele Citizen and
Machant-Taylor of LONDON at St. Steuens in Walbrooke 1613.

BY ROGER FENTON D. in Divinity.



LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1616.

JOB. 6. 10. Then shall I yet have comfort though I burn with sorrow, let him
not spare because I have not denied the words of the holy one.
THat of the Apostle S. Paul the 4. chapt. of the 2. Epistle to Timoth. at the
2. verse, preach the word, be instant in season and out of season; I
understand thus that we should not only keep our ordinary course as Moses was
preached in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, but that we should take all fit
occasions to teach and instruct Gods people though at extraordinary times as
it were out of season, amongst the which the occasion of this our meeting is
one, and as I take it none of the least, for the Prophet Isaiah chapt: 57. and
the 1. v: makes it a matter of just reproof when righteous and merciful men
are taken away from amongst us and no man does consider it, and therefore it is
fit that we be put in mind of it. We have both a righteous and a merciful
man taken from amongst us: Therefore have we just occasion to take it into
consideration, as the occasion then does fit us: so that we also might fit the
occasion. I have made choice of a righteous and merciful man in his sickness,
for he was an upright and a just man; one that feared God and eschewed evil,
by Gods own testimony in the second chapt: and the third verse who delivered
the words that now I have read unto you. For Job was wearied and spent with a
grievous and tedious sickness in so much as he complains in the 7. chap: at
the third verse that he had for an inheritance the months of vanity and
painful nights were appointed unto him. These be the words of Job, and it was
the very case of this our brother now departed. Monthe after monthe was he
tormented, and yet still put us in hope of his recovery but all in vain, they
were as Job terms them months of vanity, and painful nights were appointed
unto him. whereupon the holy man Job expresses a longing desire he had in the
premises, and the reason of this his desire in the words of my text, Oh that I
might have the thing I desire and that God would grant me that which I long
for, what was that? sure nothing else but that he might depart out of this
world which he has expressed by three phrases, in the verse immediately before
my text, that God would destroy him, that he would let his hand go and that he
would cut him off. The first is a phrase according to the words directly,
because in the sight of the world outwardly the righteous may seem to perish
and be destroyed. But the second phrase is more divine, that God would let his
hand go, as if with one hand, his heavy hand of sickness, he had beat him
down, and yet notwithstanding he had holden him up; and with the other hand
supported him, now he desires that God would take away that suporting hand that
he might die, me thinks he speaks of almighty God as if he were a kind of
Nurse that uses when men are drawing on toward death to lift them up, for if
they take away the pillow presently they give up the Ghost: so Job desires God
that he would but take away the other hand, that he might depart out of this
world: and because his ordinary glass was not yet run, he might live many
years by the course of nature, he adds a third phrase that God would cut him
off. But Job lived much longer after he had this sickness as you may see in
the last chapt. the 16 verse. And this our Brother departed by the course of
nature might have lived much longer if it had pleased God. Now the reason of
this his longing desire is delivered in this my text in three points. First, in
his faith and his full expectation of comfort after this life in these words,
then shall I yet have comfort. In the second place there is inserted a
parenthesis, which sets down the encouragement of that faith, a godly
magnanimity and resolution; though I burn with sorrow, let him not spare. And
thirdly and lastly here is both the ground of that resolution, and the only
touchstone of his faith, in that his conscience tells him he has not denied
the words of the holy one. Of these three first, and then of the occasion to
which they are fitted, and of both briefly. For then shall I yet have comfort
though I burn with sorrow, let him not spare because I have not denied the
words of the holy one. For the first death is terrible to nature, and therefore
is called the King of fear Job. 18. 14. most terrible yet notwithstanding it
is but as a cloud, and he that has an Eagles eye of faith to look through
the cloud he may discern that glorious comfortable light, and such an Eagle
was the servant of God Job; for being environed with so many miseries, and
infirmities, as he was at this time, yet notwithstanding he does pierce
through the cloud by the eyes of faith, espying his everlasting consolation.
When our Savior Christ is described that he shall appear in the clouds in
the last day, it pleased him to compare himself to a slain beast; for indeed
he was the lamb of God slain from the beginning: therefore Luke the 17. and
the last verse, he says, Wheresoever the body is thither will all the Eagles
resort, nay such is the sagacity of that creature as we read, that by the
resort of Eagles in Africa the Inhabitants foresee their should be war and
bloud-shedde in that place: and such an Eagle was Job: who living so many
hundred years before the incarnation foresawe his Redeemer, chap. the 19. 25.
verse 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, a visible Redeemer; and so Abraham
saw Christ's days John the 8. By this faith did Job receive comfort beyond the
cloud of death. And Solomon describes our Savior Christ in the second of the
Canticles the 9. verse, that he stands behind the Wall, and looks through
a grate, aluding to the manner of Nurses, and Mothers that run behind a wall
that their children may seek them with a greater desire, so does God in
sickness he goes behind the wall and if we have an eye to spy him through
the grate there is our comfort, as that was Simeons ground Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen their salvation,
after he had gotten Christ in his arms, that he had seen his salvation, he
thought he was in prison till he departed, and the word signifies for to be
loosed out of prisonne (...), and you know that it was that S. Paul speaks I
desire to be dissolved because he would be with Christ. No marvel if Job
when he discerned this comfort desired to be taken out of the world, this eye
of faith of his, begets a godly magnanimity resolving with all patience to
undergo and not doubting to overcome whatsoever is or can possibly be laid
upon him, here is the phraise and a gradation though I burn with sorrow, though
mine ague be never so terrible, the fit never so fearful, my miseries never
so many: nay as he says further in the 13. chap. the 15. verse, Though he
kill me yet will I trust in him, the word in the original for sorrow is taken
from the root chus, that signifies the sorrow of a woman in travel that cries
to God in her pain: such pains will compel a man for to pray, and to pray
unto God most earnestly: it seems by the Prophet that a woman in travel will
cry out unto God though she sildome think of him at other times; if ever she
be in a good mind it is then: and such were the pains that Job was in at this
time, though I burn with sorrow, it was a conflict and a great conflict that
Job was now in, and he wrestles as it were with Jacob: and though some
speeches of impatience pass from Job, yet notwithstanding he recouers
himself and in the end his hope and patience was crowned, though I burn with
sorrow, nay let him not spare; Let almighty God lay as much upon me as it
pleases him, so that I may at the last inherit that which is my hope and
comfort. Me thinks he speaks as though he would challenge almighty God
for these temporal afflictions to do his worst, so he might take him out of
the world. I have observed three strange phraises in Scripture, which do
amplify that power of faith that power of prayer and that power of patience,
which it pleases God to give his Saints: he speaks of faith in the 92. Psalm
at the 9. verse, as if a faithful man were able to point Almighty God to a
thing to come. So the Prophet David speaks of faith, Lo thine enemies shall
perish, as if faith did apprehend it so clearly, that it pointed God to it, a
strange phrase. And ye know of prayer in the 32. of Exodus the 10. verse. he
speaks of prayer as though prayer were able to bind the hands of Almighty
God; Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them: and so in this
place, the holy Ghost speaks as though the holy man in misery would leave
Almighty God to do his worst, though I burn with sorrow. Lastly the ground of
this magnanimity and the only touchstone of this faith of Job, that his
conscience testified unto him that he had not denied the words of the holy
Ghost: What are those words of the holy Ghost, and what it is to deny them,
be the two points. By the words of the holy one in this place considering the
time wherein Job lived, which is supposed for to be in the time of nature, I
do not only understand those edicts of nature which the Apostle speaks of
in the 2. to the Romans the 15. verse, the effect of the moral law, written in
their hearts. I mean those common rules of honesty which we have received by
the light of nature and reason, the heavens declare the glory of God as in the
19. Psalm: I say I do not only understand by the words of the holy one in
this place that light of nature but those Revelations also by which God
revealed himself more especially to the very Saints of God: and my reason is
because he gives God the name of the holy one in this place, for we know the
nature of holiness is to separate a thing from that which is common; therefore
he does not mean in this place, the words of God only as God is the God of
nature, but as he is the Author of grace, and as he has revealed unto me his
will by revelation from God, and so is God promised unto his saints. Secondly
not to deny these words, it is first to believe, to acknowledge, and to
profess the same; not to deny the power of them in their lives and
conuersations; no not to deny them in that extremity wherein Job now lies.
These three I take to contain the full sense of these words. For it is not
sufficient by the Leuiticall Law (whose ground is moral) to chew the cudde;
but also to divide the hoof: our feet must be clean as well as our mouths;
though our lips be never so holy yet notwithstanding if our ways be unclean
we are as abominable unto almighty God as those that have all unclean. All is
one to the beast in the 13. of the Reuelat. the 16. whether we have his mark
in the forehead or in the right hand, all is one to Satan; many there be that
have very smothe foreheads, and carry a goodly profession of religion, yet
notwithstanding their hands are full of iniquity. Job was as well in life and
profession, an upright and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, an
upright man, first as God says of him; a just man toward others in
distributing virtues; and all this out of conscience and religion, one that
feared God, and though as the Apostle says, evil is always with me, yet he
labors to eschew evil, so that he denied not the power of that he
professed, he performed the power of the word of God in life and conversation,
and that not only in prosperity but in his extremity, in sickness and
misery. It is an easy matter not to deny the word of God so long as the Lord
pleases us in prosperity, but Job would say the Lord has given and the Lord
has taken, yet notwithstanding blessed be the name of the Lord: so we see
for the clearenes of his conscience in the 6. chapter the 25. ver. how he
challenges his accusers, Can any of you justly accuse me? this clear
conscience wrought in him true magnanimity, and it is that makes a man strong
as a Lion, as Solomon says. As Christ is said to sleep in the ship in the
tempest, so this is the only pillow whereon a man must rest, when his
conscience tells him he is upright, though through infirmity yet he has
done his poor indeauor to keep the words of the holy one, and indeed without
this clear conscience let never any man presume of faith, for it is but a
counterfeit faith, the words of the holy one being first sown as we see in
the heart, that seed knit unto the root of faith, that root brings out a tree
of Charity, that tree bears the fruit of good works, so as it is true
indeed, we are our selves justified before God only by faith, but our faith is
justified to our own conscience by charity, and our charity must be
justified before the world by our fruits of charity, and by our godly lives
and conuersations. Faith it is an illumination, it is hard to distinguish
between the illumination of the true spirit, and the illusion of the false,
therefore it has pleased Almighty God with that heavenly faith to join
another virtue of Charity, that a man's own conscience may testify whether
his faith be counterfeit or no, and because the world cannot see into the heart,
therefore that Charity must be justified by works, and a good conscience
ioynes all these together, this is the ground of the resolution of that holy
man Job, wherefore he does desire to be out of this world You have heard briefly
the commendable misery of this holy man of God Job: which as you see does
remain upon record, not so much for his commendations as for our instruction;
yet for both. Shall I commend beloved this our Brother (here departed) unto
you? he hears it not, his friends desire it not, I have not received any
information concerning him of any, because he affected it not, what then, a
man's name is like his shadow the faster he runs away the faster it follows:
the memorial of the righteous shall be blessed, reputed he was for an
upright and just man in all his dealings, let me use the plain dialect of the
world, I like the phrase well, he was an honest man, which civil honesty did
grow out of conscience and the fear of God in him: for that is the holy salt
that must season all; without which there is no sacrifice that can be
acceptable unto him. In religion he was not factious; if he had had occasion to
speak of any that were of other opinions, if he conceived them to be honest
men he would speak of them so charitably as if he did ever remember the
Apostles rule the 3. to the Philip. the 15 verse, those that are perfect be
thus minded and those that are otherwise minded God shall reveal it unto thee
also. The mark of Jesus Christ I make no question was in his hand as well as
in his forehead, his works were answerable to his profession. In his own
family I have observed that he was neither a sheep nor a Lion but a painful
and a watchful Shepherd laboring by all means and diligence to bring his
servants to good; to work in their thoughts true religion; to examine and
catechize them; such a comfortable Guide both for soul and body that I think
he might have given example in that kind to the best. To his friends and
acquaintance most loving, kind, and true hearted, I dare say they that had
occasion to try him would testify no less. In this Parish he has not been
of many years growth, and so scarce incorporated, but a man might easily
perceue him to be both of that Spirit if the cause did require, and withal of
that wisdom to temper his Spirit, as I may justly say we have lost a worthy
member in the Church of Christ: he was a true living stone manifesting his
lively faith, as by his religious conversation in general, so by his
forwardness in any good work whatsoever, and he would do it in that fashion
as the left hand should not know what the right hand did, his heart delighted
in the word of God, and hearing of the same, he did flourish in the house of
our God; his wife and family, friends and kindred, neighbors and acquaintance
of the place wherein he did most reside I suppose can testify more then I
say, grounded he was in a true Christian faith, and had learned Jobs grace of
Dominus abstulit: he was a true Eagle he looked through a thick cloud of a
long and tedious sickness unto the happy issue and end of all, during which
time of sickness he showed such a Christian resolution that when many had
thought he himself had stood most in need of comfort, then was he most
comfortable unto others; I ever found him like himself from the beginning of
his sickness to the end: he burned in sorrow; God loved him and yet spared him
not, and now no doubt he does rest in God, blessed be the name of God, for
that, and let us desire the Lord so to bless us with his spirit of grace, that
as we profess the words of the holy one, so we may never deny the power
thereof, but so walk according to the same, that God may receive glory, and
we eternal comfort in Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT the Funeral of Mr. John Newman Citizen and Grocer of
LONDON, at St. Steuens in Walbrooke.

BY ROGER FENTON D. in Divinity.



LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1616.

GEN: 15. 15. But thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace; and shall be buried
in a good age.
IN the premises of this Chap. there passed a covenant between God and
Abraham, a covenant confirmed by a ceremony, an ancient ceremony of dividing
of beasts in pieces and going through the parts of them so divided, signifying
thereby that they should be so divided and broken in pieces who should first
break the covenant. So we do find that covenant expressed in the 34. of Ier.
the 18. verse. And so did Almighty God vouchsafe to covenant with Abraham in
this place in the 9. verse before my text: after the manner of men: But when
Abraham had divided the beasts and God presented by the fire had passed
between the parts of the same, there fell out two accidents that were not
ordinary, first the text says that the fowls of the air did light upon the
parts of the beasts and Abraham drove them away in the 11. verse, signifying
thereby, how the Egyptians should pray upon Abraham's posterity, the children
of Israel: and yet notwithstanding for Abraham's sake, God afterward would
deliver them. Secondly, it is said that there fell a heavy sleep upon
Abraham: and that is now expressed in these words that I have read unto you:
signifying the death of Abraham: that howsoever hereafter his posterity might
happily remain in the land of Egypt: yet he should go to his Fathers in
peace, and should be buried in a good age: so then you see that these words
do contain a most comfortable promise, and a prophecy of Abraham's death.
Death is sorrowful in it self as being terrible unto nature, but such a death
is comfortable, so you see my text is like unto the occasion of this our
present meeting, it is a mixture or compound of sorrow and comfort well
tempered together, wherein I will desire you to consider, First the person whom
this does concern, it was Abraham: Secondly, the condition of his death, which
is here prophesied; First that it is seasonable, in respect of the
circumstances, as my text has reference to the premises, thus and thus shall
thy posterity fare, but thou shall be in thy grave before thou see that.
Secondly, in regard of death it self, it was a blessed death; blessed in two
respects. In respect of his soul first, for he should go to his Fathers, and
the manner how, in peace: Secondly, in respect of his body also, that it should
be buried, in a good age, and these are the branches as you see them lie in
the text, But thou shall go to thy fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a
good age: and of these briefly because the time will permit no long discourse;
We must first begin with the person, for else I shall make unto you at this
time but a groundless speech; For this is a sure rule as the person is, such
is the death of the person: the person was Abraham; Father Abraham the Father
of the faithful, and as he was called a father, so likewise was he a pattern
and example of all godly virtues unto all posterities; a pattern of faith and
religion, the father of the faithful. How his faith has been tried I shall
not need to particularise; And wheresoever he came, or into what country or
place soever he was sent we shall read Abraham built there an Altar, to show
his religion and worship of God, amongst heathens and Infidels. A pattern of
true obedience, that wheresoever God called him to any country he was ready
to go obediently, even to the offering up of his own son at Gods
commandment; A pattern of humility, of meekness and mildness, of
patience, and of a peaceable disposition; When his servants and the servants of
Lot could not agree, how he entreated for peace between them. A pattern of
love and of kindness, unto all, even to the very Sodomites themselves, how
affectionately does he persuade with Almighty God, and pray for Sodom and
Gomorah: even as though it had been for his own soul: Peradventure there be
some righteous within the City will thou not spare the rest for their sakes,
or if there be thus many or thus few, and so goes as low till he goes beyond
all proportion: A pattern of righteousness and good dealing with all men. For
although faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, yet faith went not
without righteousness, No, Pharaoh himself shall loose nothing by Abraham. A
pattern of Charity, his seat and place was in the tent door, he did not
hide himself, and lock the doors, and shut them after him, but he was ready
to receive those, that stood in need to be refreshed. A pattern of fatherly
providence in his own hous-hold providing for the same to the uttermost of his
power; Marrying his son a little before his death, when he was old, he
instructed and admonished his sons, from time to time, I know says God
Abraham will teach his children.

As he was the father of the faithful, so he was a pattern and example of
all godly virtues unto posterities. Thus you have heard what he was. Now will
you hear briefly what became of him; He must die, but his death it was a
seasonable death, it was a timely death. Seasonable in two respects, First
because he should be taken away, before his eyes did see those afflictions
which God meant to send upon his posterity. The children of Israel shall be
thus in affliction in Egypt, but thou shall go to thy fathers in peace; his
posterity should be afflicted, but not for Abraham's sake, they may thank
themselves, for that, they shall be carried into Egypt for their own sins,
but delivered out of Egypt for Abraham's sake, and his eyes shall not see their
affliction, because he was no cause of it. A blessing that God does promise
unto his Saints, and he does bestow this blessing upon diverse of his saints,
as Isay shows in the 57. chap. 1. verse, The righteous man is taken away, and
no man understands that he is taken from the evil to come, and so God
promised to Josiah the 2. of the Chron. 34. and the 28. verse, That he should
go to his Fathers in peace, and his eyes should not see the evil which
almighty God purposed to bring upon that place. Secondly, Abraham's death it
was seasonable and timely, because it was after the covenant which now was made
between God and him, God had made a covenant in this chapter with Abraham:
that he would be his sure buckler and exceeding great reward, therefore now
Abraham might depart in peace when God and he were so reconciled. Now Abraham
may cheerfully go to his Fathers; After that old Simeon had embraced his
Savior and had gotten Christ in his arms. Then he sings Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace for mine eyes have seen thy salvation; Therefore
seasonable was the death of Abraham, both in that it did prevent the evil to
come that he should not see it, and also because it was after the covenant,
that passed between God and him; and there must needs follow in the next
place a most blessed death, expressed well in the phrase of going to his
Fathers, which must not be understood of his bodily burial for Abraham was
buried in the field of Ephron the 25. of this book the 10. verse, where none
of his Fathers were buried, and so the like phrase is used in the 32. of
Deuter: the 50. verse where it is said that Moses was gathered to his Fathers,
and yet it is said likewise in the 34. of Deuteronomy. the Sepulcher was not known,
therefore of necessity this phrase must only have relation to the soul and
spirit of Abraham; that, that was gathered to the society and company of those
holy Fathers, that went before: thou shall go unto thy Fathers, for there is a
company and society of Saints.

Indeed when men are taken out of company here on earth, in this world, they
go to a better company and society of blessed souls and spirits in heaven;
a company where there is no distraction or division, no ambition, or
emulation, no strife nor contention, but where there is peace, joy, and
pleasure for evermore: unto this company and society of blessed spirits did
the spirit of Abraham go, and what a comfort is it (Beloved) unto a faithful
soul to consider what company and society it is going unto, when it departs
out of this life, if it be within the covenant, if the covenant have passed
between God and us, then when we die we shall go unto this place, when we
go to our Fathers, to the society and fellowshippe of the Saints of God, that
we are at rest with Abraham, where we shall enjoy the company and society of
all the Saints of God, that ever have been departed from the beginning of the
world to this present time and hereafter of all those that shall come unto the
same place, to the end of the world. Where Eliah shall know Moses: and Moses
Eliah, and confer together as on mount Tabour, although they did live in
several ages of the world. Peter the Apostle of our Savior Christ, when he
did see but the least glimpes of this comfort, when he see but two of the
Saints Moses and Eliah on mount Tabour he was so ravished with joy, that he
cries out, Let us build three Tabernacles.

And it is indeed to be observed that the two chiefest Apostles of our
Savior Christ, that is Peter and Paul, God did afford them this privilege,
that they had both a taste of the joys of heaven, living in this life, to the
end they might more effectually persuade men, to lift up their affections to
that comfortable society in the world to come, Paul was rapt up into the third
heaven, and so ravished with joy that he knew not whether he had his body
about him or no: and methinkes after he comes down again out of heaven, he
writes and esteems of these worldly things as of dung, such a contemptible
respect he has of any thing under the Sun after he had tasted once of the
sweetness of Paradise: For imagine it were possible, for a man to be lifted
up in his body whither Paul was to the third heaven, that he might be admitted
but to look into paradise, to the blessed society of blessed Angels, and
Saints, and look but down again and see this earth hanging like a Clodde
beneath, and see so many millions of men, busied about nothing like Ants in a
molehill, methinkes afterward he should never esteem of this world being
ravished with this company of the Saints in heaven. And beside Peter and Paul
(except it were only Jude that writes but one short Chapter) I think there
was not any of the Apostles of our Savior Christ, that has used
exexhortations to the Church of God in their Epistles, but they themselves of
purpose did taste some part of this glory, to the end they might the more
powerfully eleuate the hearts of men; Paul in the third heaven, and Peter,
James and John on mount Tabour all of them see a glimpes of this glory.

Go unto thy fathers, so did Abraham, in Spirit he went unto his Fathers that
were dead before him and his sons after, they came unto him. Then the manner
and the passage unto this place is expressed in the text, Thou shall go unto
thy Fathers in peace.

Now you must understand whosoever dies in peace must die in Christ, for there
is no true peace without Christ, Abraham died many hundred years before Christ
was borne, and yet our Savior Christ says of Abraham, in the eight of John
the 58. verse that Abraham saw his days and rejoiced, he saw him then in the
eyes of faith.

He died, therefore in the faith of Christ and so died in peace, for Christ is
the Prince of peace that conferreth true peace upon all his Saints, he is the
Olive tree of peace whereon peace grows, the eleventh to the Romans the
twentie-four, Like that dove with the Olive branch in her mouth, he ever
brought peace with him, it was his ordinary salutation when he was on the
earth, peace be unto you, it was his legacy left with his Church when he went
out of the world, my peace I leave with you; Therefore Abraham dying in the
peace of Christ, must needs die in peace of conscience, and as in peace of
conscience so likewise in a most peaceable manner. In the 25. of Genes. the
eight verse, it is said Abraham did yield up his spirit, his spirit was not
taken from him by violence but he did most willingly yield up his spirit into
the hands of God. Oh how fearful is the remembrance of death to those that
are not in Christ? that fearful rending of the soul and body a sunder is
most terrible unto them; but the death of Abraham, it was like that sleep
which was spoken of before this verse, that signified his death, a heavy sleep
fell upon Abraham, for so likewise fell death upon him, even as if nature
should have fallen a sleep, quietly, meekely, peaceably, and this is for his
soul.

Then it follows in the next place, concerning his body, that that also
should be buried in a good age. Even for to be buried it is a blessing, and a
blessing that every man does not enjoy. No Iehoiakim himself, though he were
a King, in the 22. of Jeremy the 19 verse, shall be buried like an ass drawn
and cast forth on a dunghill, as Josephus also writes of him. It is threatened
by Solomon that those who are disobedient to their parents, the ravens of the
valleys shall pick out their eyes. And those that are treacherous to the
Civil Magistrates, we see they are made a spectacle to the world, and
deprived of burial and set up in the air and made a prey to the fowls of the
air: as this is a judgment on these, so likewise the other is a blessing on
them, that go unto the grave in peace, and it is an honor that is due unto
the very bodies of the Saints of God, showing they are the work of Gods hands;
not as the bodies of beasts, which God did make as it were with a word after a
more slight manner, but for man's body he formed it not only with his word,
but it is the tabernacle of an heavenly substance, that's the soul, which is
the image of God, because our bodily nature is also assumed into the divine
nature at the incarnation of the Son of GOD. Because the bodies of the Saints
are the members of Christ, and the temples of the HOLY GHOST; Know you not
says the Apostle, that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost. And last
of all, because, though they sleep in the dust for a time, yet here-after they
shall rise in glory and shine as the Sun in glory in the kingdom of heaven,
and therefore great reason that some honor and reverence be done, even unto the
very bodies of the Saints. So was Abraham buried, buried hy his two sons
Isaac and Ismael, as in the 25. chapter of this book, the ninth verse, buried
in the field of Ephron, a selected ground of purpose, where his wife Sarah was
buried long before, Genes: 23. 19. and his sons wife Rebecca in the 49. of
this book the 31. verse. One blessing more let me add in my Text, to
Abraham, and we will come to my purpose. Abraham was buried in a good age, for
so God did promise, and it was prophesied in this place, and so performed in
the 25. of this book the 8. verse, and there we find the place amplified in
three phrases together, for evermore the performance of God is with the
largest. The promise is like a seed sown in the ground only, but the
performance comes in like fruit that is multiplied and carried in, in due season:
so it is said that Abraham was buried, he died in a good age, an old man of
great years: here is three phrases to express one thing, and it is no idle
repetition; he died in a good age, so good as he desired to live no longer,
nor did he desire for to die any sooner: he lived to settle his household in
order, to marry his son Isaac, to prepare his soul for God and to depart
in peace, A good age. Secondly, he dyed an old man; If he had lived any longer
his days would but have been troublesome and burdensome unto himself. An old
man; ye^ not old before his time, therefore a third phrase is added, an old man
of great years; and so did Abraham die and was gathered to his people. David
lived but threescore and ten years, and yet David was old before his time.

Secondly, he died in good years: this God promised to Abraham, and this God
has performed, so as that was verified of him, that is promised to the Saints
in the 5. of Job the 25. verse, that they go unto their grave as a ricke of
come that goes into the barn; when the Regions are white unto the harvest, as
our Savior Christ speaks, so according to the Hebrew text it is here as we
say, in a good age.

When the Regions are white unto the harvest, then the sickle of death is put
in in due season and they carried to the euer-lasting barnes.

What blessing was there then that Abraham did want, he was taken away before
the affliction of his posterity came, yet not before the covenant was
confirmed between GOD and him, all this was granted him, and he dyed an old
man full of years. And thus beloved have you heard of Abraham what he was and
what is become of him.

May it please you now a little for to turn your thoughts upon one of the
sons of Abraham, and briefly to remember with me, first what he was, and now
what is become of him; For as he did tread in the steps of his Father Abraham,
so I will tread in the steps of my text, concerning him, and Abraham, he was
the son of Abraham while he lived, the blessing of Abraham was upon him at
his death, and so I make no doubt but he does rest in Abraham's bosom, Abraham
the father of the faithful a pattern of faith and religion unto his sons
and posterity, this was one of them.

It was his chief stay and comfort ever in his great heaviness, and in his
sickness long before his death, or before that deadly sickness, the covenant
that passes between GOD and his Saints, in Christ Jesus, there was his stay.
Abraham was a pattern of faith; faith was imputed unto him for righteousness,
but it never went without righteousness: no more did his, I do refer him for
that to you that have had so many years experience of him, did this our brother
do any man wrong willingly? was he not an upright and a just man in all his
dealing, with all whom he had to do withal?

Abraham was a pattern of humility, of meeknes, of mildness, of patience,
and of a quiet and peaceable disposition, and so was he, witness this Parish,
wherein he has lived. How deadly any contention or debate amongst us was unto
his soul and spirit, how diligent would he be, and how troubled, till the
peace were made, blessed are the peacemakers.

Araham was a pattern of love and kindness of kind affection unto all men:
and so was he ready and prone to show his kindness according to his estate upon
any occasion.

Abraham was a pattern of charity, so was he; for I have observed (coming to
this man's table at ordinary occasions) who were his guests commonly, but such
as were not able to bid him again? such as had most need of refreshing, like
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom.

He was a pattern of fatherly providence in his family, and to his children.
I know (says God) that Abraham will teach his sons, and so did he, he did
continually admonish them; and if any admonition at any time did not take that
effect he desired, how grievous it was to his soul and spirit, let his Sons
remember it now he is gone, and if any affliction come upon them, as on
Abraham's posterity, let them thank themselves, it was not the Fathers fault,
they shall fare the better for his sake; Abraham's posterity were not afflicted
in Egypt for his sake, but delivered out of Egypt for Abraham's sake, but he is
gone, he is taken away seasonablely from the evil that is to come, the sins
of these times do prophecy some evil to come upon us, and it is a blessing
unto them that are taken away before it comes. He is gone to enjoy the effect
of that covenant made between God and his Saints, in Christ Jesus, that was
his comfort, he is gone unto his Fathers, and if his Sons will tread in his
steps, they shall go to their Fathers; he is gone and has left this company,
this company now present, whereof he was a good member, and is gone unto an
other company of the Saints and Angels of God in heaven, he is gone in peace,
in that manner that his death was a sleeping in death in peace of conscience.
In a peaceable manner did he depart this life, even as if he had stolen a
nap: we that were then present with him could not tell when he went; and now
beloved are we here assembled for to solemnize his Funeral in that decent
manner you see, and that is beseeming to follow, and to remember the Saints of
God that are taken away from amongst us. Abraham he was buried, and he was
buried in the ground where he had buried his beloved wife Sarai before, and so
is he. Innocent he was in his life, innocent as a dove, he has continued
this many years, solitary as a turtle dove, and now he is gone, yet so many
years after, as I think one grave may well hold them both. Last of all, let
me add the conclusion of my text, he is buried in a good age. I may add the
three phrases before mentioned of Abraham, A good age, an old man, of great
years; if he had lived longer, as I have often heard him say unto me, he
should have been burdensome and troublesome unto himself, a good age,
fourscore and one, a good age in these times, but let me yet add one thing
more, as he died in a good age, so I may say truly that he died upon a good
day also, for it was upon the Saboth day in the morning, that he commended his
soul into the hands of God, in the morning when we were about to assemble in
this place to praise God, then did he sing Halleluiah with the saints and
Angels in heaven. No man did more duly observe Gods saboths in this place them
he did, and now his soul does enjoy that saboth of rest, in the kingdom of
heaven. On the Sabbath day in the morning did he go to solemnize the Sabbath
in heaven, a Sabbath without an evening, that is an eternal rest, into this
rest is he now entered, and into this rest that we in due time may also enter,
that our spirits may enjoy the blessed company of all the Saints of God, let
us desire of him who has purchased the same Sabbath for us, JESUS CHRIST the
righteous; To whom with the Father and blessed Spirit, one everliving and only
wise God, be ascribed all praise, power and thanksgiving this day and for
evermore

Amen.
FINIS.

