A RELATION CONTAINING THE MANNER OF THE Solemnities at the Election and
Coronation of Ferdinand the Emperor, in Francford the 30. of August last past,
1619. WITH Other Occurrences in BOHEMIA, and diverse parts of GERMANY, for three
Months last past.

LONDON. Printed for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be sold at the great
South-dore of Paul's. 1620.

THE MANNER OF the Solemnities at the Election and Coronation of Fardinand the
Emperor, in Francford August 30. 1619. With other occurrences in Bohemia and
diverse parts of Germany for three months last past.
THE Earl of Thorn (after he had renewed his covenant with the Bohemians,
and dispatched his affairs in Morauia, according to his hearts desire) removed
his Camp from thence, and passed into the lower Austria, and intercepting some
certain places and towns by the way, laid siege against Laba, which refused
to give him admittance because it was fortified with a garrison.

The Protestant States, seeing that they could not hitherto make any full
agreement with the Romish Catholics, and that they had spent all the time in
vain, sent their ambassadors unto him, to demand of him what reason he had
to enter that country with so great an army: and to request him, that, seeng
they had done nothing which might offend the Bohemians, he would lead away his
Forces from thence again. For the reason why hitherto they had returned no
answer to the Letters which were sent from the Bohemians the fifth of March,
was, because that the Romish Catholic States, day by day, deferred to give
their Categoricall and resolute answer to the principal articles and clauses
of those Letters; and yet notwithstanding had always made fair show of a
friendly agreement and peaceable end. Howeuer, albeit they saw that their hope
hereof was frustrate, yet they were not against the much-desired League, but
were rather glad of it: and the rather, for that they called to mind, how that
the Emperor Matthias answered the States at Budwitz in the year 1614. that
they should send their Legates or Ambassadors to the Parliament which was to be
holden at Prage in the year 1615. and then and there should enter a Treaty
concerning the renewing of that League. Wherefore they gave license and
authority to their Deputies or Legates, to renew that League; provided, that
it were not repugnant to the House of Austria, and the States and Religion of
the Romish Catholics. This Embassy by five selected and chosen out of every
State, was performed.

A while after there came to the Camp, certain Ambassadors of the Romish
catholic States, and Earl Buchem being their Spokesman, they say that they
never did any thing that might aggrieue either the Earl of Thorn, or any
others of the Bohemians: and that they did very carefully maintain and
preserve peace. Wherefore they request that he would be pleased to spare them,
and to dislodge his Camp from before Laba.

As touching the Confederation and League betwixt the Protestants and them; It
was true indeed, that the Protestant States and they had not yet drawn to a
full conclusion in all things; yet, forasmuch as the points of difference
betwixt them were but small, they were in good hope that very shortly a good
end and agreement should be made betwixt them.

Thorn making answer, said unto them; That the Bohemians by maine necessity
were constrained to do what they did: and for his part, That he would not
willingly undertake any thing against any man without cause: but his desire
was, to pursue all hostile Forces, and to drive away the enemy though he were
at Jerusalem: That he came into that Province to preserve peace and
tranquillity, and to relieve and aid the oppressed; for he would feign have it
so, that hereafter the Protestants and Romish Catholics should walk together
hand in hand as equals one to another in every respect. That heretofore the
Romish Catholics have had the superiority and pre-eminence, but against good
reason; for the Protestants were as honest men as the Romish Catholics, and
therefore he would no longer suffer that these being kept under and oppressed,
the Romish Catholics (like oil in water) should swim aloft: for he would
have an equality kept amongst them, without any respect had to one Religion or
other; and look what privileges were granted to the one side, the same should
be permitted to the other, that so a constant and perpetual peace betwixt them
might be made: And that whosoever should be their King and Prince, he might be
safe from the treacheries and commotions of the Cleselians, and so might
govern the weal public with greater quietness and honor. For his own
part, he took no care whence or from whom he should receive provision, money
or aid to maintain his army. He had resigned himself up to God, and made
prayers to him, that he would further and prosper this his honest and truly
Christian purpose, and grant unto him power and strength fitting and necessary
for him. That he tells them the truth, That he would never have made any attempt
against Laba, but that he found it fortified with a Garrison, and that they
themselves were the causes why he did besiege it. For he had given notice to
Earl Traustam, that when he found no Garrison, nor any resistance, there the
people should not need to fear any danger by his coming.

When the Legates had heard him speak thus, they made answer, that they would
deal with Ferdinand, and do their best endeauours, that both Laba and other
places in that Province might be quit and cleared of Soldiers.

Therefore Thorn gave his word that on condition, that Garrison might be
removed, the gates of the City set open, and hereafter the City fenced with a
Garrison of Protestants, and not with enemies, he would not attempt any thing
further against that place: and so he dismissed them.

In the mean while the Lords directors held a consultation, that if a treaty of
peace were to be made, upon what condition it were to be entertained: and they
concluded and decreed it altogether necessary.

1 That all Protestants whatsoever (as well States as inferiors) throughout
the whole Kingdom, whether they dwelt under a Romish catholic or an
Evangelical Magistrate, by virtue of a charter granted unto them by the
Emperor Rodolphus, in point of Religion; (it being mutually couenanted on both
sides) should enjoy the benefit of the secretest consultations in the
Parliament, and Imperial confirmations, and it should be lawful for them as
well as for the Silesians and others in other places to erect and set up
Schools; all such acts, decrees, prouiso's, made heretofore to the contrary,
either by Ferdinand or by them that are Sub vna, being declared to be void and
of none effect.

2 That the Proscription and the banishing of the Jesuits out of the Kingdom,
should be ratified and made sure and firm for ever: so that it shall never be
lawful for them to return into that kingdom under pretense of any order
whatsoever. That their Colleges and all their goods should be confiscate and
adjudged to the public good of the States, and that their privileges should
be razed out of public Records.

3 That their Confederations and Leagues made with the people of Hungaria,
Austria, Morauia, and of both the Lusatia's should be ratified and confirmed.

4 That the Matter of Defense should be deferred till the general Assembly of
those Provinces.

5 That it should be lawful to ordain and appoint Assemblies of States in
diverse Territories, after the ancient manner.

6 That the hereditary Leagues with the Electors and other neighbor Princes,
should be renewed.

7 That the Banishing and proscription of certain men out of the Kingdom, the
removing of them from the public Offices, should be constant and firm.

To these seven articles, the Directors afterward added diverse others which
they thought needful for the Kingdom and the provinces: as namely,

1 That, that decree where the deceased Emperor did give to the bishop of
Prage Ius patronatus, the aduowson and patronage, to present Priests to all
Churches, is repugnant to his Majesty's Charter; and therefore let it be
abrogated, and let the power be given to the consistory of Prage to confer
those benefices upon such Pastors as are addicted to that religion, which is
principally professed in that Parish.

2 Seeing that the Subjects dwelling not only in the Emperors dominions, but
also in other spiritual or secular jurisdictions, (both parties being agreed)
by the Emperors charter, had had power and authority hitherto to erect
Churches and Schools, let them still retain and keep the same hereafter, and
let thest Clostergrabiens, whose temple was demolished by the Bishop, make use
of some other temple in the City, until their own be reedified.

3 Let the Burnauiens hereafter quietly and peacibly possess their own Church.

4 The Churches in the City of Prage (which have been built since his
Majesty's Charter was obtained) as namely the Church of the holy Trinity, in
the lesser town; and the Churches of our Savior, and of Simon and Jude, with
the Chapel adioining to it, in the old town, let them for ever be left in
the power of them which are Sub vtraque, and by whom they were built: and the
next Parliament let them be registered in the public records.

5 Forasmuch as the university of Prage and all the goods appertaining unto it,
were given by the Emperor Rodolphus to the States Sub vtraque. Therefore let
them still have power either to bestow some thing of their own, or to exact of
their Subjects any thing whereby that university and other Churches may be
sustained, and that which is so collected, let it be kept upon record, and
required of the defenders as well as other public contributions of the
Subjects.

6 Let not any other spiritual orders besides those which are in the kingdom
already, be brought in either by the King, or by those which are Sub vna.

7 Let not the Commissaries which are wont to be sent to the Parliament by the
King: let them not dwell too long upon the Kings proposition, but speedily
require an answer from the States.

8 Let the States in the Parliament confer their voices together; and after
they have collected their voices, let them give up their answers by one either
severally or generally: neither let the Kings Councellers sunder and separate
themselves from the States, but let them also give their best counsel and
advice for the common good.

9 Let it not be lawful to except against the answer of the States in
Parliaments: neither let the States be bound to admit any reply, or to accept
any other conclusion, if perhaps after their departure any such conclusion be
made of any.

10 And let not the Parliament be continued above 14. days, unless it be by a
peculiar consent of the States.

11 When the chief Chancellor of the Kingdoms propounds any thing to the
King, let another Chancellor be present, and have notice given him of the same.

12 Such as are to be Secretaries and Clerks of the Chancery, let them be
honest men, and addicted to the Religion Sub vtraque, after the usual and
accustomed manner in former times.

13 In the next Parliament, let there be a consultation held, about renewing
the Hereditary leagues with the Electors and other neighbor countries.

14 That which has been already concluded, in the last assembly, concerning
some perfidious persons, whereof some were to be banished the country, and some
to be barred from public offices: let it remain firm and ratified.

15 Hereafter let none of the Kings Lieutenants in the towns of Prage be
sustained or maintained, neither let the Kings Judges have place either in the
towns of Prage, or in any others.

16 And seeing that by commandment of the States, the Directors and exactors
of contributions have run into a great deal of debt, in defending and
preserving the Kingdom from the enemy, and in paying the Soldiers their
stipends (the Directors in the mean while being wise enough to save themselves
harmless) Therefore let the goods of such as were causes of that war (whether
they be fled out of the Kingdom, or still remain in it) be confiscated, and
adjudged to the payment of those debts.

17 In like manner, let the Kings goods be sold (always excepting those goods
of the King which are inserted into public records, and can never be
alienated) Let the Kings goods be sold seeing they were redeemed with other
men's money, and that many therefore were constrained to engage their faith and
credit: and let the money which is collected thence be employed to the payment
of the Kings debts, and toward the repayring of their damages and losses,
whose Houses and goods were pillaged and burnt up by the Kings Soldiers.

18 Such Church goods as upon the vrgency of extreme necessity, have been
laid to pawn or sold outright, let them not be redeemed at all; but let more
of them be sold away, yet with this caution, that provision be made that the
spiritual persons may be honestly maintained.

19 Let not the chamber of Bohemia be subject to the Kings chamber, nor do
service to it in furthering the decrees thereof.

20 Let the walls be reedified about the towns of Prage, and let all
foreign Ecclesiastical laws be subject to their jurisdiction.

21 The Prage towns and other towns which have a third free state, let them
not hereafter be called any more by the royal name of Chamber goods, as
heretofore in public records, (we know no reason why) they were styled and
entitled.

22 What shall be done concerning those two Cities in the Kingdom of Bohemia,
namely Pilsna and Budwitz, let it be consulted upon.

23 Touching money which shall accrue by burials, let the half of it be
employed upon the repairing the walls of the City, and upon the Prage Towns.

Pilsna, Budwitz, and Gretsna, let them be given to the State ab vtraque, that
in them they may provide sufficient Armories, without which our business of
Defense cannot come to any good.

24 But to whose trust these Armories are to be committed, and what costs and
charges are needful for providing and storing up arms therein, let
consultation be had hereafter.

At this time there was a Parliament holden at Vratislavia by the Princes and
the States of Silesia: The King sent to it one Otto Melander a noble Heroical
Gentleman, and one of his Council: who from the Prince of Lignitz, in the name
of the rest of the Princes and States, brought back this answer, viz:

They say, that by relation of the Noble and Honorable Parsonage Otto
Melander, and also by his Majesty's Royal Letters, which he delivered unto
them, they were given to understand, that Ferdinand has determined, since the
Emperor Matthias is now deceased, to undertake the government of the Kingdom,
and to confirm unto these Princes and Countries, all laws, rights, and
privileges, as well general as special, all Grants and Customs, even the
Maiestatis Diploma, the Charters of State, which were granted by his
Predecessors, the Kings of Bohemia, by Ferdinand, Maximilian, Rodolphus and
Matthias: and that he is determined not only to confirm whatsoever has
been granted by his Predecessors, but also to send his Confirmation unto them:
or if at this time it be full of danger to send such Confirmations, yet at
least he will accept whatsoever special privileges any of the Provinces can
show for themselves. That look what dissentions and disagreements there be
betwixt the Romish Catholics and Protestants, he is purposed to compound them.

That he would in these places confirm the Office of the King, and accept
from him the Oath of Allegiance: and did hope that by this means it would come
to pass, that (seeing he promised moreover to take upon him, and to discharge
the Emperors debts which he owed in the Provinces of Silesia) the States of
Silesia would not only pay such Contributions as they had formerly promised,
but also would perform all other duties and offices which were due unto him:
That in so doing he himself also might have cause to declare and show his
fatherly love and affection unto them still more and more: And that also, the
States of Bohemia, to whom in like manner he had already sent the Confirmation
of their Privileges, might thereby take occasion to settle themselves to due
obedience, that so all troubles being composed, and wars ended, the Kingdom
might enjoy her former peace and tranquillity.

But as heretofore it gave them great contentment, that the Emperor Matthias
was pleased to devise a way how his Kingdoms and Countries might be provided
of one to be their head, and to succeed him after his death; and that so all
occasions of wars and seditions being cut off, peace and tranquillity might be
preserved and continued in the Kingdom: So also they called to mind, when
that Succession was given to Ferdinand, upon what conditions they accepted it,
and what promises they received from him; and what they on the other side were
bound to perform unto him: and so they wish with all their hearts, that
Matthias his departure had happened at such time, as all things being in peace,
they might quietly use and enjoy their piuiledges and immunities, and Ferdinand
might obtain the wished end of his Succession with greatest facility: for so
nothing could have hindered them, but that upon the receipt of the Letters of
Confirmation of their general and special privileges, they had forthwith
accepted him for their King, and had performed unto him all such offices as
were due.

But howsoever it be, they are exceeding glad, that he remembering his promise
made unto them, is desirous to put it in execution. But they doubt not, but
that Ferdinand will set before his eyes, how lamentable and confused the state
of those Countries is; and that the combustion is now spread so far, and
grown so vehement, that it cannot without great difficulty and danger be
extinguished and suppressed: and that he will be pleased to take into his
consideration, how far these times are altered from those wherein his
succession to the Kingdom of Bohemia was made:

As namely, that now the public peace and quiet is disturbed, all the Country
embroyled with wars, their Towns sacked and spoiled, and every place fraught
with Soldiers and armed men. That their privileges confirmed heretofore, are
of no power or strength to defend them from these evils. And that not only
Disputations and diverse wrested interpretations have been invented to
discredit that profitable business of Defense, undertaken for the profit and
good of all; but also, that wars are prepared, and great violence done to the
Subject: so that it seems that the bare confirmation of Privileges is not
now any longer sufficient to establish peace in that Kingdom and those
Provinces, but it is necessary that what before was promised in words, be now
showed in deed and action.

Also they doubt not, but that he will be pleased to remember what a quiet,
sweet and calm state there was through the whole kingdom of Bohemia, and the
other confederate countries, not only in the days of former Kings, his
Predecessors; but even at that very time when he was admitted to the succession
in the same kingdom: and how far it is estranged from that tranquillity: how
much it concerns the common wealth, that the ancient and wholesome ordinances
of the kingdom, and the old custom be observed, not only about the
designation, but also about the acceptance of the King, whosoever he shall be.

All which things being duly considered; The King and all others may easily
perceive, that, although they in times past did elect and design him to be
their chief Sovereign Duke, and that of their own free will and pleasure,
without any eye or regard to the Kingdom of Bohemia: yet, the case with the
Kingdom and other provinces standing so as it does; they may not to the great
prejudice of others, (as well concerning the execution of the designation, as
concerning the designation it self) accept and admit him to be their governor.

Also that the King by the premises may easily conjecture, that these
embroilements and combustions, together with the troubles and hurts which
followed thereupon in point of religion throughout Bohemia and Silesia, cannot
be remedied and laid asleep, by the bare charter of confirmation of
privileges: but that these times desire to see the effect of this
confirmation, and do require deeds and not words.

These things considered, they hope, and beseech his majesty, that he would be
pleased not to take it in ill part; that, weighing the great danger of these
times, they think it good for them to expect, until he do not only
undertake the government and administration of the kingdom of Bohemia: but
also, stinting all these troubles, do settle the whole kingdom in that state
which their privileges do require, and that they may freely without war and
molestation, enjoy their privileges confirmed. And that this may be done very
well, if (all wars being ended) he would ipso facto perform all things to
the Provinces according to the prescript of their privileges in point of
Religion, and would take order for them by granting such a charter, that by it
they might enjoy the peace of Religion. To the performance hereof, he needed
not any interposition; for here was nothing required but the very effect of
their privileges; and that is the only means both to settle peace and
tranquillity on all sides, and also to keep and retain it constantly: which
being used, when he should enter upon the administration of the kingdom, he
needed not to make any question at all, but they in their place will do what
necessity requires.

Concerning the Earl of Thorn his expedition and voyage into the lower
Austria, we have spoken before. The Romish Catholics even until then were in
deliberating what answer they should give to the Protestants: For the
Protestants had propounded seven articles to them to consult upon: namely, that
all the R. catholic States in the upper and lower Austria should be one body
with the Protestants in those parts; that in time of urgent necessity the one
side should defend the other: that their privileges (as well old as new)
should remain whole and entyre to every state, and nothing in them, should be
altered and changed. In burialls and spittles for sick folk there should be
no difference made between Protestants and R. Catholics: but that without
respect of religion both alike should receive the like benefit by them. That
to the university of Vienna (which the states by common consent, founded in the
year 1613) learned men should be called without respect of what Religion they
be, viz. Romish Catholic or Protestant. That no man should be troubled for
difference in religion. That both sides should abstain from persecuting one
another, and that every man should be permitted to enjoy his own liberty.

And howsoever as yet, they could not agree upon the foresaid articles, yet,
because the earl of Thorn desired it, they removed the garrison from the city
of Laba: which being done, Thorn placed there a garrison of his soldiers;
until such time as the States had levied an army, and provided a garrison for
that City.

The City Tina taken in by the Earl of Thorn.
AT the latter end of July the Earl being provided of a very good Army at
Omnitium, went forth of purpose to join battle with Count Buquoy; he led after
him 46. companies of horse, and 48. ensigns of foot. But the Count thinking
it small advantage to him accept the fight, declined it by all means, keeping
himself very carefully in his tents: wherefore the Earl made an assault upon
the town of Tina and took it, and so put all the garrison soldiers and the
borderers thereabout to the sword. Not long after some of the officers of the
Count Buquoy (not knowing what had passed) came that way, and were intercepted
by the new garrison the Earl had placed there in the town.

FERDINAND His ELECTION, in what manner performed.
AFter certain sessions in the Court at Francford between the Electors of the
spirituality; and the Ambassadors of the Secular Electors, and that the
Bishop-Electors perceived that those Ambassadors could not be wrought upon to
remit any thing of their commission, Messengers were dispatched in all have the
24. of July to the principal of the Lay-Electors unto the Duke of Saxony, and
the Palatine of Rhine. In the mean while Ferdinand and the Bishop of Colein
withdrew themselves unto Lewis Lantzgraue of Hesse, and spent the time in
hunting, when they came to Francford again, and assembled another Court, it
was declared to Ferdinand, that he should appear in the same Court again the
9. of August to take a solemn Oath, which was to be administered to him by the
State and people of Francford, according as was prescribed in the Golden Bull.

The 8. of August having received full resolution from the Elector of Saxony,
concerning his more absolute power, the Magistrate presently caused it to be
proclaimed by sound of trumpet: that all strangers should depart the City: those
only excepted which belonged to the Court of Ferdinand, and the Princes
Electors: the next day the Oath was given to him in the Court of the Governor,
and before the Court gate of all the Citizens and Garrison Soldiers to the
number of a 1000. Afterward their meetings being continued, diverse
consultations were debated, till at length the 18. of August was set down for
the Election day to be performed in their Church.

The order of going to Church.
FERDINAND and the Electors came to the Court in Coaches, and from thence
(being Royally apparelled in Electorate Robes) they rode on horseback to the
Church of S. Bartholmew about eight a clock in the morning, being environed
round about with men at arms, the Citizens being placed on either hand.

Now the Order was this: The Archbishop of Mentz, and Trieers rode first;
Ferdinand, having upon his head a Crown of exceeding great value, and the
Archbishop of Colein, to associate him, came next; last of all followed the
Ambassadors of the secular Electors.

All things being done in the Church about twelve a clock, they rode back in
this equipage; The Bishop of Trieers went first alone by himself: next after
followed the Ambassadors of the secular Electors; first, the Palatines, with
the Globe of the Empire; in the midst the Ambassador of Saxony, with the
Sword; and after him he of Brandenburge, with the Scepter; Ferdinand followed
these alone by himself; and next unto him rode the Electors of Colein, and
Mentz.

The Election thus solemnly performed, Messengers were straight sent to
Aquisgraue and Norimberge to fetch the Crown, and Scepter, and other ornaments
belonging to the Coronation, which are there kept.

In the mean time Lewis Lantzgraue of Hesse, and the Ambassador of the King
of Spain, came to Francford to congratulate Ferdinand. Then was made the
usual preparation for the Coronation: a great long Bridge was built, which
reached from the Court, all over the Market place, to the very Church. Before
the Court was a huge spacious Kitchen raised for the boiling of an Ox. Then
was there a Well artificially contrived, which did send forth out of the
ground, red and white wine, Barrels and Tubbes to that purpose being privily
before conueighed under the earth. Another large place was made in the Court
for the Imperial Banquet, Royally furnished with much variety, and drink in
wonderful plenty. Last of all, there were set up Theaters and Stages for
shows, and a Royal Chair of State set in the Church for the Emperor.

About the same time (being the latter end of July) two thousand Hungarians,
who had wasted many places of Bohemia and Austria, with their burning of
Towns, and robberies, having gotten great booty, and being dissuaded from so
wicked attempts by the States of Hungaria, withdrew themselves privately and
went home-ward with all their spoils: and there was a rumor that Sumadius an
Hungarian Captain, thought to have followed them with five hundred Hungarians
under his own command: But Count Buquoi getting intelligence thereof, gave
that business in charge to the Cornet of Horse that lay in Wallenstein, that
they should way-lay them at some fit passage: by which means they were
prevented, and defeated, all their Booty taken from them, many of them slain,
and the rest put to flight.

The Assembly of the States of Morauia, and their Decrees, five in number, for
establishing the Confederation.
ABout the beginning of this month, it was agreed by the States of Morauia
assembled at Prinna:

1 That the Confederation begun of late, and confirmed by a solemn Oath
between the Bohemians, Morauians, Silesians, and Lusatians, should be
ratified, and all the branches thereof should be kept inuiolably to all
succeeding Generations.

2 And to the end they might avenge their country of the barbarous and
incredible tyranny, and savage cruelty which their enemies had exercised upon
them; besides the Soldiers which were already in garrison, there should be
pressed 1500. more and Ralph a Schlenitz should be their commander.

3 It was decreed likewise that the Edict touching such as were proscribed for
their bad and treacherous government should be banished the country for ever,
and their goods to be ceized to the use of the town where they dwelt, and to
that purpose to be sold to the best advantage, made by the States a little
before assembled in the same place, should still be ratified and confirmed.

4 They have professed publicly, and expressly that they cannot with a safe
Conscience be helpful to the States neither in men nor money, unless all the
Ecclesiastical goods of Friars and Nuns be sequestered from them and given
to the States, and might be sold from the good of the commonwealth without al
let or contradiction of any man: and that provision should be made out of this
estate and goods thus alienated and sold from the Abbyes, Prelates, ouer-seers,
Friars and Nuns of what order soever, as also from such as refusing the state
of marriage, freely choose to remain in that condition of a single life still:
and that after a fitting and competent state during their lives.

5 That there should be a diligent search made of Arms laid up in any houses,
Monasteries, Nunneries situate as well within the City, as without, and that
those Arms, together with all gold, silver and moneys found in the hand of
any Ecclesiastical person to be taken from them, and to be translated with the
public good: and that all Citizens and subjects of the Romish Catholic
Religion, together with all partakers of the Roman faction; should be laid hold
on, and their houses being carefully searched, all Arms should be taken from
them, and be conveyed to a certain place appointed for them. And forasmuch as
they have their Governor, and inferior Officers also in suspicion, and cannot
repose that trust in them which is fitting to men of that place, they shall
give up their account of the government of their several Provinces to deputies
assigned and authorized to that effect: and in case there be necessity and
desert, they shall be displaced from their offices, others of the Protestants
being chosen in their room.

And that he might restrain them, and force the Bohemians to break off their
Confederation by the calling back of his Army, enters again into their
Country with eight hundred horse, and foot; and having got into his
possession a very strong fort called Iosuit, determined also to take in the
Castle of the Prince of Lichtenstein, and so at once to open himself a passage
into the whole Country, but the States of Morania prevented him, and recovered
the Castle into their own subjection before, and placed a very strong Garrison
in it: when he saw himself disappointed, and having received new forces out of
Hungary, he made attempt upon the government of Diffenbacchius, and when he
found him well appointed, having spoiled and fired some poor villages in the
frontires of it, he turned himself to a town called Niclasburge, but
received a repulse there to, by valiant resistance of the Garrison he was
constrained to leave them with no small loss to his men.

Notwithstanding, the Morauians incensed with these molestations, having levied
1500. of their own countrymen, and joined with them some other foreign Aid,
marched directly to meet him, and when they found him, August the 8. day, lying
in Vistrie with 9000 horse and foot, presently he fell a skirmishing with
them, and forced him, leaving many of his men dead in the place, from the
narrow straight into the Champion Fields. Now he little thought that the
Morauians would prosecute the fight, but they all on fire with rage and
indignation, set so valiantly upon him, that the battles was prolonged and
continued six hours together. Tampire lost 2000. of his foot and horse, and
last of all was driven by his flight to leave the Morauians the glory of the
Field and day. During this fight, the Earl of Monte-cuculi, Saxo of Lauenberge
were mortally wounded and many with them, and not long after died of the hurts
there received. In the heat of the conflict the Morauians were wholly mingled
with the Tampirians: the Smoke and Dust had caused so great darkness that they
could not know one another, that it could be nothing less then a miracle, that
but 300 of the Morauians were slain, and as many wounded, in so great
confusion: and thus Tampire was compelled to forsake Morauia, and to write to
Vienna, for new supplies, to be sent unto him,

The Fort of Vechin taken by BVQVOI.
COunt Buquoi mean while is not idle, but sets upon the Fort Vechin and
spoils the little town belonging to it with 15. small villages, and burns
them to the ground, and when he understood Coronel Francus to march that way
with 1200. Musketers, he laid 8000. men in ambush to entrap him, but Francus
having seasonable intelligence of so great treachery, turned aside to Thabor,
and so fortunately avoided the danger.

FREDERICK V. Count PALATINE Elector, chosen King of Bohemia.
NOtwithstanding the Directors for Bohemia, the 19. of August, together with
the Ambassadors of Morauia, Silesia, Lusatia the higher and the lower being
present, held a Council from nine in the morning till three in the afternoon,
having the doors fast shut and locked unto them: in which they finally decreed,
that Ferdinand was to be abdicated and deposed from his Kingdom, and never to
be admitted to the same, and another to be chosen in his stead: which Decree
was published and proclaimed of the Bohemians at three a clock the same day:
of the Silesians and Lusatians the 21. day of the same Month: on the 24. and
25. days of the same Month, all the people assembled in their Churches, for
public and solemn prayer to God, that he would direct them in electing a
King fitting to govern them, and Sermons also were made to the same purpose.

On the 26. of August, they met again, and after prayers and other divine
Service finished, Frederick Elector Palatine by the greater number was chosen
and proclaimed King of Bohemia: he had voices to the Election, of the Nobility
36 of the Gentry 91. these for the present: all the free Cities and States for
the most part consented to it the next day. Besides, the hands of the
Ambassadors for Morauia, Silesia, and Eusatia, being gathered, it was
manifestly found, that they were all directed to the Palatine with one consent.

The Solemnity was thus performed: The Song of Ambrose was sung, the Bells
rung, the Ordinance shot off five times together. Ambassadors also being
deputed, who the next day should bear the news to the Elector Palatine of
this his Election to be King of Bohemia, by the joint voices of the whole
Kingdom, and the three united Provinces before spoken off.

Pissera surprised by assault of Count Buquoi.
WHile these things were a doing at Prage, Buquoi marched toward Pissera with
his whole army, and consumed the Suburbs with fire. After, he sent a Trumpet to
Hacquius commander of two Ensigns in the City, to will him to depart the
town, and yield it up to him. The Captain refusing, answered, he would fight
for his City until his latest breath, as was the part of a true Soldier.
Buquoi enraged with this answer, commanded the town to be assaulted in four
several places at once: in which conflict though the Garrison behaved
themselves valiantly, and slew many, yet at last number prevailing, the City
was taken by force. After their forced entrance they ranged up and down like
mad men. The Captain was hanged up, the Governor slain with the sword, great
booty was taken, with Engines, and two Rams for battery, which General
Mansfield had formerly used against the City of Pilsna. He withdrew his forces
back toward Straconitium, which town he had also a little before brought
under his power. He thought withal to have besieged Pilsna. The Bohemians
followed the Count, but durst not settle upon him, marching in goodly equipage
with a full army: about the same time, many fled from Veraucum and other places
to Prage, carrying with them their wives, children and all their estates, being
stricken with the terror of this bloody massacre and cruelty.

THE CORONATION of FERDINAND, performed at Francford. August. 30. 1619.
WE spoke before of the Election of Ferdinand to be Emperor: now for as much as
it seemed good to his Majesty, following therein the example and president of
the Emperor Matthias deceased, that he himself would also be crowned at
Francford; he sent and sought from Aquisgrane and Norimberge the Banners, Robes
and other ornaments of the Empire; and thus all things necessary to this royal
solemnity were prepared, as we have touched before: when the appointed day for
the Coronation was come, which was the 30. of August, according to the old
account and the 9. of September according to the new, two days before, Lewis
Lantzgraue of Hesse came thither with his two sons, and his brother Philip:
The day before the solemnity approached the Ambassadors of Norimberge, with the
Imperial crown and other royal ornaments: The gates were opened to none; the
garrison soldiers stood in the valley, and the citizens in arms were set in
every corner of the streets, but most of all from the Court to the College of
Electors, and from thence on both sides the bridge even to the Church of Saint
Bartholomew: the middle of the week the Eclesiasticall Electors went to the
Church apart every one by themselves; and there putting off their Electorall
habits, attired themselves like Bishops as they were, and in that sort waited
for Ferdinands coming, who about 8. of the clock, mounted on a gallant horse:
rode unto the Temple in this prince-like order: There went before him on foot
a great train of Officers, Counselors, and other noble personages: the two
sons of Lewis Lantzgraue of Hesse, and after them Lewis their Father, with
his brother Philip, rode in front together; five officers followed next, and
the Ambassadors of the three secular Electors, who carried before Ferdinand the
Globe, Scepter and Sword of the Empire: Ferdinand himself apparelled like an
Elector, and having a crown upon his head, was carried on horseback under a
canopy, which was borne up by two noble men (Consuls) Daniell Stalburger and
Philip Orthius, and four Senators, or states of Francford; their names were
Iohn-Philip Weisius, Hierom Stephens, Iohn-Stephens Schadaeus, and Iohn-Philip
Orthius: As soon as they were come to the Church, the Ecclesiastical
Electors, in their Pontificalibus; together with their Suffraganes and some
others of the Clergy, advanced forward to meet Ferdinand, from the Quire even
to the door of the Temple, and having received him honorably, they lead him to
an Altar situate at the entrance of the Quire or Chancell: There he entered
into a seat appointed for prayer, placed before the Altar, made of cloth of
silver, and a Canopy of the same costly stuff let down from the roof of the
Church over the seat: the two Archbishops also went into their several
seats, on the right hand Triers, on the left Colein, prepared for them and
richly hung with red Scarlet cloth: Ferdinand took up a little book which was
laid in that seat, and composed himself to prayer, the Secular Ambassadors
seated also near him: The Chantors mean while sang that song: Glory be to God
on high: the Elector of Mentz began Mass, and in the saying of it the other
Electors and Ambassadors lead away Ferdinand to the high Altar, and from thence
(after Benediction) unto a royal Throne, which was placed a step or two above
the seat where Ferdinand prayed; continuing their obseruancy and ceremonies,
he came to the Altar again, and there fell upon his knees, the Electors and
the Ambassadors kneeling by him till the Letany was said over him. This done,
He that was to Consecrate him, propounded to him the usual Questions. Whether
He would steadfastly keep the Christian and Catholic Religion, defend the
Church, administer justice to all, increase, and enlarge the Empire, maintain
the widows and fatherless children, render due honor to the Bishop of Rome:
Ferdinand answered affirmatively to every of these, and confirmed his
affirmation with a solemn oath. The Consecrator turned himself to the
Electors, Ambassadors, and all the people standing round about, demanded of
them, whether they would submit themselves to Ferdinand, establish his
kingdom, and perform odedience to his commandments: when they had testified
their consents to all those motions, and cried with a loud voice, That he ought
to be their King; he was unclothed in certain places of his body, and then
the Consecrator came to him, and taking oil anointed the Crown of his head,
his neck, his breasts, his right arm and his hands, adding these words at each
several part he anointed; I anoint thee with holy oil, in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

The unction finished, the Ecclesiastical Electors, with their Suffraganes
lead Ferdinand through the Quire into the Conclaue or College of Election,
and having wiped off the oil, they put upon him the ancient Imperial and
Pontifical Robes brought from Norimbergh; that is, the Boots and long
Surplisse, and Gown let down from his neck by his Breast in parts and so
thrown over his shoulders, they put also Gloves upon his hands, and thus
attired as it were a Deacon, they bring him forth again from the Chancell to
the seat where he first prayed, and there the Consecrator liberally bestowed
upon him a new blessing; prayers said, Ferdinand ascends into the Imperial
Throne, and the Electors of Triers and Colein take down the sword of Charles
the Great from the Altar, where together with the Crown and Scepter it was
laid; draw it forth, and give it into Ferdinands hands, the Consecrator
speaking these words: Take this sword by the hands of Bishops. And when he
comes to these words: Be thou girt with this sword, etc. Then the sword is put
up into the sheath again, and girt unto his side by the Ambassador of the
Imperial Electors.

Moreover, after this the Consecrator takes the Ring from the Altar, and
pronouncing certain words put it upon his finger: from the same Altar he takes
the Scepter and Globe of the Empire, and gives them into his hand; the Scepter
into his right hand, the Globe into his left, with these words: Take the rod of
Virtue and Equity; last of all, the Imperial Crown is lifted off the Altar
and set upon his head by the three Spiritual Electors jointly, with these
words: take the crown of the Kingdom, and then they array him with the golden
cloak of Charles the Great; these Ceremonies observed, he comes down from his
Throne, and delivers back these things to the Ambassadors of the Temporal
Electors, that is to say, the Globe to the Palatines Ambassador, and the
Scepter to Brandenburghs, and so of the rest; then again he makes toward the
Altar, and there takes a solemn oath, that he will do all those things which
belong to a good Emperor.

The oath taken, the Mass goes on, Ferdinand betaking him to his throne the
while, and here is exquisit music played by the Quire: From the Throne he is
once more led to the Altar, the Sacrifice of the Mass first offered, He
receives the Sacrament at the hands of the Consecrators; the Sacrament, prayers
and other service fully finished, the Consecrator Mentz goes out first, Triers
and Colein after him; and between them goes Ferdinand to a stately Theater, a
stage raised up aloft toward the South, hung on all sides with rich Tapistry
and Stamell cloth; being laid over the floor thereof: before him are carried the
Arms of the Empire by the Ambassadors of the Secular Electors; the Suffraganes
and others of the Clergy following after: there the Spiritual Electors place
him in a Princely Throne, elevated somewhat above the rest of the stage,
covered over with cloth of gold, and hung with a Canopy of red Velvet, the
Chanters at the time singing the song of Saint Ambrose: The Music ceasing,
the Archbishop of Mentz draws near to Ferdinand, and in his own name, and in
the name of the other Electors, congratulates to him this happy Inauguration,
and withal, excellently and carefully commends to him the whole Empire.

Presently upon this the Archbishop of Triers and Colein, and all the Clergy
leave the stage and return into the Chancell, where putting off their
Pontificalibus, they put upon them again the robes of the Electors: Ferdinand
stays still in his Chair of state, and creates Knights, by striking them with
the sword of Charles the Great. After this He rises up, and goes himself out
of the Theater, and returns from Church in this solemn order.

First and foremost go the servants of the Court, next the Counselors of the
Emperor, and the Princes Electors, as also a very great number of noble
personages, then followed the Earls and Barons: in the next rank the
Archbishop of Triers by himself, the Palatines delegate and Brandenburghs
together, carrying the Globe, and the Scepter, then the Delegate of Saxony alone
carrying the Sword, next the Emperor with the Crown on his head, and the
Imperial robes on his back, by himself likewise under a Canopy borne by the
States of Francford, as was showed before: The Archbishop of Mentz and Colein
together, all going back on foot closed up this royal Train.

Thus go they along forwards straight to the Court over the bridge covered
over with Stamell: there followed a little after three of Ferdinands Chaplains
on horseback which cast abroad money to the people, gold and silver, of less
and greater value of round and square fashion: the greater money on one side
had an arm stretched forth of the Cloud, holding in the hand a Kingly Crown
with this inscription, TO THOSE THAT STRIVE LAWFVLLY: on the other side this,
FERDINAND II. KING OF HUNGARY AND BOHEMIA, CROWNED KING OF THE ROMANS SEPTEMBER
IX. MDCXIX. The lesser moneys had the letter F. with a crown, and the number
of 11. stamped on them on the one side; on the other a Crown, and these words:
CROWNED KING OF THE ROMANS, SEPTEMBER IX. MDCXIX.

The casting of this money made such a hurly burly among the Common People,
that the Chaplains could scarce make way for the greatness of the press,
though they were on horseback: the cloth on the bridge as soon as the Emperor
passed, was cut, torn and rent in pieces by the people.

In the Palace or Hall of the Court, the Tables were set and royally furnished
for himself and the Princes Electors: the Tables of the three Temporal
Electors were covered with red Velvet as also the Table of the Elector of
Bohemia, but no meat was set upon them, as is provided by the constitution of
the golden Bull: being thus at last in the Palace, the Delegates of the
Secular Electors addressed them to perform the Offices of the Electorship, in
stead of their Lords and Princes themselves. When Pappenhemius the hereditary
Marshall of the Empire mounted his horse, and being brought with a measure of
silver, to a heap of oats, being laid together in the open yard, before the
Court, between the Well of wine and the Kitchen, filled his measure, and
struck it with a rod of silver, and then gave it to a Servant to keep, the
people after snatching them away.

After him appeared one of the Delegates of the Brandenburgh, riding also on
horseback from the Court, and took up a Basen of silver with an Ewer of
gold, and a Towell, set upon a Board by the Kitchen where the Bull was roasted,
and carried it with him to the Court.

Last of all, the Delegate of the Elector Palatine, Sewer hereditary to the
Kingdom, being brought forth from the Court, took certain dishes of the
Bull roasted in the public Kitchen, covered with four silver platters, and
set out on the Dresser, and bore them with him to the Court.

This being done, the rude multitude breaking into the Kitchen, by maine force
carried away with them the Bull which was roasted whole, with the head, feet,
hoofes, tail and horns, and stuffed full of Hares, Conies, Lambs, Geese, and
diverse other sorts of Birds and fowls, pulling it by peece-meale, and cutting
it a sunder with their knives: and which is more rude, they defaced the
Kitchen, and took away all the Timber of it.

While they kept this coil, Ferdinand and the Electors are every one at their
own Tables. The Well before the Court, made in the manner of a rock, began
to flow with read and white wine, out of the mouth of an Eagle with two heads
crowned, which was placed between two Lions bearing the Ornaments of the
Empire, the Scepter, the Globe and Sword.

Now the wine ran out of this Eagle in great abundance for three hours
together, being received into two vessels of exceeding great quantity, as many
as would having liberty to draw and drink of it as much as they would, till at
last, by the rage of the giddy multitude, they in vain striving against them
who were appointed to keep it, the Well was borne down, and the Eagle, with
the Lions, and all other Ornaments of it were carried away.

The Royal Dinner continued till five of the clock in the afternoon with
great solemnity and joy. The Emperor at last departed from that Court to his
own Royal Palace, the Electors accompanying him some few days after. There
were public Tiltings for joy of this Coronation.

After it the Ambassadors of the Palatine and Brandenburgh, and last of all,
of the Duke of Saxony, returned home to their several Princes, many wishing
all prosperity and good success to the Emperor, and expressing their prayers
for him in Verse.

FINIS.

