FENNORS DEFENSE: Or, I am your first Man.

Wherein the VVater-man, JOHN TAILOR, is dashed, sowst, and finally fallen into
the Thames: With his slanderous Taxations, base Imputations, scandalous
Accusations, and foul Abominations, against his Majesty's Ryming Poet: who
has Answered him without Vexations, or trembling Recantations.

The Reason of my not meeting at the Hope with Tailor, is truly demonstrated in
the Induction to the Iudger.

Thy hasty Gallop my mild Muse shall check,
That if thou sit not sure, will break thy neck.
LONDON, Printed for Roger Barnes, and are to be sold at his shop in S.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet, 1615.

To all that can Judge, of what Degree soever.
IVdiciall Reader, after a Supper of Slanders, give me leave to bestow a
Banquet of Defense; which, I hope, shall relish with more delight in thy
generous opinion. I am sorry that my Pen (...) plucked back from better
Occasions, to an^were an Opposite so ignoble. But seeing my Reputation is shot
at by such a poisoned Pi^toll, I thought it meet to scrue out the Bul^^t of
his Infamy with my approved Hone^^ie, before it grew rank, or festered too
far ^n the Worlds Apprehension. But to the pur^ose: Master Tailor, the
Gentleman-like ^culler at the Hope on the Banke-side, at a friends house of
mine, acquainted me with his Project; which was as follows: That he the said
Tailor had studied such several Humors in Prose, as never were the like
before: (which indeed fell out true, to his shame) wherein he would have me
join; he to play a Scene in Prose, and I to answer him in Verse: Whereto I
condiscended, on these Conditions; viz. That I might have half the Commodity
thereof; Or Security for five pounds; Or else twenty shillings in hand, and
the rest as the Day affoorded. Next, That I might hear his Book read (which
was fit) to know on what ground I might build my Invention. And last, That I
should see the Manner of his Challenge before it was published, and set my
Answer to it with my own hand. To all which he granted, and delivered me
five Shillings upon the same: Whereupon I promised faithfully, That if all this
were on his part performed, I would (God willing) meet him, and with my best
endeavor strive to give the Audience content. Now, here I must entreat you,
before you condemn me, note but the Occasions of my Breach of Promise: This
Water-Taylor, with his Confederates, presuming he had bound me with his
Earnest-money, printed his Challenge-Bill, and my Answer annexed thereunto,
without my Hand, Knowledge, or Consent: Nay more; My Answer was by him set up
so mean and insufficient to so brauing a Challenge, that I altogether disliked
thereof (as I had reason) and thereupon sent my Man with the Money five days
before the Play, to certify them, That I was otherwise employed, and would not
come, in regard of the Wrong done unto me, in setting up my Answer without my
Consent: My Man delivered the Message, but lost the Money at Play, emboldening
himself upon the Wrongs I had received; which I have since paid. And the same
day I received a Letter out of Warwickeshire from my Father, That he was not
well; wishing me and my wife to repair unto him with all possible speed.
Now, you that are Parents of Children, or Children to Parents, Judge, whether I
ought rather to disobay my Father, or displease John Tailor; purchase my
Fathers hate, or lose a Scullers love; and I hope you will say I had sufficient
cause to keep me from the Hope. But fearing my homely Truth (though it be
sufficient to plead my Honesty) is not answerable to your ^xpectation of my
practice in Poesy; I will, as ^eare as I can, fit my Muse to your liking,
which is my content: And ever rest honester by Land then Tailor by Water,

WILL: FENNOR.

Although I cannot Rogue it, as he can,
Yet will I show my self an honest man.

AN APOLOGY to the Anagram of my Name, made by no Scholar, but a Sculler.
IT were a simple Tree thy breath could shake;
But see (mere Malice) how thou do mistake:
For what thy Title would bestow on me,
They self art Author of. New Villainy.
But since thou vrgest me, mark how I Will blase
That name; which thou with villainy would glafe:
For I will open the Casement, and clear Light
Shall chase thy black verse to eternal Night.
When the first William, Duke of Normandy,
Sailed from the Coasts of France to Britanie,
Amongst his best Ranks came a Chiualiere,
Whose name in French was called le Fogniere,
Which the^ our English Tongue so well did tender,
Gave him the Name and Title of Defender.
On the Seacoasts he did defend so well,
That for his Crest he bears the Scallop shell.
Since, briefer Language gives us Fennors name,
Nor can thy impudence impair the same:
And for a Token of wronged Innocence,
I do resume my first name for Defense.
My Anagram if thou but rightly scan,
Then thou will find it is, I will fear no man.
How can I then fear thee that art a Tailor,
A shred of Fustian, and a ragged Raylor;
A dish that is not worth the feeding on,
When thou art best in Lent, thou art but Poor John.
An Anagram upon the Scullers Name. JOHN TAILOR, Anagramma. O Hate, rail on.
O Hate rail on; or this, Rail on, O Hate:
For spite of Railing, I must dedicate
An answer to thy Theme, though nere so large,
Will sink thy Scullers Boat, though 'twere a Barge.
To halter up your Muse, my Muse begins;
I Will trusse the Jade for breaking peoples shinnes.
Then Monster do thy worst, yerke out thy fill,
Thou can not touch my godnesse with thy ill:
Though Horses break their Bridles, and escape,
My Lines shall load an Ass, or whippe an Ape.
To his approved Foe John Tailor.
I Have looked over with my best Prospectiues,
And viewed the tenor of thy base Inuectiues:
But if thou knewst how slenderly I weigh them,
Thou would not make such labor to display them,
All that my Lyntia in thy vain discernes,
Is Roguish Language, such as Newgate learnes.
I think thou have been tutored in the Stews;
For thine's the perfect speech they only use:
Base Roguish Wishes, Cursing, and Reuiling,
Tempestuous Raylings, and good Names defiling.
Yet maugre Malice John, I pity thee
For all the pains thou have bestowed on me;
And were my Purse but of ability,
I Would recompense thy labors horribly:
But since my means unable is to right thee,
Mark how my Pen in kindness shall requite thee.
I will bestow a sheet or two of Paper,
And sit the burning of a Tallow Taper,
To tell thee thou art monstrous insolent:
Although thy Verse is lame and impotent;
And at the highest, thou art but partaker
With Libell-spreaders, or some Ballade-maker.
But do not think thou dealst with Coriate,
Whose bosom thou did bolt a Story at;
Nor look not for such Battery at my Walls,
As against the Knight of the Sun, or Archibales;
Expect not Captain Ottooles understanding:
No, no; against a Bulwark thou art banding
Of better temper, and a Nobler spirit,
Then ever thy base bosom could inherit.
Against Cynthia, like a Wolf, th'oult bark and howl,
Whereby thou shewst thy judgment dark and foul.
Thou grieu'st, my Muse with her reflecting rays,
Has quite ecclipst a famous Scullers praise:
Thou would have Poesy in none to flourish,
But in thy self; O thou art too too currish:
Banish this self-conceit; false shadie dreams
Hang in thy heart, and drive thee to extremes.
But why do I presume to counsel thee,
That hat'st good Counsel, as thou hate me?
Wherefore I leave thy brazen Impudence,
To answer thy Revenge with my Defense.
Defense.
HOw Rascall-like, thou dealst with me at first;
Thou shewst from what Antiquity thou art nursed:
How dare thou of thy Satyre-Musicke boast,
That now stands bound unto the whipping Post?
But I will spare thee, thou intemperate Ass,
Until in Bride-well thou shall current pass.
Thou say, I had better with the Devil deal;
By which thou do thy wickedness reveal:
But I have naught to do with him or thee;
If thou be his companion, God bless me.
To crouch, or whyne, thou give me no occasion;
But I must laugh at thy absurd persuation:
Thou art that Lernean Snake, squeeze thine own gall,
But it is too bad to make thee Ink withal.
Thou Have gone so long to Styx for mingled Ink,
That all thy verses in men's nosthrils stink.
For Pens, the Scrich-Owles feathers are too tough;
A Gooses Wing for thee is good enough.
Thou have emblas'd me, Basest slave of Men;
That name I freely send thee back again,
Until the World has better eyes to see
Which is the basest Jack, my self, or thee.
Thou call'st me Rogue so artificial,
That I must judge thee for one natural:
The Injury proceeded from thy tongue,
And yet you would make me thy cloak for wrong.
But do thou think the matter is no more,
But hang my self; thy counsel I abhore:
And take thou heed of this enchanted Spell,
John Tailor ended like Achitophel.
What foolish Ass, like thee, would take in hand
To play a Play, that could not understand
What thine own folly is, thou art so blind;
Only to baseness thou art well inclin'de.
Do think I had no business, but to wait
On thy detested Fopperies Conceit:
Yet I protest, had thou but sent the Bill
For me to answer, I Would have showed my skill:
Which would have been so much to thy disgrace,
That thou again durst nere have showed thy face.
Can thou imagine, that I went away
For fear of thee, or thy contemned Play:
Know fool, when on the Stage I purchasd worth,
I scornd to send for thee to help me forth.
And put the case that I should challenge thee,
Thy railing Spirit could not answer me:
For thou art nothing without three months study;
I Would beat my brains out, if they were so muddie.
Five shillings I confess I had of thee;
Which I protest my servant had from me
For to repay thee: but since he did sail,
Thou might have sent to me; not write, and rail
On him, that holds his honesty more dear
Then all the Thames Revenues in a year.
But here thou driu'st me to a short demurre,
To know why thou should call a Christian, Curre:
Oh, I have found it; to my grief I see,
That Curres and Christians are alike to thee.
But was thy credit by my treason slain;
Faith I know none thou had to lose or stain.
I wonder much at thy simplicity,
That thou should challenge me for sharking thee;
When of my troth I had rather give thee gifts,
Then see thee driven to such paltrie shifts.
Thou and thy Squire often have ferried me,
More often then I and mine have rim'd to thee,
If ever I have sung to nastie Whores,
Thou or some Pander, like thee, kept the doors:
For I am sure, that for as little means,
As two pence, thou will carry knaves y queanes.
I know not what thou meanst by Daxie Dell,
It seems with them thou art acquainted well.
For scrappes and broken beer it is so rare
For me to rhyme, that thou shall have my share:
For though much wealth I want to maintain me
I Will never trouble Whores, nor Rogues, nor thee.
Allow I am squint-eyde, yet with those eyes
I can thy Baboonestrickes anatomize.
But prithee, which of all the Devils cramb'd
That word of judgment in the Thou art damb'd?
I Would rather wish thee talk of thy salvation,
Lest hate should hurrie thee into damnation.
Had thou begun with Brothell then transcended
Unto a Tavern, thou thy state had mended:
But thou do all thou can to cut my throat
And cheat me of the Tinker and his groat:
Thou have so many voyages to hell,
That Nemesis will like thy visage well;
And for to make hels number one the fuller,
Charon will take thee for his under Sculler:
And from those lossing torments w.ch torment thee.
I Will find a shelter, though it discontent thee.
Why do thou blame my tongue, 'cause it proclai^^
Myself a servant to my Sovereign James
I would all hearts and tongues w.th mine w.ch sing
Their loyal duty to my Lord the King.
His Royal favor makes thy envy swell,
As by thy words all may discern it well.
Thy base comparison I hate and curse,
Pray heaven thy service to him prove no wors^
For then my Rhyme shall tell thee this in Reason
Shall never be hanged for felony nor treason.
Now for the rest, thou poor Bear garden sport
I scorn to tell thee how I live in Court:
Yet for to certify thee, thou shall know it,
It has pleased the King to call me his Ryming Po^^
Although too far unworthy, I confess,
To merit it, the Title I possess:
Yet without boasting, let me boldly say,
I Will ryme with any man that breaths this day
Upon a subject in extempore,
Or else be blotted from all memory,
For any wager dare engaged be.
Then think what cause I had to run from the^
Except it were, because I would not hear,
How thou absurdly did abuse each ear.
But thou do task me with my sawcinese,
That I myself a Poet dare profess:
Would thou have me rob Nature of her gifts
Why that were baser then thy basest shifts:
Yet my esteem of course extempory,
Is but as servile to sweet Poesy,
Why would thou trouble Homer from his rest,
To view the slanders belcht from thy base breast.
Were Ovid living, he would discommend thee,
Horace in steed of wine would water send thee:
And famous Virgill, in his lofty style,
At this thy railing humor would but smile.
Last, all that have deserved a Laurel wreath,
Unto thy Muse a pair of sculls bequeath.
Alas pore Spong, thou suckst up naught but spite
And do me open wrong thy faults to right:
What Coxcombe fool would proffer such abuses
As thou have done to Poets and the Muses?
But dear Taliae in her riming fit
Sung, Thou will die a fool, for want of wit,
Thou say thy judgment can compose a verse;
What my opinion's of thee I Will rehearse,
Thou art no better then a Poets Whelpe,
That fauning up and down seeks after help:
I could be like thy self, unmannerly,
But that I scorn thy style should tutor me.
No, burn thy self out, like a Candle-snuffe,
It Is vain to make thee worse, thou art bad enuffe.
Thou taxest me, that I abroad do vaunt,
What Lords and Knights to me their favors grant;
It also seems that thou from me would know,
What Countesses and Ladies countenance show.
I Will tell thee plainly; such do entertain me,
That for thy railing baseness will disdain thee,
Had they thy hungry chapps once foddered,
Thou would not title them embrodered.
But, Syrra, though you meddle with your mate
Thou should learn manners to forbear the state
And not to descant upon Court and King,
Twere fitter thou should of a Sculler sing.
Presumptuous fool, how dare thou be so bo^^
To speak of Kings whom men with fear behol^
You say, you know his royal Majesty
Will not allow his Court to harbor me:
Nay more; your Scullership does know right w^^^
That I no longer in his house shall dwell.
Is then his wisdom think thou such mean treasur^
That Watermen must know his royal pleasure
Yet I confess so far his will they know
When he directs them whether they shall go.
It may be thou wa'st put in office lately,
Which makes thee rogue me so, and rail so state
But when thy head peepes through the pillory
I doubt these terms thy ears must justify.
For thy bace words are of such hard digestion,
They Will cause sorn stomach call thy name in quest^^^
Thou hopst to see me whipped; stand fast blind Ho^^^
For fear thou stumble into th'Porters Lodge:
Rave, rail, do what thou can, I Will never cea^^
To serve my sovereign master King of peace.
Watch till thy eyes fall out; Write; do thy worst;
I have a Pen and Inkhorne is as cursed,
To answer all thy Railing, Satyrizing,
In three days, what you three months art devising:
And when thy quarter-Cockatrice sees light,
In troth it is not worthy of man's sight.
But I am sorry that thy credit's tainted,
To make thee and thy Chaundler unacquainted:
Will he not score no more for Eggs and Cheese,
Because he saw thy Hope upon her knees?
Rather then thou should lay that fault on me,
Come where I dwell, I Will pass my word for thee:
For Reputation thou can have no more,
Then in a Bakers debt, or Ale-wifes score:
And if thou be deny'de both Bread and Drink,
Thy Writing and thy Rowing's like to shrink.
Leave these Inuectiues, trust unto thy Scull,
For that is the way to fill thy belly full
Of Meat and Drink; besides this Consolation,
Thou labor'st truly in thine own Vocation.
Why should thou stagger after Poesy,
That is attended on by Poverty?
I wish thee as my friend; never go about it;
For, as I guess, thou art poor enough without it.
I see thou art so bare and desperate,
Thou would turn Hangman to advance thy state;
And hang up me; but (Sculler) I Will ore-match you,
And stand to see a Hempen halter catch you:
For the old proverb never failed yet,
Who spreads netts for his friends, snares his own feet,
But yet I wonder since thou hat'st my life,
Thou should profess such kindness to my wife,
If thy hot love without deceit be fervent,
My kitchen Maid shall take the for her feruant,
For all the love that from my wife proceeds,
Is scorning of thy person and thy deeds:
Thou calst them wittols that lead quiet lives,
But none but Rascals will abuse their wives.
But now to the disasters of the day,
How thou miscariedst with thy Hopeful play.
Of thy mishapps no long discourse i will tell,
How thou amongst them made a beastly smell.
Thou do commend the Players for their action,
But they were all ashamd of thy distraction,
For them, as much as thine, my praise allow,
For none amongst them plaide the fool but thou:
Thou would same find a fault, yet know not where,
When in thy bosom it appears clear.
Thy cheifest railing and thy strongst evasion,
Is against me, yet thou art the occasion.
Another while thou blamst the Audience,
When thou wast cause of their impatience;
The better sort said I was wise enuffe,
To keep me out of that black whirle-winde puff,
Which almost blue the hangings from the stage,
Was ere such folly known in any age?
Thou say, the Maundering Beggar credit got,
For that, thou know I know a Poet wrote:
For all the rest, that was deuisde by thee,
Was nothing but a heap of Fopperie.
I heard, thou letst the Wine run tumbling down
Thy rotten windpipe, like a drunken Clown:
But yet thy Lion drunk could not defend thee,
For 'twas thy Ape drunk made some men commend thee:
For that days censure thou can not escape,
Which says, That all thy actions playde the Ape.
But thy Tobacco was such stinking stuff,
That all the people cry'de, Enough, enough.
Thy third Act showed the humors of men frantic,
Wherein, most like an Ass, thou stoodst for Antic:
I saw it not whether it were good or bad;
But wise men judge thee either fool, or mad.
Thy last Act shows thy skill upon the Seas
To be so rare; it did them all displease:
And in conclusion, such a Tempest rose,
That blew thee off, and made thy friends thy foes.
And woldst thou load my back with all this blame?
Nay; as thou got'st the coin, so take the shame:
And let me tell thee this, to calm thy Rage.
I chaleng'd Kendall on the Fortune Stage;
And he did promise before an Audience
For to oppose me; note the Accidence:
I set up Bills, the People thronged apace,
With full intention to disgrace, or grace;
The House was full, the Tru^pets twice had founded,
And though he came not, I was not confounded,
But stepped upon the Stage, and told them this;
My Adverse would not come: not one did hiss;
But flung me Theames: I then extempore
Did blot his name from out their memory,
And pleased them all, in spite of one to brave me,
Witness the Ringing Plaudits that they gave me.
Was not this just the case 'twixt me and thee?
And yet thy eyes thine own faults cannot see.
I Will touch thee nearer: Had thou been away,
As I was, and my self supply'de the day,
I would have roused my Muse incontinent,
With Mirths best quaint devise, for their content;
And in extempore I would have gained
The favor of them all; which thee disdained.
But thou art hatched from Saturnes frozen brain,
Poor drowsy groom of sleepie Morpheus train:
If there be any spark of Muse in thee,
It is the tayle-gut of Melpomenie,
Which does instruct thee in thy filthy terms;
There Is nothing else in thee my Pen affirms.
Had thou done well, the credit had been thine;
But doing ill, thoud'st have the shame be mine.
The Money pleased thy humor passing well;
But thy discredit made thy anger swell
Above the verge of Patience; and thy Sail,
Blown full of Envy, bursts it self to Rail,
Not publicly, but in a private Hole
Kindle thy Malice at the Devils coal:
But I with water of true Honesty
Will quench thy raging heat of Villainy.
How bravely thou can brag it out, and swagger,
And talk of stabbes (God bless us) and thy dagger:
I would not see thy spightfull spit-Frog drawn,
'Twill serve thee better for an Alehouse pawn.
Thou scornst to foul thy fingers upon men,
Because thou know they will shake hands again:
But thou art excellent at these windy puffes,
And dare encounter boys at fisticuffes;
But Sirrah, look to your green Wastcoat well,
For fear the boys do tear it off peccemell.
All the kind favor that I will implore,
Is, That thou would not threaten me no more:
And yet, now I remember, it is no wrong;
For threatened folk (the Proverb says) live long:
But with thy Pen write, and revenge thy spleen,
I Will have an Answer that shall cut as keen.
But now base Slanderer, I must term thee so;
Why medlest thou with them thou do not know:
This long I have but spent my Ink in jest,
But now I Will dart my anger at thy breast:
I would I had the humor of some Scold,
That I, like thee, my venom might unfold.
Thou never knewst my birth, nor my begetting,
So well as I thy Rascal Play, and Cheating:
But whatsoere my birth or breeding be,
Spider, I live to toss and torture thee,
Use thee like Stock Fish, gill thee like a Sprat,
Duck thee in the Towne-ditch, like a Water-Rat,
Make Iigges and Ballads of thy apish Toys,
For to be sung by threadbare Fiddlers Boys:
Yet to do this, I shall but prove a Babie;
Thou have disgraced thy self as much as may be.
Thou Barrabas of all humanity,
Base slanderer of Christianity,
Know that I am a Christian, and am borne
Better then thy best Kindred, I Will be sworn:
How thy own tongue thy breeding does display,
By Pedlers French, and Canting, Curds and Whay;
And I Will approve it to thy foul disgrace,
Thou art sprung from baseness; I, from Gentries Race:
Which to make good, my Parents yet do live,
And each day at their Table food do give
To better men then thou; misshapen slave:
Thus bear thy slanders with thee to thy grave.
If I at Grauesend rim'de for fourteen pence,
For 12. pence thou have row'de that voyage since:
Allow it were no more; I bor't away
With better credit then thou did thy Play.
Thy envy is not worth the speaking of;
The more thou raylst at me, the more I laugh:
I scorn to beg (as thou do) Poets phrases
To raise my name; let Merit sing my praises:
For were they meaner then thy own desert,
They were the worse where thou should sing a part:
Thou do but think there is nothing good in me;
But I am sure there is much less in thee.
That hate thou bear me, prithee bear me still,
My good with envy all thy veins shall fill,
Until they swell and burst thy angry gall:
Then if I live, I will lament thy fall;
And on thy grave this Epitaph bestow,
For to be read for either friend or foe.
Epitaph.
HEre lies a Carcass in this Grave,
Who while he lived, would rail and rave;
Borrow his wit from others worth,
And in his own name set it forth:
He row'de from Tyber to the Thames,
And there his tongue himself proclaims
The luster of all Watermen,
To row with Scull, or write with Pen.
O, had he still kept on the Water,
And never come upon Theater,
He might have liu'de full merrily,
And not have di'de so lowsily.
O, 'twas that foolish scuruie Play
At Hope that took his sense away:
Yet he to blot out all his shame,
Imputes the fault on Fennors name;
And rayl'de at him like a mad body;
Liu'de a bare Fool, di'de a base Noddie.
But if you will know what was his name,
I willingly will show the same:
No Land-Poet, nor Sea-Saylor,
But a poor Sculler, called John Tailor:
And had not Hate this Wonder slain,
He would have liu'de a Knave in grain.
Thus Jack thou see what friendship I would do,
Garnish thy Grave out with a verse or two:
But yet thou art alive, and I surmise
Thou will not die till Crows pecke out thy eyes.
I Would wish thee sail unto some foraine Places,
Where they have never heard of thy Disgraces:
The Baramoodes Tongue thou do profess;
The name of Poet there thou may possess:
There spread thy Pamphlets, make the^ understand
Thou art the chiefest Poet in that Land.
Thou say my Pate a mint of Lies can forge;
Indeed t'has wit enough thy lies to scourge:
For I was neither rid South, North, nor East,
But into Warwikeshire, direct Northwest:
Nor did I thither ride, to shun thy Play,
But 'twas my Fathers will called me away;
And for the obedience that he in me found,
He gave me his blessing, with a hundred pound.
Then Sculler know, that was no Tinkers gift,
Nor had I need for thy poor Crown to shift:
But he that told thee I was gone int' Kent,
Spoke half as true as thou do, lies invent.
But see how Envy in thy heart does trot,
Thou grieu'st that I a poor man's Pardon got;
Is thy eye evil then, 'cause mine is good?
Or would thou stop my Fountain with thy mud?
No; spite of thee, thou Canniball to man,
I will not cease to do what good I can:
Nor do I look for Silver for my meede,
When poor men want, if I can help their need:
For though thou raylst on me at the Bear garden,
Rather then see thee hanged, I Would beg thy Pardon;
Although it cost me more the suing forth
In ready money then thy Boat is worth:
So much I tender Man, though bred by Nature,
As being Image of his high Creator:
But thou that of man's Life art no esteemer,
What mercy can thou hope from thy Redeemer.
Say I had wro^gd thee, thou good-names betrayer,
Thou call'st for Vengeance in thy Sauiors prayer:
I will not say so, but it does appear,
Thou scarce do say thy prayers once a year:
Thou must forgive, if thou would be forgiven;
For if thou fear not Hell, nere hope for Heaven.
Thou do accuse the King as well for Graunts
As men for Suits: But leave these bitter taunts,
And learn in time, black tail of insolence,
To arm thy heart with Christian patience.
Thus have I answered all thy false Alarmes:
Now it remains for me to blaze thy Arms;
For thou have falsely set up mine in blue;
Wherefore I mean to have a bowt with you.
Thy Heraldrie shall not outstrip my brain,
But I Will devise as good for thee again:
And first; because all Sculls thou do excel,
A silver Oar will for thy Crest do well,
A pair of Arms bound in a sable Scarffe,
In a sad field, as large as Wapping Wharffe,
Out of the water shall appear one dead,
A Halter and a crosse-barre ore his head;
And on his Shield this Motto shall be found,
Tailor the Sculler was both hanged and drowned.
In all this blazing thee, no hurt I mean,
But hang thee till the Tide have washed thee clean:
And when the billows ore thy head are flowing,
And AEolus against Neptunes brow is blowing,
And Oars and Sculs above thy crosse-barre sailing,
There is great hope thou will forget thy railing.
Thus have I answered thee in three days space,
And yet my Pen ran but an ampling pace:
Thus much I mildly write, in hope 'twil me^d thee;
If not, the Thames or Wapping shore will end thee.
And last, to show what course I would direct thee,
Use honesty, from Tiborne to protect thee.
Thine more then thou desire, Will: Fennor, his Majesty's Riming Poet.

To my kind Friends in general.
NOw you have read, and understand my mind,
I hope your wonted favors I shall find,
In spite of railing baseness, whose lewd toungs
Are Satan's Instruments for slanderous wrongs.
Sure I have satisfied your expectation,
And used the Sculler in his own vocation:
But if you think my Answer ouer-milde.
Know this; I would not have my tongue defilde
With such uncivil terms, much less my Pen,
Which now gives satisfaction to all men
Of Truth; I will avouch, in spite of ill,
My Answer was set up in Tailors Bill
Falsely, without my Knowledge or consent:
Then was not that a cause sufficient,
To give my purpose sudden alteration,
When I was played the Knave with in that fashion.
But though we could not then meet face to face,
I hope my Pen has followed him apace:
If I be not deceived, it has out-stript him,
And spite of all his rods in piss, 'tath whipped him,
And made his howling hollow voice to rore;
Yet for your loves, I Will give him one lash more.
FENNORS final Fare-ill to TAILOR, With his blue Bitch and Cods belly.
BLadder of Envy, one word more with you;
I must hunt out your Bitch, of Azure hue:
You that at Roterdam have Spies to houer,
And in Cods bellies transport Slanders over,
And without License belcheth them abroad,
'T were fit she should be searched to see her Loan:
For in her Head, her Belly, and her Crookes,
I doubt there will be found some dangerous Books:
For he that undertook this Work for thee,
Perhaps prints Romish Doctrine for a fee;
Or Matters prejudicial to the State;
Or things Schismatic, to breed debate.
If it be found so; spite of your Revenge,
You and your Bitch may in a Halter swinge,
And your Cods belly starve for want of water:
To you all three I do commend this Satyr,
And to my Country all my love and skill,
To root out all such instruments of ill.
FINIS.

