Terra Australis incognita, OR A new Southern DISCOVERY, CONTAINING A fifth
part of the World. Lately found out By FERDINAND DE QVIR, a Spanish Captain.

Never before published.



LONDON Printed for JOHN HODGETTS. 1617.

THE COPY OF A Petition presented to the King of Spain, by Captain Peter
Ferdinand de Quir, touching the discovery of the fifth part of the World, called
Terra Australis incognita: and of the great riches and fertility of the same.
SIR,
I Am called Captain Ferdinand De Quir, a most humble servant and subject of
your Majesty's, who in all submission do show unto you, that this is the eighth
Petition, which by me has been presented to your Majesty's view, to persuade
the conduction of some Colonies, unto the land which your Majesty has
commanded to be discovered in the Country of Terra Australis incognita. And
yet to this hour no resolution is taken in this affair, neither have I
received any answer or hope, whereby I might rest assured to obtain my
dispatch, although I have attended fourteen months in your Court, and have
employed fourteen years in this Discovery, unto the which I have been
induced by the mere goodness of the cause, and in the assuredness of the
same have obdurated my self against all difficulties and contradictions
whatsoever. I have desperately exposed my self to a thousand perils both by
sea and land, I have diminished and suncke my estate, I have been travailed
with many afflictions in my person, and suffered such strange and extraordinary
crosses, tha^ they seem almost incredible to my self (...) and all, that so
Religious an undertake should not unworthily be abandoned. In regard^ whereof,
I do most humbly beseech your Majesty in the bowels of the Divine Charity,
that you would be pleased to take order that I be not deprived of the fruits of
this design, which with such instance I do desire and which with so much
justice are due unto my continual pains and travail: nor that I be debarred
from the effects of so considerable and well-grounded a request, whose
^^incipall scope is the glory of God, and of ^^our Majesty, and from whence
infinite benefits are likely to issue forth, which will live ^^long as the
fabric of the world shall subsist, and after the dissolution thereof will
re^^aine to all Eternity.

Touching the extent of these Regions ^^wly discovered, grounding my judgment
(...) that which I have seen with mine own ^^es, and upon that which Captain
Jews ^^ez de Torres Admiral of my Fleet has represented unto your Majesty,
The length ^^er of is as great as all Europe and Asia the less, ^^to the Sea
of Bachu, Persia, and all the Isles, ^^ell of the Ocean, as of the Mediterranean
(...), taking England and Island into this account. (...) This unknown
Country is the fifth part (...) the Terrestrial Globe, and extends it ^^fe
to such length, that in probability it is twice greater in Kingdoms and
Seignories, ^^en all that which at this day does acknowledge subjection and
obedience unto your ^^^aiestie.

These Regions know no neighborhood either of Turks or Moors, or of any
other Nation which attempteth war upon co^^^ning Countries. The land which we
h^^^ discovered is all seated within the To^^^ Zone, and a great tract thereof
reaches unto the Equinoctial Circle, which is elevated (...) them to 90.
degrees above the Horizon, and in some places a little less. And if (...)
success prove answerable unto the hop^^ there will be found Antipodes unto
the better part of Afric, unto all Europe, and to the greater portion of
Asia. But you must observe, that as the Countries which we have discovered in
15. degrees of latitude, are better then Spain, so the other which are opposed
to their elevation, must by proportion and analogy prove some terrestrial
Paradise.

All those quarters swarm with an incredible multitude of Inhabitants, whereof
some are white, others black and in color like unto those which the Spaniards
call Mu^^^^ or half- Moors, and others of a mingled complexion. Some wear
their hair long, black, and scattered, others have their hair crisped and
thick, and others very yellow and bright. Which diversity is an apparent
argument, that there is commerce and communication amongst them. And this
consideration together with the bounty which Nature has bestowed on the soil,
their inexperience of Artillery and Guns, and their unskillfulness in
laboring in Mines, with other semblable circumstances, does induce me to
infer, that all the Country is rich and well-peopled. It seems they know
little what belongs to artificial trades; for they have neither
fortifications nor walls, and live without the awe of Kings or laws. They are
a simple people cantoned into several sexts, and factions, and exercise much
disagreement amongst themselves. The Arms which they use are bows and
arrows, which are not poisoned or steeped in the juice of venomous herbs, as
the custom is of many other Countries; They do also carry clubs, truncheons,
pikes, darts to hurl with the arm, all which are framed only of wood. They
do cover themselves from the waste or girdling-place down to the half of
their thighs, they are very studious of cleanlines, tractable, gleeful, and
wonderously addicted to be grateful unto those that do them a courtesy, as I
have experienced many times. The which does build in me a belief, that with
the assistance of God, if they may be gently and amiably entreated, they will
be found very docible and easy of manage, and that we shall without much
work accommodate our selves unto them. And it is most necessary to observe
this way of sweetness, especially in the beginning, that the inhabitants may be
drawn along to this so holy and saving an end, whereof we ought to take a
particular care and zeal, as well in small things, as in matters of more
importance. Their houses are built of wood, covered and tiled with Palm Tree
leaves, they have pitchers and vessels made of earth, they are not without the
mystery of weauing, and other curiosities of that kind. They work on Marble,
they have Flutes, Drums, and wooden spoones, they set apart certain places
for Oratories and prayers, and for Churchyards. Their Gardens are artificially
severed into beds, bordered and fashioned with distinct limits; Mother of
Pearl and the shells which contain Pearl, they have in much use and
estimation, of which they make wedges, rasors, sawes, culters, and such like
instruments; They also do make thereof Pearls and great beads to wear about
their necks. They that do dwell in the Islands, have boats very artificially
made, and exceedingly commodious for sailing, which is a certain argument that
they confine upon other Nations that are of a more polished and elegant
behavior. And this also they have of our husbandry, that they cut Cocks and
gelde Boares.

Their bread is usually made of three sorts of roots, which grow there in
great abundance. Neither do they employ much labor in making this bread, for
they do only roste the roots until they are soft and tender. They are very
pleasant to the taste, wholesome and nourishing, they are of a good length, there
being of them of an Ell long, and the half of that in bigness.

There is great store of excellent fruits in these Countries. There are six
kinds of Maple trees, Almond trees of four sorts, and other trees called Obi,
resembling almost in fruit and greatness our Quince trees. Innumerable Wallnut
trees are found there, and of Citron trees the Barbarians have no dearth, nor
of other great and excellent fruits, which we have seen and tasted. They have
moreover Sugarcanes, large in size and in great plenty, they have knowlegde of
our ordinary Apples; they have Palme-trees without number, out of which there
may easily be drawn a juice, which will make a liquor alluding much to wine,
as also whey, vinegar, and honey, the kernels thereof are exceeding sweet. And
they have fruits which the Indians call Cocos, which being green do make a
kind of twine, and the pith is almost like in taste unto the cream of milk:
When they are ripe they serve for meat and drink both by land and sea. And
when they wither and fall from the tree, there sweateth out an oil from them,
which is very good to burn in lamps, and is medicinable for wounds, and not
unpleasant tobe eaten. Of their rindes or barks there are made bottles, and
other like vessels, and the inner skin does serve for tow or moss to stop and
close up the leakes in ships. Men do make Cables and other cordage of them,
which are of sufficient strength to draw a Canon, and are fit for other
domesticke uses. But that which is more special, they do there use the leaves
of Palm trees, which they amasse together, to make sails of them for vessels
of small bulk and burden. They make likewise fine thin mattes of them, and
they do serve for tiles to cover the house without, and for hangings to cloth
the house within. And these houses are built of the branches of trees that are
straight and long, of which they do likewise make pikes, and other sorts of
weapons, as also oars to row with, and vtensils for the house. You are to
note, that these Palme-trees resemble Vines, from whence they gather their
materials for Wine all the year long, which they make without much cost, or
labor. Amongst their herbage and garden fruits; We have seen Melons, Pears
great and little, and sundry sorts of pot-hearbes. And they have also beans.
For flesh, they are stored with a great number of Hogs which are like unto
ours, they have Hens, Capons, Partriges, Duckes, Turtles, Pigeons,
Stocke-doues, and Goats, as one of my Captains does relate. And the Indians
themselves have assured us that there are Cowes and Oxen. There are also sundry
sorts of fish, Harghi, Persereyes, Lize, Soles, Troutes, Shads, Macabises,
Casanes, Pampani, Pilchards, Thorne-backs or Skate-fish, Cuculi, Congers,
Porposes, Rochets, Muskles, Lobsters, and many other, the names whereof I
cannot now remember. But it is probable that there are diverse other kinds,
since those which I have recounted were taken hard by our ships. And upon ripe
and serious consideration of that which I have represented unto you, a man may
easily collect, that such plentiful and different varieties of all things, may
yield large means to inhabit there, with great and singular delights. There
is stuff for Marchpanes and sweet confections of all sorts, without borrowing
any spice for the composition of them elsewhere. And for my Mates the Mariners,
besides those particulars which I have before set down, there will be no want
of Gammons, Sausages, and other salt meats which hogs do yield; neither of
vinegar, spiceries, and other sauces that serve for delicacy, and to awake the
appetite. And you must observe, that many of these things, are the same with
those which we have in our parts, and possibly they are there in greater
abundance; by all which it is easily to be coniectured, that this Country is
fit for the production of all that which grows in Europe.

The riches which I have seen in those parts, is Silver and Pearl; another
Captain in his Relation, does report that he has seen Gold, which are the
three most precious darlings that lie and are cherished in the bosom of
Nature. We have also both of us seen many Nutmegs, much Masticke, Ginger, and
Pepper. There is also Cinnamum; and it is likely that Cloves may be found in
those parts, since so many other sorts of Spiceries and aromaticall drugges do
prosper there; and that the rather, because these Countries lie very near the
parallel of the Isles of Terr^natte, Bachian, and the Moluccos. There an^
likewise materials for all sorts of silk, and we^ have seen Anise-seed, and
excellent good Ebony, as also other kinds of wood proper for the building of as
many ships as one will desire, and stuff to make sailesf or the same. Three
sorts of materials there are wherewithal to make cordage, and one o^^ them is
very like unto our hemp. More over out of the oil of Cocos, whereof I have
already made mention, there is a kind of bi^tuminous stuff extracted, called
Galagald which may be well used for pitch. They make also a kind of rosen
with which the Indians pitch their boats, which they call Piraques. And since
there are Goats and Cowes in those parts, without question we^ shall have
Goat Skins, leather, tallow, and flesh in full abundance. The Bees which we
have seen there do make proof, that there will be no scarcety of honey and
wax. And there is good appearance to discover many other things which are not
yet known, to say nothing touching thefor me and site of the Country. Unto all
which if that be adjoined, which the industry of man may contribute to those
parts, since there is such abundance of commodities which the Country it
self does yield, and such hope to transport thither those things which grow
with us, the best and choicest whereof that Peru and new Spain bring forth, I
have resolved to transfer thither; it is to be hoped, that this will so
enrich that Country, that it will be able to nourish and furnish not only the
Inhabitants of the same, and those of America, but give an accession unto
Spain it self both of riches and extent of Command: and this may be
accomplished after the manner which I have proiected, and will unfold unto those
which shall lend an assisting hand for the guiding and consummation of this
work.

Now by that land which we have already discovered outwardly and along the
shores, without entrance into the inward parts, we do conceive a certain
argument, that as much riches, commodities, and greatness, may be hoped for
from thence, as we have already in these Countries. And you may be pleased to
understand, that my principal aim was to take a view only of these ample
regions which we have discovered: for by reason of many sickenesses which have
weakened me, and some other chances whereof I will at this time make no
mention, I was not able to suruay all which I desired, neither could I in a
full month have seen all that, which I was of my self inclinable to view.

You are not to make your judgment of the Indians that inhabit these
Countries, according to the honor of the people here, or conceive them to be
affected with the same desires, pleasures, necessities, or estimation of things
that we are: But you are to make account that they are a people whose care is
studiously placed upon this, that they may live easily in this world, and pass
their days with the least pain and perturbation they can. And this is indeed
their practice, for they do not bestow themselves on those things, which with
such vexation and torment we here labor to obtain.

There are found in this Country as many commodities, both for the support and
delectation of the life of man, as may be expected from a soil that is
manureable, pleasant and very temperate. It is a fat and a fertile land,
wherein many places Clay is found, which will prove of excellent use to build
houses, and to make tiles and brickes, and will serve for Whatsoever is usually
made of earth. There is no dearth of Marble and other good stones, wherewith if
there be occasion there may be built structures of greater State and
Magnificence.

The Country abounds in wood, fit for all works and uses, whereunto the
same is commonly put. There are spacious and goodly plains, and fields that
are divided and interlaced with brooks, trenches, and rivers. There are great
and high rocks, sundry torrents, rivers great and little, on which watermilles
for corn may with much commodiousnesse be built and placed, as also Engines to
make Sugar, Tucking-milles, Forges, and all other instruments which in their
use do require water.

We have found Salt Pits there, and which is a note of the fertility of the
soil, there are in many places Canes whereof some are five or six handfuls
thick, with fruit answerable to that proportion. The top of that fruit is very
small and hard, and the skin thereof is exceeding sweet. There are also Flints
for fire, equal in goodness with those of Madrid. The bay of Saint James and
Saint Philip has twenty leagues of bank, and is without mudde; Into which
there is a sure and safe entrance both by day and night. It is sheltered and
covered with many houses, which in the day time we have seen a far off to
send forth smoke, and in the night to show forth fire.

The Haven called The true Cross is of that spacious capacity, that it is
able to contain a thousand Ships. The botome as I have said is without
mudde, and has a blackish colored sand wherewithal it is covered. There are
no gulfes or deep pits, but an assured and easy anchorage in what part soever
you will, from forty to half a fadome; and it is between the mouths of two
rivers, the one whereof is as great as that of Quadalguiuer, and has mud of a
fadom deep, over which our Shaloppes and boats did pass.

For the other river, when our Skiffs went to water there, they found the
entrance safe and easy. And a man may from the very mouth of the river take in
as much fresh water as he will. The place where ships may be unloaded has
three leagues of gravel, mingled with little flints blackish and very heavy,
which will serve for balaste for ships. The bank is straight and united, on
which much green grass does grow and prosper, and that makes me to conceive
that the Sea does not beat or rage thereupon; I observe that the trees are
straight, and the branches not dismembered, which is a token that there are no
tempests there. Touching the Port, besides the commodities which I have already
discoursed of, there is one of marvelous pleasure and contentation. And that
is, that at the dawning of the day you shall hear from a wood which is near at
hand, a sweet and various harmony of a thousand birds of all sorts, among
which we could distinguish the Nightingales, Black-birds, Quails, Goldfinches,
Swallows almost without number, Parrochitos, and one Parret we marked there,
and creatures of sundry other kinds, even down to Grasse-hoppers, and
Fieldcrickets.

Every Morning and Evening we received a most odoriferous sweet smell, sent
unto our nostrells from the infinite diversity of Flowers and Herbs which
grow there, amongst which we observed the blossoms of Oranges and Basil. All
which (with a number of other varieties) does make us think that the air is
clear and healthie, and that the nature of the place is of a good temperature.
The Haven and the Bay are therefore of the greater estimation, because they have
the neighborhood of so many goodly Islands that are there, and especially of
those seven, which are said to have two hundredth leagues of extent: and surely
one of them (which is some twelve leagues distant from the Haven) is fifty
leagues in circuit. In brief SIR, I do affirm unto your Majesty, that you
may give command to have a goodly and great City built in this Port and Bay,
which are in fifteen degrees and forty minutes of the Southern Elevation,
and those that shall inhabit there, shall have plenty of riches, and all
other conueniencies which they can desire. Time will show and discover all
these commodities, and in this place there may be made the discharge and
unloading of all the wares and merchandises of the Countries of Chilly, Peru,
Panania, Macaraqua, Guttimala, New-Spaine, Terre-natte, and the Philippines,
all which Countries are under the command of your Majesty. And if you shall
acquire unto your self the Dominion of these Seigniories which I do now
present, I do make so great an esteem of them, that besides their being the
Key of all the rest, they will (in my opinion) prove another China or Iapan,
and equallize the other rich Islands which are on this side of Asia, in trafique
of curious and precious merchandises, to speak nothing of the augmentation and
extent of your power, and the establishment which you may make unto your self
of your Dominions, by the accession of so great a Country. That which I have
given unto your view in my discourse, is of much slenderness, in regard of
that which I do probably conceive of this land, the which I am ready to make
appear in the presence of Mathematicians. Neither will I vex this paper to
demonstrate unto you, that these Countries will be able at the first aboard to
nourish twenty thousand Spaniards. In sum, this is SIR, the world whereof
Spain is the Center, and that which I have related, is the nail by which you
may judge of the whole body, which I pray you to take into your observation.

You may judge by that which I have already represented, what the goodness
and temperature of the air is: whereunto this may be added for a further
testimony, that although all our Company were strangers, yet never a one of
them was sick, albeit they were in continual travel and labor, and did
sometimes sweat, and sometimes take wet. They drank water fasting, and fed
many times on that which the earth did there bring forth. Neither had they any
regard to keep themselves from the Serenes, nor from the Moon or Sun, which
indeed in those parts is not ouer-vehement. Only about Midnight, they covered
themselves with Wool, and did lie and repose themselves thereupon. And for the
Inhabitants, they are commonly healthie, and many of them very aged, although
they have nothing but the bare earth for their pallet: which is an argument of
the wholesomenesse and pureness of the soil. For if it were a wet and weeping
ground, or had any viciousness in the mould, they would raise their lodgings
higher from the earth, as they do that live in the Philippines, and other
Countries which I have viewed. And this is further confirmed by their Flesh and
Fish, which although it be unsalted, yet will it keep sweet, and without
corruption two days. And the fruits which are brought from thence are
exceeding good, as we had proof by two that I took care to bring along with
me, although they had not their full maturitie and grouth when I gathered them
from the Tree. We have not seen any barren and sandy ground, nor any
Thistles, or trees that are thornie or whose roots do show themselves, no
Marshes or Fennes, no Snow upon the Mountains, no Snakes or Serpents, no
Crocodiles in the Rivers, no Worms that use with us to hurt and consume our
Grain, and to work us so much displeasure in our houses, no Fleas,
Cater-pillers, or Gnats. This is a Prerogative that has the advantage of all
the privileges that nature has bestowed on other places, and is worthy to be
compared, or rather preferred before any delicacie of the Countries of India,
some of which are abandoned and uninhabited, merely by reason of these
incommodities, and of sundry others that are distasteful unto the Inhabitants,
as my self have oftentimes been witness.

These (SIR) are the virtues and excellencies of the Countries which I have
discovered, of which I have already taken the possession in the name of your
Majesty, and under your Royall-Banner, as appears by the Acts which I keep
safely in my power, whereunto I proceeded after this ensuing manner.

First (SIR) we erected a Cross, and built a Church in honor of our Lady of
Loretto. Then we caused twenty Masses to be celebrated there, and our troops
made have thither to gain some Indulgences. We also made a solemn Procession,
and observed the Feast of the blessed Sacrament, the which was carried in
Procession, your Banner being ever displayed, and marching before it, through a
great Circuit of Countries, which were honored with the presence of the same.

In three several places we set up your Titles, in every one of which we
prepared and erected two Columns, with the Arms of your Majesty tricked and
garnished thereupon: so that I may with good right affirm, that since this
will challenge to be one of the Parts of the World, the Impresse of Plus vltra
is accomplished, and because it stretches unto the continent, whether it be
forward or behind it skills not, the bounds of your Dominions are with much
spaciousness enlarged. Now all this which I have performed, receives its root
from this the faithful zeal which I bear unto your Majesty, that to all the
Titles which you already do possess, you may adjoyne this which I represent,
and that the name of TERRA AVSTRALIS INCOGNITA may be blazoned and spread over
the face of the whole world to the glory of God, who has revealed this
Country, and has given me the grace to guide my course thither, and to
return to the presence of your Majesty, before whom I do present and
prostrate my self with the same affection and zeal unto this work which I
had before, and which has grown up with me as it were from my cradle, and
for the nobleness and worth thereof, I do still tender and cherish the same
with the greatest love that can be.

I do confidently believe, that your Majesty does use so much prudence in
your Councels, and are so magnanimous and full of Christian piety, that you
will (with your best care) embrace all the conducements which may further the
habitation of these new-discouered Countries. And the principal reason to put
a tie and obligation upon us not to leave them abandoned, is, in regard that
this is the sole ordinary way to establish the knowledge of God, and faith
amongst them, and to bring to pass that his name may be adored and called
upon, where the Devil usurps so much reverence and invocation. And this
ought to be embraced with the more readiness, because it is the channel to
convey and disperse all abundance of commodities amongst your subjects. And
hereby you shall be eased of many disturbances and vexations, which will
assuredly be put upon you, in case the Heretics should enter and nestle
there, and should vent their erroneous doctrines amongst them, whereby they
would convert all the blessings which I have hitherto recounted unto you, into
assured incommodities and mischiefs, and would arrogate unto themselves the
name of the Lords of the Indias, to the utter ruin and desolation of those
countries. I make no question but your Majesty well weighs of what importance
this danger of which I speak may prove, and what evil consequence some other
hazards may carry with them, which are either at this time imminent, or may
succeed hereafter. And if this should happen, it would cost you innumerable
thousands of gold and men, before you shall be able to give a remedy unto the
same. Acquire therefore SIR, whiles that occasion is offered you (that one day
you may purchase heaven unto your self;) acquire (I say) with a little money
which you mis-place upon Peru, a neuer-dying reputation, and this New-world
with all the benefits which it reaches out unto you. And since there is none
that craves a reward for this good tidings that is brought you concerning so
great and singular a blessing, which God has bin pleased to lock up until your
happy time, I am he SIR, that do demand it, and my humble request unto you
is only this, that you would be of that gratiousnesse unto me, as to dispatch
and give me mine answer: for the Gallions are ready to hoyse sail, and I have
much way to go, and many things must be fitted and disposed for the voyage.
There is no hour passes, which carries not with it an assured loss both in
regard of spiritual and temporal blessings, the damage whereof can never be
made up, or repaired.

If upon a bare suspicion Christoferus Columbus did pursue his design with so
much obstinacy, you are not to account it strange in me, if the things which I
have beheld with mine eyes, and touched with mine hands, do put some kind of
constraint upon me to be importunate.

Let it therefore please your Majesty, amongst so many expedients which you
have at hand, to sever and put apart some one for the accomplishment of this
work, that after all these languishments, I may at length meet with the
success of my desires. I do assure you that you will find my propositions
most just, and that I shall be of sufficiency to give you satisfaction in all
things. This, SIR, is a great work, against which the devil does bandy
himself with all the puissance he may; And it is not consonant to reason, to
abandon these Countries to his tyranny and power, which do know your Majesty
for their Patron and Defender.

FINIS.

