A LETTER WRITTEN BY A FRENCH GENT: of the King of BOHEMIA his Army:
Concerning the Emperor FERDINAND his Embassage into FRANCE.

Translated out of the French Coppie.

Printed at Flushing. 1620.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY A FRENCH GENTLEMAN, OF THE KING OF BOHEMIA HIS ARMY,
Concerning the Emperor FERDINAND, his Embassage into FRANCE.
NOT to meddle with (what every man knows) the insatiate Ambition of the House
of AUSTRIA, in both the branches thereof, which all Christendom shortly will
not be enough to content, as having long since prepared the way to that Fifth
Monarchy, which certain Religious Persons Confidents of Spain affirm to be
as necessary for the preservation and increase of the Catholic Religion, as
is the Popes Spiritual Monarchy. Nor to speak of the Cruelties which the
Princes of this House have given way to, in the Indyes, in the Low Countries,
and in all places where they have extended their Dominions; nor the Designs or
Attempts they have had (open or secret) against England, Ireland, Venice, or
France it self, wherein they have nourished partialities and indeauoured to
suppress the Laws Salique. For as for Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary,
(Elective Estates) who is ignorant that to perpetuate them to themselves, they
have sought to make them Hereditary and Patrimonies to their Family?

Not to mention also the scornful fashion of the two last Emperors, who
would never send to France to perform office of Congratulation or Condoling,
when it is well known that in their Courts, were public reioycings for the
Murders committed upon the Persons of our two last Henryes, of famous and
immortal memory, refusing to acknowledge the last for a King or a Catholic,
till long time after his absolution, when they saw him Victorious, Tryumphant,
and Absolute in his Government; And yet when that Great and good Prince, was
pleased to use his Credit and Mediation, for according the difference between
certain great Princes of the Empire (friends and allies of this Crown,) one
of the Emperor Rodulphs principal Officers, spared not to say, that the King
of France might meddle with the affairs of his own Kingdom, and let others
rest: When at that time there was on foot a question, touching a certain
litigious Territory, which the said Emperor pretended to be deuolued to him,
and lay, otherwise, very fit for him and one of his Brothers. Not I say to
mention or repeat what has fallen so often under the Pens and discourses of
men, and whereof no man almost is ignorant: I will only succinctly answer to
the Five principal reasons, framed to induce the King to assist the Emperor
Ferdinand, now stripped of the Kingdoms of Bohemia, and Hungary.

1.
The first is Religion, the ordinary pretext of such as undertake to invade
others, or to draw from them aid and supplies. It is true that the hard
measure offered the Protestants of Bohemia, by the Officers of the Emperor, (as
is apparent by the frequent Complaints and remonstrances presented by the
said Protestants to his Imperial Majesty, and of late by the Apology and
declaration Published in diverse Languages) gave the first hint and occasion to
the last Combustion, and brought forth the fruits and changes that we now
behold. But this is not the first time that the Bohemians have in general
complained of the force offered their Privileges, and Liberties; and of the
breach of the fundamental Laws of their Estate, (which is in very deed
Elective) and that the Imperial branch of Austria, has endeavored to make it
Hereditary, as well as the Empire; to the prejudice of the Imperial Liberties
and Constitutions, and particularly to that of the Golden Bull, which expressly
forbids the perpetuating of the Succession in one and the same Family. In a
word then, it is a business of State and not of Religion: Besides that, the
Bohemians make it appear (and they think with sufficient proof) that
Ferdinand was Elected King of Bohemia by the surprise of three or four
Officers of that Kingdom, Pentioners and Partisans of Spain, without calling
thereto the assistance of the three incorporate Provinces, Silesia, Morauia,
and Lusatia, which have ever had, and ought to have, their free voices and
assents. Again it is most true, that at such time as the Estates of the said
Kingdom, expelled the Jesuits (whom they charged as the Authors of that
mischief) they took into their protection, all other orders of Churchmen,
who even to this hour have not received any interruption in their
Ecclesiastical Functions, or in the free inioying of their revenues and
Benefices. Besides that, King Frederick at his entrance, took a solemn oath
for their maintenance, and protection, and signified as much to the King in his
Letters, Dated at Amberg the Twentieth of October last. And questionless if
he should proceed otherwise, he should be ill advised, in regard that a good
and great part of that Estate consists of Catholics. It is then a mere
Columny to say that it is a business of Religion, and that the Design of the
Protestants is to suppress the Catholics. The falsehood also of this
assertion is proved by the Suffrages, that a Prince Catholic had in his
Election to Bohemia, and in like number as had another Prince of the Lutheran
profession: each of them having had six Voices: And since all this is matter
of Fact, the proof or disproofe thereof is most easy.

2.
The Second reason alleged, is Alliance: because the Emperor Ferdinand, is by
the Mother side Uncle to our Queen, whose Husband they say is tied in respect
of so straight a Bond to assist him: But the most straight Bond is of a King to
his Subjects, as of a Father to his Children; and the safety of an Estate
surpasses all other considerations. The transcendent Greatness of this House
has cost France dear enough in our days, without seeking farther proof of
this in other Histories then in that of the last League; unless we will now
approve, what was almost two thousand years since said of our Nation, That
we as soon forget an Injury, as a Benefit. This also is a point of
Consideration, that the King in making himself a party for the House of
Austria, divides his Subjects that are of different Religion, before the
wounds of the State be thoroughly closed; offends his Oldest and surest
Friends and Allies; and brings his Kingdoms into the danger of a War
abroad, and of trouble at home. For if he employ his forces against the
Palatinat for the diuersion demanded; what other effects may he expect? Since
the Palatinat during the absence of King Frederick, is under the Protection of
the Estates of the united Provinces, and of the Princes of the Union. Again,
the King (shall as in a bravery) empty his Treasure for a business far from
us; and which concerns not directly nor indirectly, his Estate or Person;
being (as I have said) a matter neither of Religion nor Conscience. In
yielding also Supplies to one party before he hear the other, his Majesty
tacitly Condemns one, and is Guilty of that which all the Laws of the world
and he himself forbids, in ordinary Suites and differences, between party
and party; it being likely that before many days be past, the said King
Frederick, his Friends and Allies, will give his Majesty an account of what
has passed in this business, and acquaint him with the cause and motives of so
great a change and enterprise.

3.
The third inducement is the assistance and Protection that Kings owe one
another; especially such as are in distress: But let the Emperor be pleased
to remember how he and his Predecessors, have evermore neglected France;
expressly forbidden the Princes of the Empire, Friends and Allies of this
Crown, to assist our Kings of later times, in their necessities; much less
that they have ever supplied them with men or money: Let him remember also the
refusal, he lately made the Duke of Neuers, of the Kings mediation, favor,
and authority, for settling the Affairs of Bohemia, when they were yet in Good
terms; I mean during the Life of the Emperor Mathtas, and many months
before this new Election. But if the King will favor one of the parties (as by
reason of State and for diuersion it has been at other times in practice)
there may be showed to his Majesty, half a hundred Letters of the deceased
King, and of some of the Kings his predecessors, containing thanks for the
good and notable services performed by the house of the Prince Palatine and his
Allies, to their Persons and Crowns in their occasions of need. The
instructions given to such as have been within these thirty or forty years,
sent into Germany confirm this: Besides, the straight alliance that King Henry
the great (a most wise Prince) settled between him and the body of the Union
in Germany, a small time before his death; approved since by the King now
Reigning, and by the Queen his Mother then Regent, when the Duke of Deux Ponts
came into this Kingdom to condole the last Kings murdering. In like sort the
Contracts and Obligations upon proof in the Chamber of Accounts for many
sums of money, lent and paid before hand, by the said house of the Prince
Palatine, his near kindred and Allies, (of a part whereof France is yet a
debtor.) These (I say) are proofs sufficient of what I have said, and oblige
his Majesty to lend his assistance rather to this then to the other party.

4.
The fourth induction, is the dangerous example of Reuoltes (for with such
terms do they qualify this change, to make it the more odyous, without
distinguishing between Kingdoms Elective and Hereditary; Especially since
between Elective Kingdoms, there is difference of Condition as all the world
knows. And it is to be noted, that at the Sacring and Coronation of the
Kings of Bohemia, the King first swears to observe the Laws and Privileges
of the Country, and then the people take the Oath of fidelity. And at that
joyful entry (as it is termed) of Antwerp, which is the solemnity of Creating
and receiving a new Duke of Brabant, it is delivered in express terms that
he declares himself fallen from his Right and Dignity, if he make not good
the Articles that he has promised and sworn to the people. So did the
deceased Duke of Anion, last Duke of Brabant promise and pronounce in the
year, 1583. For between the proceedings of the Low Countries, and of Bohemia,
there is a great resemblance. The enactions and Cruelties of the Duke of Alua,
were indifferently exercised upon the Protestants and Catholics, The Count of
Egmont (whose head he stroke off) was no Hugonet: no more then was the most
part of so many thousand other of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, whom he
bragged, at his departure thence, that he had made an end of by the hand of the
Hangman. And it is most true, that the inhumane and barbarous courses taken by
the Count of Bucquoy, for these fifteen or sixteen Months, in the War
against the Bohemians, thinking with Fire and Sword to bring them to obedience
(which is wisdom against the hair) served but to hasten the reiection of
Ferdinand, and the Election of Frederick: Not to mention the obstinate
denial, made to admit or hear the Deputies of the Estates of that Kingdom,
and of the Provinces incorporate unto it, at the last assembly at Franckfort,
when the said Ferdinand was advanced to the Crown Imperial: And of this
kind of wisdom, was also the Refusal made lately by the same Emperor
Ferdinand to his Subjects, of the lower Austria, and Stiria, who made offer to
serve him with their Lives and goods, in withstanding the Invasions of the
Bohemians, conditionally that he would Confirm their Privileges, and grant
them free use of their Religion: It is he himself, that in the like case
said once, That he had rather be a Prince without Subjects, then to have any,
of a contrary Religion to his own. This humor of his expressed in that
Language, made such an Impression and apprehension of him in his people,
(though he be held otherwise a Good and a wise Prince) as it was not the least
reason of the Alteration we now see. Happy are those Princes, that having
need of Counsel, are able to make choice of Wise and Faithful Councillors,
such as have no other aim but their Masters advantage, without regard to
their own particular interest. There have been in this House, Great and
Famous Princes for Valor and Virtue, but these of later time have been ill
Served and ill advised. Witness their Losses in the Low Countries, and now, and
to come; if they again take not the way they have left, of sweetness and
gentleness.

5.
The Fifth and last, principal reason is, That the Turk will infallibly, lay
hold on the occasion of these Combustions, to serve his turn, and to advance
his Conquests, to the hurt of Christendom; which is not unlikely? And if he
do it not, it is either the fault of his little wisdom, or of his weakness;
which yet may be avoided by leaving this new King in quiet Possession, now
that he is Elected, and that without Suite or laboring of his own, nay
without his own Knowledge, and being forcedly as it were carried on, by the
Counsel of his Friends, to the Acceptance of this Crown, which has been
since set on his Head; accompanied with all the Forms and Solemnities due and
Correspondent to the fundamental and most ancient Laws of Bohemia; a
Kingdom Free and Privileged if ever any: Whereas, on the Contrary, if he be
molested; and dispossessed; He will be, by the law of Nature, and of Reason,
enforced to inuit his Friends and Allies to aid him; As the Princes of
Germany; the Kings of Denmark, and Sweden; the Hans Towns, and the Protestant
Cantons of Switzerland, with whom he and some other Princes of the Union, are
Confederate for their common Defense. Not to speak of England, and the United
Provinces, whence he cannot but receive Powerful succors. Not to speak also
of certain Princes, and Estates Catholic, which hold good Correspondence
with him: Nor of the Prince of Transiluania, who offreth him his best means
and Forces.

In the mean time, it is a false affirmation that the said King entertayneth
Intelligence or commerce with the Turk, having Friends so many and so mighty
in Christendom, without being driven to seek them else where with so great
danger. But if the Prince of Transiluania Fortify himself on that side, (as
he has heretofore done) for his better settling in his Principallity, at such
time as the House of Austria sought to cross him, as it had done before, the
unfortunate Gabriel Battori: and disturb him in his Possession, it is beside
the purpose and concerns not Bohemia; nor is in any sort applyable to this
new King. But who knows not, how the greater part of Hungary, and of other
Principalities of that part of Christendom, are in conclusion fallen into the
hands of the Common Enemy of Christendom?

In a word, this Business is the true Touchstone whereby to distinguish
between good and ill Counsels, and to discern the true French from the
Spaniard, or favorers of the Spanish Party. *

FINIS.

