A RELATION OF A NEW LEAGVE MADE BY THE EMPEROVR of GERMANY, with other
Princes, Potentates and States Catholic, against the Enemies of the Roman
CATHOLICK-RELIGION, WITH The Names of those Princes. AS ALSO, The true Numbers,
both of Horse and Foot, which every one of them offers to set forward so
great a Design. Unto which is added the Copy of a Letter sent by the King of
Spain to Pope VRBINE the 8. Printed according the Spanish Copy set forth at
Madrill. Unto all which is likewise added: The Discovery of a New Spanish
Armado, threatening with Fire and Sword to Invade ENGLAND.

Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1626.

A RELATION OF THE League, made by the Emperor of Germany, with other Princes,
Potentates, and States Catholic, against the Enemies of the
Roman-Catholick-Religion.
A Novelty of so high a nature as this is, (in which all Christendom, or the
greatest part of it, stands interessed) should not Present it self to the
world, without the Noble attendance of Probability and Possibility, the one
to confirm the Truth, the other to enable the Action: Both which (to clear
understanding eyes) are Wayters upon this.

For if we consider the Hate which the Spaniard and his Colleagues bear to
our Kingdom; It is a likelihood sufficient to persuades us, that he is
preparing Forces: and if we look, but upon his Indian treasure, his Command
over several Kingdoms, his Armies in several places, and the desires which
his Subjects have to set footing in our Country, we may find strong
arguments of his Possibility, to begin an Invasion, or any attempt else.

But because our Nation, are not apt to fear any Spanish danger (how loud
soever it speaks) unless they hear it roaring at their doors; It will be
no great loss of time, to listen to this short Story, which the Spaniard
relates (to this purpose) in his own haughty Language.

The Spanish Relation.
BLessings from Heaven, and good wishes on Earth, be ever attendant on All
those, who are zealous in the service of GOD, and the Christian Common-good: as
also, on this League United together by the Emperor, and celebrated with all
the Rites in Brussels before the most Excellent INFANTA, both in regard of the
Authority, which her Altezza (or Highness) has in that City, as also, for the
Situation, honor, and commodity of the place.

And albeit, I am well assured, that his Imperial Majesty, has with much
deliberation and wisdom, made trial in his Judgment of all those things
which are comprehended in this League; yet notwithstanding (as well to satisfy
my self as to discharge the duty belonging to my place, which I hold under his
Catholic Majesty) I will briefly set down my knowledge in this great
Business, because happily, some may gather the fruit of experience from it, as
the Be suckes Honey out of a bitter Flower.

First then, it has bin held a matter of great importance, that in this League
should be comprehended, his Holiness, the Majesty's Imperial and Catholic,
all the Princes of the House of Austria, the Catholic Electors, all the chief
Princes, Potentates, and Republickes Catholic, in Germany, Italy, Flaunders,
etc. well affected to the Sea Apostolical, and to their Majesty's. Herein
showing a desire to sow Peace, Quietness and Justice, amongst all those
States, over which God has placed them, thereby to establish a new League
everlasting and hereditary, as Friends to Friends, and Enemies to Enemies, with
Penal clauses and other necessary Particulars.

Secondly, that this League should be published and declared by Ambassadors or
Agents, (Ordinary or Extraordinary) to all other Kings, Princes, Potentates,
and States, which are Friends, albeit not well affected, or being of another
Religion. For this must work one of these two Things; either they must send to
this Diet (or Assembly) and enter as the rest do into the League upon the same
Conditions; or if they refuse so to do, then are they to be excluded and
barred from any benefit which by the League may arise, and so be branded with
the Notes, marks, and blemishes of Obstinacy, and evil Hearts, they of the
League hereby having just cause given them, to beware of such people.

Concerning Trade and Commerce, betwixt those of the League, their Friends,
Subjects and Vassals; the same liberty shall be given them which heretofore
they have had without Exception, and without any new Customs, Impositions or
other Duties, than those necessary Payments which must be dispended to fight
against Rebels and known Enemies.

What Occurrent, fact, or difference soever shall happen between any of the
Colleagued Princes, or any of their Subjects; it shall be ended and taken up
by the Sovereign Prince to whom the acknowledgement thereof does appertain,
or by him, who with consent of the rest of the League, or the major part, shall
be held fit to decide it: and what sentence he sets down shall peremptorily
stand, upon pain of being Expulsed from the Society of the League, or to
feel the sharpness of their Indignation.

The Pope, Emperor, every King, Prince, Potentate, and State, which enters into
this League, shall give the Number of such Forces (Horse and Foot) which
willingly they intend to furnish; as well those which they have already raised,
and paid in their own Kingdoms and Territories, as of any other Troops,
which they are to raise with all expedition and at their proper Charges, upon
any occasion whatsoever, to the due observance of the League, which is
confederated together for Three special ends.

1 The first, to Conserve Peace, Justice and Amity, amongst the Colleagues,
and to Chastise any one that falls off, and does not accomplish what he
promises.

2 The second, to prevent, curb and bridle any other Prince, (albeit not one
of the League) whenever he offers to Invade, directly or indirectly, any of
the Confederate Princes.

3 Thirdly, to make quick War upon the Common Enemy, as Rebels, Turks,
Moors, Tartars, etc. Provided there be a general Consent so to have it done.

Now, to show, that for every Prince to deliver up the Number of all such men,
as he has already leauyed and paid, (or the greater part of them) can be to
him no danger or loss, but rather a most assured safety and profit. And it is
first to be considered, that none of them can receive any harm, seeing they
have the like interest whether they maintain their men within or without their
State. Secondly, concerning the peril, it is certain that leauying in their
ordinary Garrisons, for the time that may be necessary some expert Commanders,
and diverse skillful Soldiers, which ever any Prince used to have without pay
only for his defense, they cannot therefore run into any peril or danger.

Now, for the third point which is Safety, It is plain, that whenever any
Stranger shall attempt to wrong any of the Confederated Princes, who punctually
have delivered all or part of such Forces as by them are leauyed; It is most
certain (and so resolved upon) that All the rest shall take his part, and
defend him by such means, as in their best Judgments shall be held fit.

Hereupon it is inferred, that if in the beginning of those troubles and
Calamities, which set Germany, Flaunders, Italy, and France on fire, there had
been such another League with a ready and faithful Intelligence passing
between those Christian Princes, which were truly just, and religiously
given; Then, it had kept the Germans from Revolting, the Bohemians,
Transilvanians, Hollanders, and Palatinate from Rebelling; neither, had the
Venetians ever so much as dreamed of an Invasion to be made upon the Emperors
Towns; no, nor had the Savoyans and French, put on Arms first against Mantua,
and then against Genoa, wounding (in both these times) the Subjects of his
Catholic Majesty; Neither, had the French and Venetians, spotted their Names
with such infamous reproaches, for Tearing from his Holiness the Valtoline,
which upon the Accord, and engagement of the Christian King himself, was
delivered up in trust to the hands of his Holiness: Nay more, those other
infinite Insolences, Sacriledges, and Inhumanities (which for modesties sake I
bury in silence) had never been so barbarously committed, to the shedding of
so much Innocent blood, the loss of so much wealth, and utter ruin of so much
noble Reputation.

Great hope therefore there is, that such a number of Christian Princes,
entering together into this Holy League, there will follow not only an
amendment of Abuses past, but a prevention of many Evils to come. It being held
for certain, that when this League is fully published and made known, all the
Opposites against it, shall never be able to beget a second Combination
(amongst themselves) of sufficient Power to contest or contend against the
Fourth part of this.

Here follows the Number both of the Foot and Horse, (Infantry and
Cavallerie) leauyed and set forth by the vnder-named Princes.
THe Pope in regard of the Churches Estate, does offer 1000. Horse, and 8000.
Foot. The Emperor, in regard of all his States 4000. Horse, and 20000 Foot. The
Catholic King of Spain, in regard of all his Command in Spain, Italy, and
Flanders, 8000. Horse, 20000. Foot. The King of Poland, 2000. Horse, and 4000.
Foot. The Archduke Leopold, 500. Horse, and 3000. Foot. The Elector of
Colleyne, 500 horse, and 3000 foot. The Elector of Mentz, 500. horse, and 400.
foot. The Elector of Trever, 500. horse, and 3000. foot. The Duke of Baviere,
400. horse, and 3000. foot. The Duke of Saxony (who is a Friend) 400. Horse,
and 3000. Foot. The Archbishop of Sarzburg, 300. horse and 1000. foot. The Duke
of Newburg, 500. horse, and 2000. foot. The great Duke of Florence, 1000. horse
and 3000. foot. The Duke of Parma, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Duke of
Mantua, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Duke of Modena, 300. horse, and 1000.
foot. The Duke of Vrbine, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The State of Genoa, 1000.
horse, and 4000. foot. The State of Luca, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The
Cantons Catholic of the Swissers, 2000. Horse. Which in all amount to 22100.
Horse, and 87000. Foot: a number sufficient to work all the Effects before
treated.
But if at any time, occcasion should call for a greater Army, every Prince is
to bring in his proportionable number, according to the former agreement.

So that upon any just cause, every Prince must send in his quantity of
Artillery, Munition, and all other things necessary fitting those numbers,
which he furnishes.

Then, that his Holiness, with those Kings and Princes, who are furnished with
Galleys, Ships, or other Defenses by Sea, shall be ready with them upon any
occasion offered, according to that Rate to which they bind themselves.

Also, that the Princes of the League shall with one consent (advisedly to be
taken) Elect a General out of all this assembly, who shall be a man of
Quality, Valor, and Experience sufficient.

By this means, the divine Majesty will assist and Crown this holy
Enterprise, It tending only to his glory and the Exaltation of his holy Name;
as also, for the general Peace and Concord, of the whole Christian world, and
withal to Bridle and Confound all malicious, turbulent, and ill-affected
Spirits.

Printed at Seuill with Authority, by Simon Fajardo, etc.

The Copy of a Letter from the Catholic Majesty of our Lord the King, to
our holy Father the Pope, VRBANE the VIII.
HOly Father: I received your Letters of the 12. of the last Month, which your
Holiness sent me by the Post who came from Vrbine and Poland to Millane. In
answer of which, I say, that before I received them, I was well advertised and
sufficiently informed, of all the Novelties therein set down, and of all those
things which are comprehended in the League; for they have been many days
about it, to mold it, and reduce it into Form, (as in my writings dated the 6.
of November,) I have made it appear to your Holiness. Let them perform the
best of their power, and do what they can, yet your Holiness knows, that God
is able to effect much more: and I for my part (his divine Arm assisting me)
will (as I am bound) do my utmost in defense of the Catholic Faith, as my
Forefathers have done before me.

In Millane and Naples, I have commanded my Governors to join their Forces, to
divert the Intentions of those Heretics which live there, and to appoint the
Rendevous in the State of Millane.

Be your Holiness assured, that if you have occasion to use them, you may;
for albeit, I give no Cause to have war made upon me, yet (though their
numbers be but small) they have good hearts, so that God in behalf of the
Church, will be on their side and assist them.

The Horse and Foot amount to 80000. men, and if this be not sufficient, I
have given order to the Duke of Feria, to Advise me with speed, who instantly
and personally shall hasten to mend it; albeit it be done with a small number
of Men, part of them to be leauyed out of these Kingdoms of Spain, which
shall rise to 80000. more.

By this means your Holiness may both see and know the Obedience of such a
Son, and I the way to serve so holy a Father, whom God prosper, and guard,
for the Augmentation of the Holy Faith as the Catholic Church has need, and
I desire.

Madrid, etc.
THus far our warlike News, of Confederations and Vnitings so many Princes
in a Holy League (as themselves Christen it) has betrayed it self to you in
English, which so perfectly and boastingly before spoke nothing but Spanish.

And to strengthen this Report, here is another Confirmation sent by a friend
out of Spain, to his acquaintance in London, in this manner.

Sir, albeit I make no doubt but that the extraordinary preparations of the
Spanish Fleet, are by Letters arrived in England, yet by reason of the frequent
houering of the Spanish here in Marseilles, I presume, you cannot meet a more
exact knowledge of the Particulars, then these which I send you, holding my
self bound to acquaint you with the Truth.

The certain place of their intended Invasion, is not published; but common
muttering whispers in our Ears, that it is for England, Ireland, and the
Netherlands, yet some suspect, it is against the Venetians. But leaving that,
be pleased to cast your Eye on these Particulars following, which are accounted
here for truths, and so we receive them.

Galleasses 200. Ships built after the English fashion 120. Hulkes 020. Pinkes
020. Catches 020. In all 330. Land Soldiers 60000. Noblemen and Gentlemen
being 8000. Voluntaries 8000. Sailors 13000. Great Pieces of Ordnance 70.
Poisoned Bullets for Ordnance 47000. Hollow Bullets filled with wildfire
20000. Muskets and Caleeuers 12000. Partisans 1000.

Besides double Cannons, field Pieces: dry-fats filled with old Nails, and
broken Iron, store of Carriages: necessaries for Sea and Land, without number,
three thousand Spears, Armours of Musket-proofe, Wines, Biskets, Bacon,
Cheese, Beef, Rice, Beans, Pease, Oil, Lamps, Pipes for fresh water,
Torches, Candles, Lanthornes, Hides, large Hogsheads, Wheele-barrowes, Wheels,
Spades, Mattocks, Shouels, Galthrops, Baskets, Boygh-ropes innumerable, and
thirty thousand Pikes pointed with Iron.

The Commanders of this Fleet are to meet with Spinola, who is to be
General of the Forces.

With Spinola, come Tyrone, and the Earl of Argile, with a great number of
Horses, and are to be transported in flat Boats.

The Duke of Sauoy his Son is Admiral of the Spanish, Sir Robert Dudley
Rear Admiral: Sir Griffin Markham, and Sir William Stanley Colonels of the
Regiments, and one Neuill who terms himself Earl of Westmerland, has
likewise a great command.

There are lately arrived at Lisbone twenty armed Elephants from Persia, for
what employment it is incertaine.

And this is the most remarkable News of this Fleet; of which the Turk is so
jealous, that he stands upon his guard.

With so much does a Letter sent from Marseilles acquaint us, but from Malaga
come these tidings. That there was never such warlike provision and preparation
as is now in Spain: Wine, Oil, and Vinegar to a great quantity, being made
ready with ten thousand barrels of small shot, a thousand Kintals, six
thousand Breames, or Bottels, six thousand Baskets for Pioners, with an
incredible number of Spades, Shouels, Scoops, and Mattocks, with powder and
wildfire.

From Dunkirke and other places in the Net herlands under the King of Spain,
are expected eighty ships to be ayders in this great Expedition.

Of Spanish Ships, these are provided.
In Auero 20. In Valencia 20. In Lisbone 20. In Guinny 50. In Cales and Auero
Poole 20. In Saint Sebastians 20. In Naples 40. In Barcelon 50. 240.

Malaga thus (as Marseilles did before) having thundered out her story of
vproares and threatened deuastation: Here steps in a third Trumpetter, and
proclaymes other news, sounding as harshly as the former.

Don Frederick of Toledo is general of the Army by Sea, and the Marquess by
land, who has vowed to lay his bones in England.

The General of the Cauallery, is Don Carolo of Columbo: Commissions being
granted to leuy three thousand Horse, as well Burgonians, as Lorrainers, and
some out of Luremberg.

If the Peace be made in Italy, the greatest part of these Forces, are to go
by Sea, and so to fall into the Spanish Army, which is to set forth on the
first of July.

Spanish Leaders and their Companies.
Don John of Fuentes has a Regiment of ten Companies. Don Ferdinando of
Arragon 10. Don Diego of 10. Coronell Bayard 10. Marquess of Beluedore 10.

Three hundred men being in every Company, which in the five Regiments, amount
to 15000. besides two other Regiments, the names of whose Coronels, I have
forgotten; so that the whole Army consists of one and twenty thousand.

Italian Leaders.
Pedro Aldobrandino Companies 10. Marquess of Gonzales 10. Pedro of Gonzales
10. Don Carolo Spinola commands all the Italians.

The common rumor is, that they intend their course for Ireland; but the most
knowing, say for England, the Dunkerkers (as it is reported) having sownded all
the Seacoast, and assuring them an entrance free from all danger.

Amongst all the Engines and warlike furniture, which comes alongwith them,
they also bring store of Ouens, and Mils made of Iron or Brass, and will make
their issue by the motion of wheels, on which they are mounted.

Thus this great Archer of the World (whose Bow reaches from the East to the
West Indies, and whose string is twisted together by the Hands and Hearts of
Confederated Kings and Princes) shoots his Arrows at this our Kingdom of
England, making account to come and clean the glory of it, and then to march
back into Spain as a Triumphant Conqueror.

This Nimrod is a mighty Hunter, and by his good will, would strike down none
but whole Nations: Havoc he cries what Park so ever he comes into; and the
goodlier the Herds are, the more cruelly does he scatter them. Millions of
poor murdered Indians being the Trophies of his bloody Shambles.

But as the beginning of the first Nimrods Kingdom, was Babell, so the end of
this second (Gods Almighty Arm tumbling down the buildings of his Ambition)
shall be Confusion.

What though five Kings complot, combine, and incorporate their Forces in One,
to fight against Joshua? Let not us fear, but send up our Cries to Heaven, as
the Men of Gibeon (a great and Royal City) sent theirs to Joshua, even to the
Host at Gilgall, and as they to Him, so let us call to God, and say, Withdraw
not thy Hand from thy Servants; Come up to us quickly, and save us, and help
us; for all the Kings of the Amorites (Spinolized and Spaniolized Tyrants)
thine and our Enemies, which dwell in the Mountains, are gathered together
against us.

We must shake off our sins when we do thus, and not cry with a faint and
distrusting voice that he will not hear us, for if we speak to him as we
ought to do, He himself will say thus to our Joshua; Fear them not, for I
have given them into thine hand: None of them shall stand against thee.

And as the Lord kept his Word with Him, so will he with us: He will smite
these Colleagued Enemies to his Truth and Gospel, even to Azekah, and
Makkedah, (their Gibraltars and Magellanes) and as they are chased to Bethhoron
(into Spain) he will (for their poisoned Bullets prepared to shoot at us)
cast down great stones from Heaven upon them, until more dye by that hail,
then by the sword.

Then shall these Confederated Kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Iarmuth, Lachish and
Eglon, fly to their Caves (their Spanish Dens) until the Chief Men of this
our Israel by our Joshua's command, fetch them forth to set their feet upon
the necks of such insolent Insulters.

Shall I read to you, another story of comfort? Hearken then to it.

When Benhadad the King of Aram, had assembled all his Army, with two and
thirty Kings to assist him, having great numbers both of Horses and warlike
Chariots, he besieged Samaria; and sending a disdainful message to Ahab King
of Israel, thus he commanded those that went to terrify him, Tell Ahab
(quoth he) that thy gold is Mine, also thy women and thy fair Children are
Mine; or else, I will send my servants unto thee (as the King of Spain would
now his Ianizaries into England) and they shall search thine House, and the
Houses of thy Servants, and whatsoever is pleasing in thine eyes, they shall
take it in their hands, and bring it away.

But Ahab taking Counsel of the Elders, did at the second sending, refuse to
part from any thing.

Hereupon Benhadad in a rage fell a rauing, and said, The Gods do so to me, and
more also, if the dust of Samaria, be enough to all the people that follow me,
for every man a handful.

Poor Samaria was now in a terrible fear, Benhadad roared, Israel trembled:
but God casting an Eye of Compassion upon their Calamities, and an Eye of
Scorn on the others tyrannies, sent a Prophet to Ahab, who told him this good
tidings (after one Army overthrown by Ahab the year before) I will deliver
this great multitude into thy hands again, and ye shall know that I am the
Lord.

His word was true, the children of Israel stood in the field in the day of
Battle like two little flocks of Kiddes, but the Aramites covered the whole
Country: yet the poor Handful had the victory: the Sheep beat the Lions,
and slew in that day a hundred thousand Aramites (all footmen.)

It is not Number that preuailes, but goodness of the Cause. When Justice
guardes the Standard, Safety is General of the Field.

No matter what proud defiance, a daring Philistine throws into our faces,
there is an Arm Omnipotent can direct a Peeble-stone (being but put into a
Sling) to stick in the Giants forehead, both to strike him dead, and confound
the whole Army that comes along with him.

Regard not the Braues of a blaspheming Rabshecay sent from Senacherib King of
Ashur, to the Cities of Judah, For a voice from the mouth of the God of Hosts,
shall come to an Hezekiah, saying thus much. As for Ashur, He shall not enter
into this City, nor shoot an Arrow at it, nor come before it with a Shield,
nor cast a Mount against it; but he shall return the way he came, and shall
not come into this City. What followed upon this comfortable promise? The same
night, the Angel went out, and smote in the Camp of Ashur, one hundred
fourscore and five thousand men.

Senacherib escaped from the slaughter, but not from Gods vengeance; for
afterward, as in his Temple be was worshipping Nisrech (his God) Adramelech,
and Sharezer his own Sons, slew him with the sword.

Many Examples to this purpose may be brought into the Field, of infinite
Armies, of Idolatrous Nations fighting against Judah and Israel, and yet were
then still (so long as they held in with God) by weak and wasted troops
confounded.

For, God has still a Red Sea to stand up an end on either side of Moses and
the Israelites like a double Brazen wall to guard his people, but to fall down
in rough billows, to ouerwhelme Pharao and his Host.

Yet we must not presume too much upon Gods favor, as if we were his only
Darlings, and all other Nations, Cast-awayes. No there is no such excellence in
us, that he should dote upon our beauty, which is nothing else but a loathsome
Deformity.

We have been scourged lately, with one of David's whips, but the Beating is
forgotten, and therefore we were best take heed, lest this second Rod draws
blood indeed. Our sins are in our hearts, when our swords are in our hands,
and the mustering of the One, frights us from striking with the other. Turn
away the first, and God will teach us how to turn the second upon the bosoms
of our Enemies.

It is folly to go into the field to fight, unless God sends out his Priest,
to have us serve under his Colors: Let us take his pay and we must needs
prove Noble Soldiers: Every Englishman make but peace with his own
Conscience, and be careful that it betrays him not, and he needs not fear
any Spanish Invasion.

Spanish Invasion! These Thunderings and Lightnings, may be but Terrors talked
of, and not seen: or if seen, not certainly aiming where to do mischief:
they may hurt others sooner then Us: These Spanish Canons, happily carry no
Bullets in them, but give only a false fire.

These Rumors and Tumors, Whirlewinds, Vproares and Combustions, filling the
Christian World with Amazement, and us with expectation of some dreadful
Monster to be presented to all wondering eyes, may perchance bring forth only
That ridiculous Mouse, of which the Mountains were so long in labor.

It is well, if it be so: The Beati Pacifici is a string which makes heavenly
Music in a Kingdom.

Yet, if we lift up our heads, to observe what eyes the Spaniard casts at us,
and what good Prayers he shoots after us; Wisdom may soon persuade, that he
does not love us; if not love us, we are not to trust Him, (albeit he lies
still) no more then to trust a sleeping Lion or a Mastiffe: and therefore (not
to dandle our selves too much upon the knees of security) let us rowse up our
English Spirits, and be armed, against this spotted Beast do come, albeit he
be not coming, lest with his paws he tear us in pieces, when we are not
provided for his dreadful Encounters.

Spanish Bulls are fierce at the stake, and worse loose, and although in
Madrill, Civil, and others Cities, they bait them for pleasure, in England
they would yield no such pastime. If Fame therefore, has taught her thousand
Tongues to tell Truth, and that these Castilian Echoes mock us not with Lies,
Is it not high time for every man to girt his loins with the sword, and to
fight Gods Battle, for this Quarrel is against Him?

If this holy League be knit together, to tear Anointed Kings, out of their
hereditary thrones, and to turn Nations out of their Native Countries; It is
not a Holy, but a Deuillish League: A Confederacy of unclean Spirits: An
Union of Discord, and Hellish Music.

Let those then, who have commands over Narrow Seas (whose Nursing Arms most
lovingly embrace our Kingdoms body, busy themselves in their Nauall-Military
Preparations; whilst they on Land muster together to guard our Kingdoms Heart.

Let our English Nobles give Heroical Confrontations to the Spanish Grandees
and Dons: the Gentry hearten on the Commons, and the Commons go with cheerful
faces, against this Enemy, as their Forefathers have done, when they fetched
Honor from other Countries.

Whilst the Divine prays at home, for success abroad: whilst the Lawyer
spends some of his Golden Fees, to the maintenance of Soldiers, in so glorious
a war: whilst Citizens open bounteous Purses, (though they go not in
Person) to defend themselves, and Countrymen: whilst the strong run to
fight, and the weak look to their Houses at home: whilst the Rich empty
their bags, to maintain the poor Soldiers in good clothes and wholesome
diet: Nay, whilst even the very Blind and Lame (when they can do nothing
else) send up their hearty wishes to Heaven (night and day) to crown our Land
with Conquest, to confound all bloody and execrable Confederations with ruin
and shame, and to send home this second Armipotent Armado (if any such there
be) in Tempests, Whirle-winds and Wracks, as that was in Eighty eight. To which
all true hearted Englishmen will cry Amen.

FINIS.

