THE ROMISH FISHER CAVGHT AND HELD IN HIS OWN NET.

OR, A True Relation of the Protestant Conference and Popish Difference.

A Justification of the one, and Refutation of the other.

In matter of FACT. FAITH.

By DANIEL FEATLY, Doctor in Divinity.

Theodoret. Dial. 2. Cap. 24. (...). Orthodox. Thou art caught in thine own
Net. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at the
great South-dore of Paul's. 1624.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, the Lrd Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metrapolitane of all England, etc. my very good Lord.
May it please your Grace:
I Have ever, as much as lay in me, declined, and earnestly contended against
all contentions, and public Conferences in point of Religion, with Romish
Priests, and Jesuits. For, Popery (as I have often learned from your Grace) is
a doctrine of lies; and as it maintains lies, so it can be maintained by no
better support, then of lies. In all conflicts with men of that faction, though
their redoubted wrastlers, in grappling with our Divines, are put to the worst,
yet (like Pericles in the Theater) be they indeed never so much foiled, they
will go about, by their eloquence, to persuade the Spectators, that they
received not, but gave the foil. And as Lysimachus, when he received a sore
wound from Alexander in his forehead, had it presently bound up, and covered
with a glorious Diadem: so when any of their side are wounded sorely in any
skirmish with us, their fellows presently bind it up, and cover it with a
Crown of a surmised victory. I well knew, and foretold the Pitcher of the
field, that whatsoever the issue of the combat were, Master Deane of Carlisle
and my self, should be notwithstanding conquered in effigy, and led in
triumph in many a Pageant at Doway, Bruxels, Rhemes, and Rome, as since we have
seen in Letters, and gazettaes from beyond the Seas. Omnia praecepi, atque
animo mecum ante peregi. Yet knowing that truth is strong in her weakest, and
falsehood is weak in her strongest Champions; and being vrgently desired by the
friends, and personally challenged by the enemies of our most holy Faith, to
appear as a Second in her sacred and just quarrel, malui in illo praesertim
legum et iustitiae publicae iustitio Iesuitas fractos, quam despectos
dimittere: I chose in that high floate of the Jesuits pride and hopes, rather
by an encounter to repress their insolency, then by a refusal increase their
arrogancy. Neither was the divine Assistance and benediction wanting at the
Conference, nor since: for by it the old Gentleman (whose intended satisfaction
drew on this meeting) was settled (as himself under his hand twice professed)
and resolved in that point, which before left a scruple in his conscience. And
by occasion of this Dispute, the Chronicles of the Reformed Churches have been
better searched into, and some most useful Relations and Treatises touching
the Visibility of the Church, brought to light, and more public view then
before. And, albeit his Majesty, upon the first noise and mis-report of this
disputation, seemed to distaste it, yet when the whole truth of that which
passed that day, together with the occasion and issue thereof, appeared to his
Majesty in its native hiew; the former cloud, which threatened a bitter shower,
was by your Graces favorable breath, suddenly blown over: and then the true
Relation of that Conference, finding the sky clear, stole wings to, and from
the press, and flew freely abroad, every where checking and controuling the
Jesuits false Relations, and plucking from their heads those Laurel garlands,
wherewith they had crowned their temples, for their own noble exployts that
day. It could not be expected, that this printed Relation should have been
otherwise entertained by Master Fisher and Master Sweet (the Popish
Combatants), then it was; who, after a month or two, set upon it in print, and
dealt with it, as the wife of Anthony did with Tullies Because it truly wounded
her husband.
tongue, after his death: they thrust it through and through with needles, and
stabbed it again and again with their poisoned pens; the one writing an
answer to it; the other, a censure of it. To both these Pamphlets, this Reply
is addressed. In the former part, Master Fishers Answer to the Fisher catched
in his own Net, is censured: in the latter, Master Sweet's Censure is
answered. And because opposita iuxta se posita, magis elucescunt, I have
printed Master Fisher's Text with my Reply thereunto, vt dum haeretici hominis
venena lector cognoscit, libentius orthodoxi bibat antidotum. If any thing be
omitted, the occasion and reason of the omission is not omitted. Had I set down
all the Jesuits battologies, Idem delicti fierem reprehensor et author.

Whatsoever I have done herein, I submit to your Graces censure and favorable
construction thereof. I acknowledge, it is not a worthy present for your Grace:
yet because it is (...).
my first fruits in this kind, it of right belongs to the high Priest; the
rather, because the growth of it was upon your sacred gleabe. The Stork, which
always leaves one of her young ones in the house where she breeds, for the
Owner thereof, teaches me this point of gratitude, to offer that to your
Grace, which was bred under your Graces roof; Sieve legas, quo dabo sieve tegas.

Did not these, and many other private respects, challenge this dedication to
your Grace: yet the sweet influence which your Graces government continually
distilleth upon Gods Inheritance, among us, would cause from any heart and pen
not barren, the return of some sweet spiration of praises to God, and
thanksgiving to your Grace for your incessant travels in Gods cause. The costly
ointment, which on Palme-Sunday last flowed abundantly from your lips, so
cheered up and revived that numberless Auditory, that your Graces Name is as a
most fragrant ointment, sending forth a most sweet savor through the whole
Kingdom. What should I speak of the most happy and joyful news of our
thrice-noble Prince's return out of Spain: whereof your Grace was the first
silver Trumpet to the City? And (God be blessed for it) the Trumpet gave not
an uncertain sound. Those glorious night-Tapours which were set so thick
together in the streets, that they made a kind of Galaxia in the City, were
all kindled early in the morning at your Graces sacred Lamp. Sicut Marcelli
praelio ad Nolam, says the Orator, populus Romanus primo se erexit, postea
multaeres prosperae consequutae sunt. As the Roman State, after many disasters,
first began to cheer up again at Marcellus his victory at Nola, and
afterward much good fortune followed: so, after much sorrow and more fear,
the happy Return of our Prince first cheered up our drooping spirits; and,
after that, many happy things have followed: whereof, under his Majesty, your
Grace have been, and are, together with your noble Associates in this high
Court of Parliament, the principal Instruments. Ride on, in the Lords march
prosperously, with your honor, because of truth and righteousness, and your
right hands shall teach your terrible things; terrible things to the Whore of
Babylon, but comfortable to Christ's afflicted Spouse. The good will of him who
dwelt in the bush, make your Aarons Rod to flourish more and more, to the glory
of his Name, advancement of the Truth, honor of the Priesthood, and your own
endless joy and comfort. This we all of the Tribe of Leui are bound to pray
for in general, and I my self more specially, as being

Your Graces most humbly-deuoted Chaplain in house, and servant, DANIEL FEATLY.

The Preface to the Protestants Relation of the Conference, JUNE 27. 1623.
BEing commanded by my Lord his Grace of Canterbury, from his Majesty, to
certify the truth of that which passed in a late conference, in point of
Religion, at Sir Humfrey Linde's house in Sheer-Lane, in London: we, who were
present at the Conference, partly, out of the fresh memory of such passages as
we then observed; but especially, by help of such Notes as were taken in the
Conference it self, subscribed by both the Disputants, drew up, within a week
after, as perfect a Relation of the substance thereof, as we could: wherein as
we added nothing to the advantage or prejudice of either party; so we omitted
nothing of moment, in the Current of the Arguments and Answers. As for some
interlocutory speeches of the right honorable the Earl of Warwick, who diverse
times seasonably interposed, and, when the Disputants or standers-by grew into
any heat or distemper, discreetly tempered both sides, Ille regit dictis
animos, and pectora mulcet. -- those passages we inserted not into our
narration, because, the Earl being not then in London, we held it
incongruous, without his Honors knowledge, to use his name to the King. For
other omissions, the Jesuits are beholding unto us: for, they were in favor
of them; we being loath to be vngues in vlcere, to be thought to rub too
hard upon a gawle, but rather desirous to carry the whole Relation as fairly
and passably as might be. 2. Cor. 12. 13.
We had thought, the Jesuits would have pardoned us this wrong.

After this original Draught was by us tendered to his Grace of Canterbury,
and by his Grace delivered to the Kings Majesty, some Copy (as we understand)
was taken, for the satisfaction of a Person of quality: which, passing from one
to another, in the end fell into the hands of some Stationers; who, without
license or knowledge of those whom it most concerned, committed it to the
Press, de questu magis, quam quaestione soliciti. And the better to vent this
new wine, they set a fair Garland before the door, intituling it, The FISHER
caught in his own Net. Which Title was not devised nor prefixed by any of us:
we willingly leave the vanity of such affected inscriptions to our Adversaries,
who make themselves ridiculous in this kind. One intituleth his Answer to D.
White, WHITE dyed black. Another calls his wooden Pamphlet, The Gag of the new
Religion, or of the reformed Gospel. Another, his Reply to M. BELL, Cecidit
BELL, The doleful knell of THOMAS BELL. This is not the sound of AARON'S
golden Bell; but rather of the tinkling Cymball mentioned by Saint PAVL, 1.
Cor. 13. Fancies and Iigs make no good Church-musick. Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis,
Qui Musas colimus sacratiores.


For the Title therefore, we approve it not: but for the Conference it self,
it contains nothing but the truth, whatsoever the Adversaries give out to the
contrary, who (as it seems) hold it a work of supererogation, to forge and
coin signal and transcendent Leasings for the Catholic Cause; for, although
the Jesuits, at this Conference, were often uncertain, and always very slow
and tardy in their Answers, and (in fine) answered nothing, but that they would
not answer Doctor FEATLY his instance in CHRIST and his Apostles; yet have they
or their Scholars proclaimed in Gath, and published in Ascalon, such a victory
as never was heard; much like the wonderful conjunction of the superior
Planets, which was never seen.

About a week after the Conference, the noble Earl of Warwick, who had bin
present at it, having occasion to pass over the Seas, and coming to Saint
Omers, had the Company of Doctor Weston at his Inn; to whom this Doctor
(taking the Earl for a Roman Catholic) told for fresh and most happy news
out of England, that at a Conference between Father FISHER and SVVEET,
Jesuits, and two Protestant Ministers, in London, the Jesuits had quitted
themselves so well, and the Catholic faith prevailed so far, that two
Earls, and an hundred other of the Auditory were gained to the Church of Rome
by this Encounter: of these two Earls, the party to whom he spoke, was one,
who could not but smile at this Relation. Risit Atlantiades; et me mihi,
perfide, prodis,
Me mihi prodis, ait?


A pretty Comic Scene, where the Spectator is made an Actor, and a false
person put upon him to his face: a renowned and constant Protestant, borne
down to be a Romish Proselyte. As for the revolt of the other Earl, and
pretended Centurie of Protestant Roman Conuerts, we believe it as firmly, as
that Vitae Sanct. Brigittae. Vitae S. Aldelmi.
S. BRIGET laid her Wimple, and Saint ALDELME his Chesible upon a beam of the
Sun, which supported them. That Saint NICOLAS, Festivale de Sancto Nicolao.
while he lay in his cradle, fasted Wednesday and Friday; these days he
would not suck, but once in the day. That Legend. de Sancto Patricio.
Saint PATRICK caused a stolen sheep to bleate in the belly of him that had
eaten it. That the corpse of Legend. de Sancto Stephan.
S. LAVRENCE, at the coming of Saint STEPHENS body, smiled for joy, and turned
it self to the other side of the Sepulcher, to make room for him; Ep. Clem.
ad Iac. in Ep. Pontif.
that CLEMENS wrote a Letter to Saint JAMES the brother of our Lord, seven
years after he was dead; that Vide Breu. and picturas Dionys. vel interrog.
Paris^enses.
Saint DENNIS carried his head in his hand three miles, and rested at each
place of the posts, that are set between Paris and Saint Dennis; that Legend.
de Dunst. and picturae pass^^.
Saint DVNSTONE held the devil fast by the nose with a pair of tongues; that
the Hist^ire de N^stre Dame de L^retto.
chamber of our Lady was carried by Angels through the Air, from Palestine to
Loretto, in Italy; Annot. in Clemanges ex Caesario.
that our Lady helped Saint THOMAS BECKET to mend or stitch his hayre-cloth;
Legend. de (...). Cant.
that a Parrat crying out, Saint THOMAS help me, was delivered from an Hawk;
Legend. de L^p^.
that Saint LVPVS shut up the devil in a tankard all night; that Legend. de
(...). vid. M^l^h. (...). Theol.
Saint DOMINICK made the Devil hold the candle to him till he burnt his
fingers; that Vitae Francisci.
Saint FRANCIS swallowed a Spider in a Chalice which Spider came whole out of
his thigh; that the Cheney Martyr Carthus.
Image of the Crucifix turned tail to GREGORY the Monk, when he went from the
Vespers, to walk in the Chapter- house; that Sedul. Francisc.
Friar ANDREW, to correct his appetite of eating birds at the Table, by the
sign of the Cross, commanded them to fly away after they were roasted; Author
of the Relation of the Western Religion.
that the Thunder of the Popes excommunications so blasted the Hugonotes, that
their faces were grown as black and ugly as the devil; Vitae Iu^^j.
that FRANCIS JUNIUS had a round cloven foot like an Ox; Beza rediuiuus.
that BEZA recanted his religion before his death; My Lord of Londons Legacy.
that the reverend Doctor KING, late Bishop of London, died a Papist; or,
Interroga vicin^^ de re iam recenti.
that the Protestants at Black-^ryers, by knocking certain pins out of the
timber, caused that late and lamentable fall of the floar: wherein about 200
Papists were assembled, and near a 100 slain. They who teach pious frauds,
and write of holy hypocrisy, and doctrinally deliver the lawfulness of
equivocation, may securely report, whatsoever makes for the Catholic Cause.
The more incredible and palpable the Lie is, the more merit in him that makes
it, and in them that believe it. Popery is a doctrine composed of Lies: and
Philosophy teaches, that all things are fed and maintained by such things of
which they are bred and made. The aliments of Popery must be correspondent to
the elements of which it consists: and verily as he said in the Poet, Si ius
violandum est, Regni causa violandum, if a man must transgress the Law of
honesty and Justice, he must doeit for a Kingdom: so it is like they are
resolved, if a man must lie, certainly he must lie for the good of the
Catholic Religion; and if lie in so good a cause, lie to some purpose.

The first report concerning the issue of this Conference, was of a silly
woman, said to be present, and converted thereby to the Romish faith, who
forsooth stamped upon her English Bible, and solemnly renounced the Protestant
Religion upon it; protesting, she would never trust heretical Translation any
more. But, alas! this was but a silly lie, made by some p^isne ^ouice of the
petty form, to see how a lie in this kind would take. The higher Scholars in
the Jesuits School, thought it behooued them to make a Catholic or
universal lie for the Catholic cause, by giving out, that the whole company
of Protestants present at that Conference, was gained to the Romish faith, yea,
and many more Protestants then were there also for 100, some say, 400* is the
sum of the supposed Conuerts; whereas there were not near a hundred persons
in both parties in all at the Conference; and (as we conceive) near 20. were
professed Papists, and known Recusants: and for the rest, which were
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Gentle-women of quality, with some few Divines,
there was not one of them any way staggered in Religion by this meeting; but on
the contrary, they have openly professed, that they were much established and
confirmed in the truth of the Protestant Religion by it: and Master BVGGES
himself, (whose satisfaction by this Conference was principally intended) who
before had doubted of our Church, after this Disputation, professes himself
fully resolved through the mercy of God: to whose grace we commend all that
love the Truth in sincerity.

As for those, who contrary to the evidence of truth, and so many testimonies
beyond all exception, are yet resolved to believe what the Jesuits report for
their own advantage in their own cause; the Jesuits, we say, who maintain,
that a man may utter an untruth in words without the guilt of Venial sin, so
he be sure to make it up by a mental reservation: upon such as stand thus
affected, we bestow the blessing of August. Thuan. ad An. 1556. Caramalis
Caraffa Lutetiam Regni Metropol^m ingreditur, solita pompa, tanquam Pontificis
Legatus; vbi cum signum Crucis, vt fit, ederet, verborum, quae proferri mos
est, loco, ferunt eum vt erat securus de numme animo, and summus Religionum
derisor occursante passim populo, in genua procu^bente, saepius secreta
murmuratione haec verba ingeminasse: Quandoquidem, etc.
Cardinal CARAFFA: who, when the people flocked to him in great multitudes to
be blessed by him, (being arrived at Paris, coming as Legate from the Pope),
lifting up his eyes devoutly to heaven, and making* according to the manner,
crosses in stead of the accustomed form of Episcopal benediction, blessed the
honest vulgar Frenchmen in these words: Quandoquidem iste populus vult decipi,
decipiatur: If so be this people will be gulled or deceived (with such shows
and fopperies), let them be gulled or deceived.

THE PARTICVLAR CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THe occasion, and issue, of the late Conference had* June 27. 1623. between
Doctor White, Deane of Carlisle, and Doctor Featly, with Master Fisher, and
Master Sweet Jesuits. Page 1. A Relation of what passed in the said
Conference, touching the Visibility of the Church, page 6. Additions to the
former Relation of the Conference, page 29. An Attestation, concerning some
particulars, set down in the said Relation, entitled, The Fisher catched in
his own Net, page 38. A Remonstrance sent in a Letter by Doctor Featly, to his
worthy friend, Sir Humfrey Lynde, touching the former Conference held at his
house: wherein is maintained, that, 1 Conferences in point of Religion are
lawful, and useful, and therefore to be justified. 2 The Method also used in
the former Conference, maintained and justified. 3 The proofs alleged in the
Conference, were direct, not diuersiue. H* A succinct or brief discussion of
the two Questions, which were propounded by the Jesuit; by Distinctions.
Assertions.

1 viz. Whether the Protestant Church was in all Ages visible? L1. 2 Whether
visible Protestants are to be named in all Ages? O2. A Defense of Doctor
Featlie's proceedings in the Conference, (R3.) wherein Rules are prescribed for
Disputations: and it is proved and confirmed, that, 1 No conclusion of Faith
may be proved out of mere humane testimonies. S1. 2 The Protestants Church
might be visible in all Ages, yet their Names not now extant. S3. 3 The Romish
Church was invisible in the first and best Ages. T1. A Prooeme to Master
Fisher's Answer to the Conference: wherein is showed, that absurd Paradoxes are
miserably defended by Master Fisher. T3. An Answer to the Title of Master
Fisher's book, masked under the Name of A. C. V3. An Answer to the Preface
thereof. V 4. A Table of the principal matters contained in the same, which
are reduced unto five heads, viz. 1 Untruths. 2 Contradictions. 3 Idle
observations, and exceptions. 4 Impertinences, or mal' a proposes. 5 Vain
repetitions. Y 3. A Reply to Master Fisher's Counter Relation, touching the
occasion of the Conference, page 37. The Answer of Sir Humfrey Lynde, touching
diverse passages in the Protestant Relation, about the occasion and issue of the
Conference, excepted against by the Jesuit, p. 39. A Reply to Master Fisher's
Answer, or, the defense of the Protestant Relation, divided into Paragraphs.
Paragraph 1. touching the entry into the Conference, page 45. 2 Of the state of
the Question, page 49. 3 The conditions to be observed by the Disputants, page
52. 4 Of the Inuisibility of the Roman Church, for more then 500 years next
after Christ, page 54. 5 Concerning the parts of the Question, page 59. 6 Of
the pretended necessity of naming Protestants in all Ages, page 63. 7 Of the
comparison between a proof a Priori and a Posteriori, page 74. 8 Of the
Demonstration of the Visibility of the Church, by the eternity and immutability
of faith, page 88. 9 Touching a testimony alleged by M. Fisher out of D. Field
page 113. 10 Of the Induction, and breaking up of the Conference, p. 119. 11 Of
the issue of the Conference, page 129. A Copy of M. Fisher's Letter to the
Earl of Warwick. p. 139. An Answer unto the same by D. Featly, page 142. A
Copy of a Letter from the Earl of Warwick, to Sir Humfrey Lynde, page 146.
Master Fisher's Reflection upon the Conference, with the Answer of Doctor
Featly, page 147. Wherein 1 A testimony out of Luther, alleged to prove the
inuisibility of the Protestants Church, is answered, page 150. 2 Luther's
testimony of VVesselus, page 152. 3 Of the Waldensis, page 154. 4 Of Hus, 157.
5 A testimony out of Conrad. Schlusenburg, is answered, p. 160. 6 A testimony
out of Benedictus Morgenst, answered, p. 164. 7 A testimony out of Calvin, is
answered, page 167. 8 Caluins testimony of the Waldenses, is produced, p. 168.
9 A testimony out of Bucer, is answered, page 169. 10 In what sense Luther may
be termed the first Apostle of the Reformed Churches, is declared, page 170. 11
An allegation out of Beza, answered, page 171. 12 An Allegation out of Perkins,
answered, page 173. 13 An Allegation out of Bishop Jewel, answered, page 174.
14 The Conclusion, page 178.
To the courteous Reader.
I Entreat thee, courteous Reader, to understand, that the greater part of this
book was printed in the time of the great Frost; when, by reason that the
Thames was shut up, I could not conveniently procure the proofs to be brought
unto me, before they were wrought off: whereupon it fell out, that very many
gross escapes passed the Press, and (which was the worst fault of all) the
third part of the book is left vnpaged. This defect I find no other means to
remedy for the present, than to refer thee to the letters of the Printers
Alphabet, set under the Page. Thus therefore, I pray thee, correct the Errata
following.

Faults escaped.
In the Conference, page 6. line 9. for demanded, r. and demanded. p. 7. l. 7.
four, r. your. In the Additions, p. 27. l. 29. f. I should, r should I. p. 30.
l. 29. f. author, r. adversary. In the Attestation, p. 36. l. 8. f. prepetua,
r. perpetua. In the Remonstrance, H 2 * for approbation, r. a good answer. H 4
* l. 4. f. (...), r. (...). b. l 23. f. (...), r. (...). K * l. 9 f. (...). r.
(...). line 14. f. of Church, r. of the Church. l. 15. f. thing, r. Chius. K 2
* In mar. f. quibus, r. quidam. f. falsa, r. falsum. l. penult. dele the. K 3 *
b l. 7. f. Vovius, r. Voions. l. 9. Wolfius, r. Walfius. l. 10. f. Moustre a
Vortley, r. Munster a Vortlegue. K * b l. penult. in marg. f. de praescrip. r.
Tert. de praescrip. K 4 b l. 14. f. Partus, r. Paetus. Quest. 1. touching the
visibility of the Church, L 3 * l. 5. f. (...), r. (...). L 3 l. 10. f.
Becherites, r. Bezerites. l 12. f. Luiddamites, r. Quiddamites M * b l. 21.
dele into. M 2 l. 28. f. eternally, r. externally. M 4 in marg. f. obsconditur
and obsoluens, r. absconditur and absoluens. M 2 b l. 19. f sweet fish and
rotten, r good and bad. N * a l. 17. f. Margaerites, r. pearls. N * b l 28. f.
a firmer, r. the former. O * l. 17. f. Lyranensis, r. Lirmensis. O 2 b l. 5. f
Barradus, r. Barradius. Quest. 2. touching the names of visible Protestants, P
3 a in marg. f. lenone, r. lenones. Q 1 b in marg. f. Caluini, r. calicis. Q 2
a l. 9. f sect. r. track. Q 3 l. 18. f. leave, r. levy. l. 23. f. Epistolae,
r. Epistolis. Q 3 b add in marg ad Occham and Platin ex Wolf. prooem. Q 4 b
add in marg. The fixed assertien. R 1 l. 26. f. this, r. then. R 1 b l. 18 f.
(...), r. (...). R 1 in marg. f. excusseront, r. exusserunt. S 1 l. 28. f.
forces, r. forteth. S 2 b l. 23. dele of. T 1 b l. 22. f. voculae, r. voculas.
T 2 b l. 9. f. quum. r. qum. T 3 in marg. f. (...), r. (...). T 3 b l. 3. f.
Athanaeus, r. Athenaeus. T 4 l. 8. f. distinguish, r. to distinguish. V 1 l.
13. Corrige accentos ita, (...). V 1 l. 20. f. (...), r. (...). Pone in mar.
Odys^. 3 In the reply, page 1. line 1. add M. Fisher. p. 1. l 10. superpone D.
Featly. p. 5. l. 25. f. (...), r. (...). l 26. f. (...). l. 27. f. (...), r.
(...). p. 7. l. 9. for conifictiou, r. confiction. p. 11. l. 2. f. you r.
yours. p. 12. l. 2. f. m, r. on. p. 22. l. 13. f signal, r. signal. p. 32 l.
14 f. predicants, r. predicaments. p. 44. l. 6. f. be, r. but. p. 48. l. 21. f.
of, r. Of. p. 51. l. 11. f. particula entirer, r. particular entire. p. 63. l.
8. f. Elohim, read barah Elohim. p. 79. l. 10. f. metriculated, r
matriculated. p. 83. l. 15. f. who keep, r. they who keep. p. 92. l. 8. f.
namely fir, r. in Si^. In marg. add Viues de causis corrupt. art. l. 3. l. 16.
f. Ceres, r. Seres. l. 17. f. Riphean, r Rhiphean. l. 24. f. (...), r. (...).
add in marg. Arist. analit post. l. 1. c. 4. p. 101. l. 32. dele and. p. 103.
l. 1. f. in error, r. obstinate in error. p. 104. l. 11. for (...), r. (...).
p. 108 l. 23. dele he can. p. 110 l. 11. f. Eleaetes, r. the Eleaetes. page
149. l. 4 f (...), r. (...). p. 150 l 1. f. (...), r. (...). l. 2. f. (...), r.
(...). l. 29. f. adeo, r. a Deo. et add in mar. extat et al^^ ad Argen ep. in
tract. Histo de coen. dom. Casp. Peut. Ambergae. an. 1596. vbineque habentur
haec ve ba. p. 152. l. 10. add in marg. quia and lux mundi vulgo dictus, in
script opuse. p. 154. l. 9. f. habent, r. habeant. p. l. 162. l. 12. f. exet.
r. expetend. p. 163. l. 21. f. Bishop, r. Bishops. p. 172. l. 11. f. (...), r.
(...).

THE OCCASION and issue of the late Conference had between Dr. White, Deane of
Carleil, and Dr. Featly, with Mr. Fisher and Mr. Sweet, Jesuits, was this as
follows.
EDward Bugges Esquire, (about the age of 70 years) being lately sick, was
solicited by some Papists then about him, to forsake the Protestant faith;
telling him, there was no hope of salvation without the Church; there was no
Catholic Church, but theirs; and to believe the Catholic Church, was the
Article of his Creed; and by it there could no other Church be meant, but the
Church of Rome, because it could not be proved by all the Protestants in the
Kingdom, that they had any Church before Luther.

This Gentleman being much troubled in his mind with these and the like
suggestions, who all his life time had bin and professed himself a religious
Protestant, becam now more sick in mind then body: and if by Gods merciful
goodness he had not recovered of this sickness, it is to be feared he had
fallen both from his Mother Church, and his former faith, as some of the
nearest of his own blood (to his great grief) have lately been seduced by
like inticements.

After his recovery, being still much troubled in mind with these former
suggestions of the Popish Priests, he repaired to Sir Humfrey Lynde, Knight:
who, by reason of his alliance and long acquaintance with him, gave the best
satisfaction he could to his said Cousin Master Bugges; who seemed to take
content in such his conferences, and to be well satisfied by him in all points.

But the Popish Priests and Jesuits not desisting to creepe-in further where
they had once made a breach, perseuered still in questioning him, Where his
Church was before Luther? Whereupon he repaired again to Sir Humfrey Lynde,
and required some further satisfaction of him concerning that demand. And
thereupon Sir Humfrey Lynde told him, It was first in Christ and the Apostles;
consequently also conspicuous in the Primitive Church for 600 years after
Christ: after which time some errors crept into the Church, as diseases into a
man's body: so that the Church, which Luther and we acknowledge, was in general
the same Christian Church, as his body was the same substantial body, being
now well, and lately sick, though different in the qualities.

And for the better strengthening of his mind, the said Sir Humfrey Lynde
invited him to his house in the Country, thereby the better to prevent the
daily solicitation of those dangerous seducers. And after his return to
London, the said Sir Humfrey Lynde going to Master Bugges his house in
Drury Lane to visit him, found Master Fisher the Jesuit there: where, after
some debates about Religion, and the visibility of the Church, M. Fisher called
for pen and ink, and set down this question in terminis, thereto adding under
his hand, that he would answer upon it negatiuely, as challenging and expecting
opposers, delivering also the paper into the hands of the said Sir Humfrey
Lynde: who upon view of it, answered that it was an historical question, and
not so proper for disputation. But Master Fisher urging it, Sir Humfrey told
him, if he would go to Doctor Whites, (where formerly he had been) the said
Doctor would easily resolve those doubts. Which being refused by the Jesuit,
the said Sir Humfrey did then return him his paper again, and so left him.

About two days after, Master Bugges repaired to Sir Humfrey Lynde, and
entreated him (for his satisfaction) to give Master Fisher a meeting; saying,
that Master Fisher had again told him, that he would maintain what he had set
down, and that our Divines could not prove our Church visible before Luthers
time. Whereupon Sir Humfrey told him, that D. White and Doctor Featly were to
dine with him upon Friday following: and if after dinner Master Fisher would
come thither with four or six at the most, they should be admitted for his
sake and his wises, who (by reason of such solicitation) were troubled in
their minds, and satisfaction should be given as occasion required. And these
were the true causes of the meeting, as is before declared. Upon which Friday,
being the twenty seventh of June, 1623. Master Fisher, Master Sweet, Jesuits,
and some others with them, came to Sir Humfrey Lyndes house, into a little
dining-roome; where they found the aforesaid Master Bugges, his wife and
children, and others of Sir Humfreys friends, that had then dined with him,
together with some others also: whose coming in, as the said Sir Humfrey did
not expect, so he could not with ciuility put them forth his house, but did
instantly cause his doors to be locked up, that no more might enter in:
notwithstanding which his command, some others also came in scatteringly, after
the conference began.

At the same time and place, Doctor White and Doctor Featly being invited to
dinner by Sir Humfrey Lynde, and staying a while after, had notice given them,
that Master Fisher and Master Sweet, Jesuits, were in the next room ready to
confer with them, touching a question set down by Master Fisher, under his
own hand, in these words, viz.

Whether the Protestant Church was in all ages visible, and especially in the
ages going before Luther. And whether the names of such visible Protestants in
all ages can be showed and proved out of good Authors.

This question being delivered to the parties aboue-named, and it being
notified unto them, that there were certain persons, who had bin solicited,
and (remaining doubtful in Religion) desired satisfaction especially in this
point; the said Doctors were persuaded to have some speech with the Jesuits,
touching this point; the rather, because the Priests and Jesuits do daily
cast out papers, and disperse them in secret: in which they vaunt, that no
Protestant Minister dares encounter them in this point.

A Relation of what passed in a Conference touching the visibility of the
Church, June xxvii. 1623.
AT the beginning of this meeting, when the disputants were set, D. Featly drew
out the paper, in which the question above rehearsed was written, with these
words in the margent, viz. I will answer that it was not; demanded of M.
Fisher, whether this were his own hand? Which after he had acknowledged, D.
Featly began as follows.

D. Featly. (...). To this universal demand, requiring rather an historical
large volume, then a Syllogisticall brief dispute, we answer, that

1. Although divine infallible faith is not built upon deduction out of humane
history, but upon divine revelation, as is confessed by your own Schoolmen,
and expressly by Cardinal Bellarmine: Historiae humanae faciunt tantum fidem
humanam, cui subesse potest falsum: Humane histories and records beget only an
humane faith, or rather credulity subject to error, not a divine and infallible
belief, which must be built upon surer ground.

2. Although this question be grounded upon uncertain and false supposals:
for, a Church may have bin visible, yet not the names of all visible professors
thereof now to be showed and proved out of good Authors: there might be
millions of professors, yet no particular and authentical record of them by
name: Records there might be many in ancient time, yet not now extant, at
least for us to come by;

Yet we will not refuse to deal with you in our own question, if you in like
manner will undertake the like task in your own defense, and maintain the
affirmative in the like question, which we now propound unto you here in
writing.

Whether the Romish Church (that is a Church holding the particular entire
doctrine of the now Romanists, as it is comprised in the Council of Trent) was
in all ages visible, especially in the first 600 years. And whether the names
of such visible or legible Romanists in all ages can be showed and proved out
of good Authors.


Here D. Featly reading this question, through a mistake, in stead of out of
good Authors, read, out of Gods Word. Whereunto M. Fisher replied, No: I will
prove it out of good Authors.

Then said one that sat at the Table M. Alesbury.
, By no means can M. Fisher endure to demonstrate his Church out of Gods Word.

D. Featly. God is a good Author, M. Fisher: but it is true, I did mistake.
What say you to the condition? Will you undertake to name visible Papists in
all ages, out of good Authors?


M. Fisher. I will, so you prove the Visibility of your Church.


Here an order was set down, that D. Featly should for an hour and a half
oppose M. Fisher in this question; and afterward M. Fisher for the last hour
and half should oppose D. White in the other question, for the Visibility of
the Roman Church.

M. Sweet. Before you proceed to dispute, I desire, these conditions may be
assented unto on both sides: 1. That all bitter speeches be forborne. 2. That
none speak but disputants.



Which conditions were well approved by the whole company.

D. Featly. I desire a third to be added thereunto, viz. that both the
Opponent and Respondent be tied to Logic Form.


M. Fisher. I hold not that condition fit, because the company understands not
Logic Form.


D. Featly. There are of the company that understand Logic as well as you or
I, and the rest are men of understanding and reason: therefore I am resolved to
keep Logic Form, and expect from you direct answers.


M. Fisher. You your self confess, that this question is not to be handled
syllogistically.


D. Featly. I said indeed, that it required rather a large historical volume,
then a brief syllogisticall Dispute: the more you too blame, to propound such
a question; and my task the harder: yet, being propounded as a question, I
will keep my self to Logic Form. But before I propound my argument, I crave
leave, in few words to lay open the vanity of the usual discourse, wherewith
you draw and delude many of the ignorant and unlearned. You bear them in hand,
that there was no such thing in the world as a Protestant, before Luther; and
that all the world before his time, believed as you do: That your Church has
not bin only visible in all Ages, and all times, but eminently conspicuous and
illustrious: which is such a notorious untruth, that I here offer before all
this company, to yield you the better, and acknowledge my self overcome, if you
can produce out of good Authors, I will not say, any Empire or Kingdom, but
any City, Parish or Hamlet, within 500. years next after Christ, in which
there was any visible assembly of Christians to be named, maintaining and
defending either your Trent Creed in general, or these points of Popery in
special; to wit,

1. That there is a treasury of Saints merits, and superaboundant satisfactions
at the Popes disposing.

2. That the Laity are not commanded by Christ's institutions, to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds.

3. That the public service of God in the Church, ought, or may be
celebrated in an unknown Tongue.

4. That private Masses, wherein the Priest says, Edite et bibite ex hoc
omnes, Eat and drink ye all of this, and yet eats and drinks himself
only, are according to Christ's institution.

5. That the Popes pardons are requisite or useful, to release souls out of
Purgatory.

6. That the effect of the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the
Minister.


M. Sweet. These are scholasticall points, not fundamental.


D. White. Those things which are defined in your Council of Trent, are to you
matters fundamental.

Whatsoever article denied makes a man an heretic, is fundamental.

But the denial of any of these, makes a man an heretic:

Therefore to you, every one of these articles is fundamental.


To which argument nothing being answered, D. Featly proceeded.

7. That extreme unction is a Sacrament, properly so called.

8. That we may worship God by an Image.

9. That the sacred Host ought to be elevated, or carried in solemn
procession.

10. That Infidels and impious persons, yea Rats and Mice, may eat the body of
Christ.

11. That all ecclesiastical power depends of the Pope.

12. That he cannot err in matter of faith.

13. That he has power to canonize Saints.

14. To institute religious orders.

15. To depose Kings, etc. which latter points and the like I leave to D.
White, to mayntaine against you, when (according to your promise) you do
undertake to name visible and legible Romanists in all ages.


M. Fisher. After you have proved your Church visible in all ages, and named
the professors thereof, I will satisfy you in your particulars.


D. Featly. In the meane-while, name but one Father, but one Writer of note who
held the particulars aboue-named, for 500. years after Christ. To which
instant demand of D. Featly, nothing was answered.


Sr. Humfrey Lynde. M. Sweet, prove me but this one point out of Saint
Augustine, namely, Transubstantiation, or satisfy such arguments as I shall
bring you out of Saint Augustine to the contrary, and I will promise you to go
to Mass.


To which M. Sweet made no other answer then this: That is not now to the
question.

M. Fisher. I expect your argument, Doctor Featly.


D. Featly. There are two means only, to prove any thing by necessary
inference; to wit, a Syllogism and an Induction: other forms of argument have
no force, but as they are reducible to these. I prove the visibility of our
Church by both; and first, by a Syllogism.

That Church, whose faith is eternal and perpetual, was ever visible in the
professors thereof.

But, the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal and perpetual:

Therefore the faith of the Protestant Church was ever visible in the
Professors thereof.


M. Fisher. You conclude not the question.


D. Featly. There are two Quaeres in your question: first, Whether the
Protestant Church was in all ages visible; and secondly, Whether the names of
such visible Protestants in all ages, can be showed. I have concluded in my
Syllogism, the first Quaere.


M. Fisher. There are not two Quaeres, or parts in the question: it is but one
question.


D. White. Where there are two propositions with two distinct Vtrums, there are
two questions: But here are two propositions with two distinct vtrums; to wit,
whether the Protestant Church, etc. and whether the names, etc.

Therefore there are two Quaeres, or parts in the question.


M. Fisher. Conclude any thing Syllogistically, D. Featly.


D. Featly. You your self make the first part a question by it self: for, at
the margent over against the first part, Whether the Protestant Church was ever
visible? you write, I will answer, It was not: which words can have no
Construction, if you refer them to both parts, or at all to the latter part;
to wit, Whether the names can be a showed?


M. Fisher. Let us hear a Syllogism.


D. Featly. In this copulative proposition which you offer for a question, and
require me to prove, either you deny both parts, or one only; if both, I am
to prove both, one after the other; if one only, then you grant the other. A
copulative is not true, unless both parts be true. Do you deny both, or one
only?


M. Fisher. I say, they are but one; for, the later part is to expound the
former: for, I mean by visible, so visible, that the names of such visible
Protestants may be showed.


D. Featly. This is to confound two distinct questions in one: For, a Church
may have bin visible, and yet the names of such visible Professors not now to
be showed.


M. Fisher. They are my words, and I am best able to expound my own meaning.


D. Featly. An exposition, which the construction of the words will not bear,
is not to be received. But the construction of the words will not bear this
your exposition: Therefore it is not to be received. And is a conjunction
copulative, and must add somewhat to that which goes before. It is all one,
as if you should expound the words of the Apostle, Provide honest things before
God and men; before God, that is, before men.


M. Sweet. What need you stand so much upon this: if there were visible men,
certainly they may be named. Name your visible Protestants, and it suffices.
A Romanist standing by named M. Bolton.
Name visible Protestants in all ages:


D. Featly. It seems you are Two sects of Schoolmen and Logicians so called.
Nominalls, rather then Two sects of Schoolmen and Logicians so called.
Realls, you stand so much upon naming. Will you undertake to name visible
Papists in all ages? The same Romanist standing by.


If neither you nor we can name visible professors of our Religions in all
ages, for ought I know, the best way for us is to be all natural men.


D. Featly. This is the right reason of a Natural.


M. Sweet. If there were visible Protestants in all ages, certainly they may
be named.


D. Featly. That is a Non sequitur, for the reasons beforenamed by me. What
say you to a people of Africa, who (if we may believe Pliny) have no names at
all?


M. Bolton. Yet they have descriptions, and may be known by some Periphrasis.


D. Featly. What say you then to the Heretics called Acephali, who are so
called, because their Head and Author cannot be named, nor particularly
described? Yet the Author was a visible man. Are all visible men's names upon
Record? Are all the Records that were in former times, now to be produced?


Here diverse of Master Fishers company, called, Names, names, names.

D. Featly. What? Will nothing content you but a Buttery-booke? You shall have
a Buttery-booke of names, if you will stay a while.


Here, diverse of the Auditors wished D. Featly not to proceed any further in
the disputation, unless Master Fisher would suffer him, according to the laws
of all disputation, first, to conclude the first part of his copulative
Que^stion; and then, the second. Yet Doctor Featly' desirous to bring the
disputation to some better issue before he left it, was content to yield to M.
Fishers unreasonable demand, and conclude both parts of the copulative Question
in one Syllogism.

D. Featly. That Church, whose faith is eternal and perpetual, is so visible,
that the Names of some Professors thereof may be showed in all Ages.

But, the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal and perpetual:

Therefore the Protestants Church is so visible, that the Professors thereof
may be showed in all Ages.


M. Fisher. Faith eternal? Who ever heard of faith eternal? Saint Paul says,
that faith cease.


D. Featly. You have a purpose, M. Fisher, to cavil: you know my meaning well
enough by the term perpetual; to wit, that Christian faith which has
continued from Christ's first publishing it, till this present, and shall
continue until his second Coming.

The Church which houldeth this faith, you believe, shall be so visible, that
the Names of the Professors thereof may be showed in all ages.

But, the Protestant Church holds this perpetual faith:

Therefore it has been so visible, that the Names of the Professers thereof
may be showed in all Ages.


M. Fisher. Your Argument is a fallacy, called Petitio principij.


D. Featly. A demonstration a causa or a priori, is not petitio principii.

But, such is my Argument:

Therefore my Argument is not petitio principii.

Is it not a sounder Argument, to prove the Visibility of the Professers from
the truth of their faith, than (as you do) the truth of your faith from the
Visibility of Professers? Visible Professers argue not a right faith.
Heretics, Mahumetans, and Gentiles, have visible professers of their
impieties; yet will it not hence follow, that they have a right belief. On the
contrary, we know by the promises of God in the Scripture, that the Church
which maintains the true faith, shall have always Professers more or less
visible.


M. Sweet. You ought to prove the truth of your Church a posteriori; for, that
is to the question; and not a priori.


D. Featly. Shall you prescribe me my weapons? Is not an Argument a priori,
better than an Argument a posteriori? This is, as if in battle you should
enjoin your enemy to stab you with a knife, and not with a sword or dagger. I
will use what weapons I list: take you what buckler you can.


M. Fisher. A Proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue than a priori.


M. Alesbury. Here M. Fisher shows his Academicall learning, in preferring a
demonstration a posteriori, before that which proceeds a priori. Is not a
demo^stration of the effect from the cause, more excellent, than of the cause
by the effect?


From this place, and so forward, it was agreed by the Disputants, that the
Arguments and Answers should be taken by one common Writer; and that the
Opponent, Dr. Featly, should set his hand to each several Syllogism; and the
Respondent, Mr. Fisher, to his several Answers.

Dr. Featly. That Church, which is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be, is so visible,
that the Names of the Professors thereof may be produced and showed.

But, the Protestant Church is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be:

Therefore the Protestant Church is so visible, that their Names may be
produced.


M. Fisher. I deny the Minor.


D. Featly. That Church, Minor probatur
whose faith is eternal and perpetual, and unchanged, is so visible, as the
Catholic Church ought to be, and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher
to be.

But, the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal, perpetual, and unchanged:

Therefore the Protestant Church is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought
to be, and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be.


M. Fisher. I distinguish the Mayor. That Church whose faith is perpetual and
unchanged, so as the Names can be showed, is so visible as the Catholic
Church ought to be, and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be, I grant
it.

That Church whose faith is perpetual and unchanged, yet so, as the Names
cannot be showed in all Ages, is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be, I deny it. To the Minor
I apply the like distinction, and consequently to the Conclusion in the same
manner.


D. Featly. What? Answer you to the Conclusion also? This is a Strain of new
Logic.


M. Fisher. Toll distinctionem.


D. Featly. A strange distinction of the etemity of faith by Professers to be
named, All this was spoken, but not committed to writing.
and not to be named. What are Professers nominable or innominable, to the
eternity of faith?


M. Fisher. Conclude that which I deny, that the Protestant Church is so
eternal, as the Names of visible Protestants in all Ages may be showed.


D. Featly. That Church whose faith is the Catholic and Primitive faith, once
given to the Saints, without which no man can be saved, is so perpetual and
visible, as the Names of some of that Church may be showed in all Ages.

But, Tollitur distinctio.
the faith of the Protestant Church is the Primitive and Catholic faith, once
given to the Saints, without which none can be saved:

Therefore the faith of the Protestant Church is so perpetual and visible, as
the Names of some of that Church may be showed in all Ages.


M. Fisher. I answer the Minor. If this Proposition be taken simply in it
self, I absolutely deny it: but if this Proposition be considered (as it must
be) as related to the first question, and the end thereof, I further add,
that it is not pertinent to that end for which the whole Dispute was intended,
to weet, to show to those, who are not able by their own ability to find out,
the infallible faith necessary to salvation, without learning it of the true
visible Church of Christ: and consequently, the Visibility of the Church is
first to be showed, before the truth of doctrine in particular shall be showed.


D. Featly. First, These words were also spoken but not set down by the Writer.
what speak you of those who are not able by their own abilities to find out
faith? Is any man able by his own ability, without the help of divine grace?

Secondly, what helps the Visibility, to confirm the truth of the Church?
Visibility indeed proves a Church, but not the true Church.


Here M. Fisher alleged some words out of D. Field of the Church, supposing
thereby to justify his former Answer. Whereunto D. Featly promised, Answer
should be made when it came to their turn to answer: now he was by order to
oppose M. Fisher.

D. Featly. The Sum of your former Answer, was, that the Minor of my former
Syllogism was both false and impertinent. It is neither false nor impertinent.
Therefore your Answer is false and impertinent. And first, my Minor is not
false.


M. Fisher. I answer to the Antecedent, that it is both false and impertinent:
but I add, that for the present it must first be proved to be pertinent, or
else it diuerteth us from the chief end of our Dispute, which was (as I said
before), that infallible truth may be learned of the true visible Church; and
not the true visible Church, by first finding every particular infallible
truth; and by that to conclude which is the true visible Church.


D. Featly. I prove, that the Minor is pertinent.

That Minor Proposition, which, together with the Mayor, does necessarily and
directly infer the Conclusion of the Minor last denied, is pertinent to the
probation of that Minor denied.

But the Minor Proposition of the third Syllogism, does necessarily and
directly infer the conclusion of the Minor last denied:

Therefore the Minor of that Syllogism is pertinent.

Note, that M. Fishers Answers to every one of these Syllogismes, were penned
by him verbatim with the advice of M. Sweet, and one other, suggesting
privately, and amending what they thought fit. Which breeding much delay,
irkesom to the hearers, and the Opponent then saying, You are very long,
Register of the Court of Wards.
M. Fisher: M. Chamberlane, standing by, said, Let him alone: for, he and his
learned Council are not yet agreed.


M Fisher. I distinguish the Mayor. That Minor proposition, which together with
the Mayor does necessarily and directly infer the conclusion of the Minor, in
such manner as it may serve for the purpose to which the whole Dispute is
ordained, I grant it to be pertinent. But if it do infer the conclusion, yet
not in such manner as it may serve for that purpose for which the whole Dispute
was ordained* I deny the Mayor.


Here the Disputants iarred, and so the Writer ceased: yet that which
follows, was then delivered by them.

D. Featly. That Minor which together with the Mayor inferres the proposition
last denied, the whole process having been per direct a media, is pertinent
to that purpose to which the Dispute is ordained.

But this Minor, together with the Mayor, directly and necessarily inferres the
proposition last denied, the whole process having been per directa media.

Therefore it is pertinent to that purpose to which the Dispute is ordained.


M. Fisher. Your Media in your Syllogismes were directa, but they tended not ad
directum finem.


D. Featly. This is a Bull. M. Fisher. Media directa? yet not addirectum finem?
that is, direct, and not direct? for Media are said to be directa, only ratione
finis, in regard of the end.


M. Sweet. Is there not a fault in arguing, called transitio a genere in genus,
When a man by arguing quite leaves the maine question and subject?


D. Featly. I acknowledge, that transitio a genere in genus, is a fault in
disputing: but I never heard, that the inference of the effect by the cause,
was transitio a genere in genus: such was my argument. For, faith in a right
believer produces profession and confession thereof, which makes a visible
member; and the like profession of many members, a visible Church. Where the
cause is perpetual, the effect must needs be perpetual. Therefore where the
faith is perpetual, the profession thereof must needs be; and consequently the
Visibility of the professors thereof. Is this transitio a genere in genus?


D. Good. M. Sweet, you once learned better Logic in Cambridge, then you show
now.

Here again those of M. Fishers side calling for names, Where are your names?
D. White said,


D. White. This is nothing but an apparent tergiuersation: you will not answer
any argument directly, nor suffer us to proceed in our argument, and therefore
I require you M. Fisher, according to the order mentioned in the beginning, for
each party to have an hour and a half, that you now oppose, and suffer me to
answer. Prove by Christ and his Apostles, or by any of the Fathers, for the
first 600 years, these present Tenets of the Roman Church, viz.

1. That all power of order and Jurisdiction in respect of the Churches, is to
be derived from the Church of Rome.

2. That no Scripture, sense or translation thereof is authentical, unless
the same were received from the Church of Rome.

3. That the Roman Church only was and is the authentical Custos of
unwritten traditions.

4. That all general Councels were called by the sole authority of the Pope,
and that he might ratify and disannuall whatsoever pleased him in them.

5. That the Pope only had power to canonize Saints.

6. That the Pope had or has power to depose Princes.

Prove all or any of these, and we will neither carp nor cavil about names,
but answer directly, without all delays, euasions or tergiuersations.


M. Fisher. When you, Doctor White, or Doctor Featly, have proved your Church
to be visible in all Ages, and named visible Protestants, then I promise you
to prove the Visibility of the Catholic Roman Church: but that is not done
by you yet.


D. Featly. It had bin done, but for your delays and tergiuersations. Answer
briefly and directly to my former argument, and I will descend to my Induction,
and produce the names of such eminent persons as in all Ages have maintained
the substantial points of faith, in which we differ from your Roman Church.

That Church whose faith is the Catholic and Primitive faith, once given to
the Saints, without which none can be saved, is so visible, that the names of
the professors thereof in all Ages may be showed and proved out of good
Authors.

But the Protestant Church is that Church, whose faith is the Catholic and
Primitive faith, once given to the Saints, without which none can be saved:

Therefore the Protestants Church is so visible, that the names of the
professors thereof may be showed in all Ages, etc.

The Mayor is, ex concessis. What say you to the Minor?


M. Fisher. I distinguish the Minor.


D. Featly. Upon what term do you distinguish?


M. Fisher. I distinguish of the proposition, not of any term.


D. Featly. Here is again another strain of new Logic, to distinguish of a
proposition, and apply the distinction to no term: howsoever, I am glad to
hear you distinguish, and not simply to deny, that the Protestant faith is the
Catholic Primitive faith. Mark, I beseech you, you that are present, that M.
Fisher demurres upon the proposition; his conscience will not suffer him simply
to deny, that the Protestant faith is the Catholic Primitive faith: we simply
and slatly, and in downright terms deny, that your present Tridentine faith
is the Catholic Primitive faith.


M. Fisher. I answered you before, that your Minor is false and impertinent.


D. Featly. I have proved already, that it is pertinent: what say you to the
truth of it?


M. Fisher. This is to divert from the question, The question is not now,
Whether our faith or yours be the Catholic Primitive faith: but the question
now is of the effect, to wit, the Visibility of your Church, which you ought to
prove out of good Authors.


D. Featly. May not a man prove the effect by the cause? Is there no other
means to prove the effect, but by naming men, and producing Authors for it?


M. Sweet. An effect is posterius: the question is about an effect: therefore
you ought to prove it a posteriori.


D. Featly. What a reason is this? May not an effect be proved by his cause?
Must an effect be needs proved by an effect? or a posteriori, because an
effect is posterius?


M. Sweet. Leave these Logic Disputes. Bring the names of your Protestants:
that is it we expect.


D. Featly. If I should relinquish my former argument, to which yet you have
given no manner of answer, you, M. Fisher, would report that I was non-plussed,
as you slandered D. White in a former conference, who (I tell you, M. Fisher)
is able to teach us both. Whereto M. Fisher replied nothing.


To prevent all such mis-reports to the wrong of either, it was moved by the
hearers, that it should be written down by the common Writer of the
Conference, that both the Disputants being willing to proceed, D. Featly was
desired by the company (because it was late) to produce the names of such
Protestants as were extant before Luther in all Ages. This being written and
subscribed by them both, D. Featly proceeded to his Induction.

D. Featly. An induction is a form of argument; in which we proceed from
enumeration of particulars, to conclude a general, after this manner:

It is so in this and this; et sic de eaeteris, and so in the rest:

Therefore it is so in all.

According to this form of arguing, thus I dispute:

The Protestant Church was so visible, that the names of those who taught and
believed the doctrine thereof, may be produced in the first hundred years,
and second, and third, and fourth; et sic de caeteris, and so in the rest:

Therefore it was so in all Ages.

First, I name those of the first Age, and I begin with Him, who is the
beginning of all, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, blessed for ever: at whose
name all knees must bow both in heaven and earth, and under the earth (at which
words all the company on both sides expressed an holy reverence). After Christ,
I name the twelve Apostles, and Saint Paul: and because there were few Writers
in the first Age (at least, whose undoubted works have comne to our hands) I
name only Ignatius after the twelve Apostles, and Saint Paul; yet not denying,
but that many others may be named.


M. Fisher. These are enough for the first Age; Christ, the twelve Apostles,
Saint Paul and Ignatitius.


Here, at the name of Ignatius, some of M. Fishers side seemed very glad and
confident, saying, We are sure enough, Saint Ignatius is on our side.

D. Featly. I mean not the new Ignatius Loyola, but Ignatius the Martyr:
between whom there is more difference in quality, then distance in time.


M. Fisher. Name of all the Ages, or else you do nothing.


D. Featly. I cannot name all at once: will you have me name men of so many
Ages with one breath? Will you have me eat my whole dinner at a bit? Can I
name twelve severally, but I must name first one, then two, then three, and so
forward? I name (as I said before) in the first Age, for our Religion, our
blessed Lord and Savior, the Founder of all Religion, the twelve Apostles, and
after them Saint Paul, and Ignatius the Martyr. For the second Age, I name
Justin Martyr, Saint Cyprian was here mentioned, but intended for the first of
the third Age.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Saint Irenaeus, and I begin first with Christ and
his Apostles.


M. Fisher. You shall not begin with Christ and his Apostles.


D. Featly. You are not to make my Induction: I will begin with Christ and his
Apostles, where I should begin, but in the first Age, and with the first of it:
shall I make a Catalogue of the Christian Church, according to the several
Ages, and leave out Christ and his Apostles in the first Age? Answer first to
them, and I will proceed to others.


M. Fisher. Name the rest in all Ages, and then I will answer you.


D. Featly. First, answer to the first Age, and then I will proceed to the
second. If you grant me the first Age, then I will proceed presently to the
second; otherwise I must stay in the first.


M. Fisher. Unless you give me a Catalogue of names throughout all Ages, I
will not answer.


D. Featly. Will you not answer Christ and his Apostles in the first place?


M. Fisher. I will not, before you have named the rest.


D. Featly. Will you not be tried by Christ and his Apostles?

That which Christ and his Apostles taught in the first Age, was taught by
succeeding Christians in all Ages* this is confessed on both sides.

But the doctrine of the Protestants was taught by Christ and his Apostles in
the first Age*

Therefore the doctrine of the Protestants was taught in all Ages.

Answer this Syllogism, if you will not answer my former induction.


M. Fisher. I will not answer you any thing, till you have made your Catalogue.


D. Featly. M. Fisher, I charge you, as you will answer it before Christ
himself at the dreadful day of Judgment, answer now, upon your conscience,
before all this Company, whether you believe, that Christ and his Apostles
taught our faith or yours: this is the maine point of all: answer directly to
my Induction.

Notwithstanding this deep charge, M. Fisher still refused to answer to the
argument of instance in Christ and his Apostles: whereupon diverse, expressing
their distaste at such refusal, desired D. Featly to surcease; telling him,
that he ought not to talk any longer with such a one, who refused to answer
Christ and his Apostles. And so the conference brake up, having lasted about
four hours.


Additions to the former Conference.
IF any man marvel, that in so many hours spent in the Conference, so few
arguments were discust, or rather, not any one thoroughly untwisted to the end,
as the Opponent desired, the cause hereof was, the Jesuits diffusiue and
discursiue answers, but especially his dilatory cautions and tergiuersations,
who would not suffer the Opponent to proceed in his argument, without dictating
it first to the common Writer of the conference; and then, reading it, and
setting his hand thereto: which after he had done, the principal Respondent,
M. Fisher, meditates by himself an Answer; which he first writes in a private
paper, then shows it to his Assistant, M. Sweet, and two other that stood by:
according to whose advice he adds, blotteth out, and alters what they
thought fit. After this, he dictateth it out of his private paper to the common
Writer of the conference; then resumes this schedule from him, and, having
compared it with his private paper, subscribes it as a Record, and then reads
it openly. This long spinning, wreathing and winding, he used to every
Syllogism: which was so tedious and irksome to the Auditory, that a Protestant
Divine standing by, vpbraided him in this manner: M. Fisher, what have we
deserved of you, that you should thus torment us, to make us stay half an hour
for an Answer to every Syllogism and Prosyllogisme?

The Lord of Warwick also more than once called upon M. Fisher to come to the
point, to answer briefly and directly, without discourses or vn^^cessary
distinctions. A short lesson may be long in playing; where there are more rests
than notes, as it was here. Yet all that passed in the conference, is not
particularly and punctually set down. Some things were omitted: which omissions
because the Author complains of, we thought fit here to supply.

1. About the entry into the conference, M. Fisher offered a paper to be read:
part whereof was read by D. Featly; the rest he refused to read, saying, M.
Fisher, lis contestata est, we are already agreed upon the Question: we have
received the Tenet under your own hand, and are prepared to oppose it: it is
no time now to tie your Opponent to new conditions.

2. About the propounding the first Argument, when M. Fisher carped at the word
eternal; D. White, to try and wind M. Fisher, did cast a Syllogism (...), to
prove the eternity of faith from the eternity of the cause, the divine
predestination. Whereunto when M. Fisher, or some standing by, answered, that
in that sense all other things might be said to be eternal; another Protestant
standing by added, that faith might be said to be eternal, in that sense in
which eternal is taken, for e^iternall: so the souls of men are said to be
eternal, because though they had a beginning, yet they shall have no end.
Neither so, said M. Fisher, may faith be said eternal, because the Apostle
says, Faith cease. These Answers and Replies upon the By, we omitted,
because D. Featly sufficiently expressed his mind by the Synonymie, which he
added to eternal, to wit, perpetual: and besides, the disputation was not of
the habit or infused grace of faith, which, Saint Paul says, cease, but of
the object or doctrine of faith, which is eternal in that sense, in which S.
John calls the Gospel eternal, Reu. 14. 6. (...). I saw an Angel fleeing
in the midst of heaven, having the eternal Gospel.

3. About the middle of the conference, D. Featly took occasion, by the
Jesuits often inculcating and ingeminating the same Answer, to tax their
battologie or vain repetitions in their Jesus Psalter, and other Books of
Prayers; saying, M. Fisher, I think, you partly believe, that the often
repeating the same Answer, adds truth and strength to your Answer; as you are
persuaded, that the saying-ouer the same Prayers, and repeating the name Jesus
so many times by tale, adds merit to the Prayers.

M. Sweet. What fault can you find with the often repeating the name Jesus?
Does not the holy Ghost in the Scripture diverse times reiterate the Attribute
Holy, saying, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus?


D. Featly. Is there no difference between the repeating the word Holy or
Sanctus three times, and repeating the name Jesus thirty times at the least?
nay, says a Protestant standing by, a hundred and thirty times?


M. Fisher. In one of Dauid's Psalms, these words, for his mercy endures for
ever, are repeated in every verse.


D. Featly. It is true: these words, for his mercy endures for ever, are
elegantly and sweetly repeated, as the burden of that heavenly Song: but note
withal, M. Fisher, that something comes betwixt, and that this Epiphonema or
clause is applied in every verse to a several blessing of God there remembered:
what is this to the saying continuately, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, forty times in a
breath. If this be not the vain repetition or babbling forbidden in prayer by
our Savior, Mat. 6. 7. I know not what it is.


M. Sweet. It matters not. You are no lawful Interpreter of Scripture.

To which words as D. Featly was making a reply, he was recalled by the
company, to prosecute his main Argument.

Here you may observe by the way, that M. Fisher saw well enough, that M.
Sweets instance of the thrice repeating the name Sanctus, was very frivolous,
and impertinently brought to maintain their vain repeating the name Jesus, so
many score of times together in their Psalter: and therefore he let M. Sweet
shift for himself, and make good his instance, if he were able: for, M. Fisher
could not be ignorant, that the Fathers generally observe, against the Arrians,
the mystery of the Trinity of Persons to be implied in the thrice repeating the
word Sanctus. Isa. 6.
If the Papists repeat the name Jesus to the like purpose (as they must do,
Apoc. 4.
if they take that for their pattern), will it not follow, that forty times
repeating the name Jesus, implies, that there are forty Persons in Jesus? So
well did M. Sweet keep his own pretended law, that none should speak any thing
but to the purpose: but, because he challenged to have made such a law
himself, peradventure he thought, he might dispense with it.

4. In the prosecution of the main Argument, when Master Fisher, being
required to give a direct and punctual answer to some proposition in the
Syllogism, digressed from the point, and discoursed, how an ignorant and
unlearned man might first come to the knowledge of the true Church, and was
checked by Doctor Featly, saying, This is not now to the purpose: M.
Chamberlane sitting by, added, The less to the purpose, the better. Would you
have Master Fisher speak to the purpose?

5. In making way to the Induction, when D. Featly was recalled, by a new
Answer of Master Fishers, to some former Argument which Doctor Featly went
about to refell, the Earl of Warwick advised him, notwithstanding this
interruption, to proceed to his induction; saying, Master Fisher, like a woman,
will have the last word, but it makes no matter; let him answer what he will;
we presume, his answers will be but like his former.

6. In propounding an Argument by an induction, after this manner: For the
first age, I allege for Teachers of the Protestants Doctrine, Christ, his
twelve Apostles, Saint Paul, and Ignatius; for the secondage, Iustine Martyr,
etc.


M. Fisher, after he had repeated the instance in the first age in these
words: In the first age you allege Christ, his twelve Apostles, Saint Paul,
and Ignatius, he added Transeat: name in the succeeding ages.


D. Featly. You grant then, Christ and his Apostles were Protestants.


M. Fisher. Will you slander me to my face? What will you do^ behind my back?


D. Featly. I slander you not. The word transeat, implies, in my understanding,
a concession; if not, then deny it, and I will presently prove it.

But as for this word transeat, though that we made a transeat of it, and let
it pass in our relation, yet his own side have taken special notice of it:
and indeed Master Fisher Lupum auribus tenet. If by transeat, he meant a
concession or grant of the proposition, we desire no more of him: if we have
Christ and his Apostles on our side, what need we more? To avoid this
inconue^ience, if he interpret this transeat, Let it pass, as not worthy of
his Answer or notice; thus to slighten an Argument drawn from His authority
(whose words shall not pass, though heaven and earth pass) it cannot receive
a good construction. But we spare Master Fisher, quia vapulat intus in
poscenio, because he has bin schooled at home. Forsooth this Non been creed
mihi faciunt duo: Sufficit vnus.

Surely many, that hold Master Fisher to be a great Gamaliel in the Romish
Synagogue, very much marvel, that being so often pressed and urged, yea, and
adjured also, he should yet still decline to make any Answer at all to the
Opponents instance in Christ and his Apostles. But, the truth is, he and his
companions are of the b^ood of those, whom Tertullian fitly terms Lucifugas
Scripturarum, ^^unners of the light. Like Bats, they keep a fluttering in the
twilight of supposed humane authorities, and plausible glosses of reason, but
the broad daylight of Scripture they cannot endure. Though in his Question he
laid claim to all ages, in which any Scholar, according to common sense and
natural apprehension, would understand, that he meant Methodically to begin
at the first age, and thence prepetua serie to descend to the later, as do the
framers of their own late extant Catalogues of Roman professors, beginning
with Christ Jesus, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Corinthians, Ephesians,
Thessalonians, etc. ordine naturae et temporum, yet he preposterously would
have the Opponents begin first with the last age, and so ascend upwards. Omnia
naturae contraria legibus ibunt; that so he might the better lurk in the
dark and muddy age next before Luther. Which the Opponent justly suspecting,
resolved to hold to the high way and fair tracke of natural method, intending
thereby to draw him into the clear stream of Antiquity, beginning at the
fountain in the first age. But this, Master Fisher would by no means endure,
hoping, that he might lie hid (tanquam Sepia in atramento suo, like the
Scuttle-fish in her own ink) in those dark ages next or near before Luther:
whereas being beaten up into the cleerer stream of the first ages, he would
easily be discerned, and soon caught.

7. At the breaking up of the Conference, when Master Fisher desired to have in
his own custody the common Schedule (in which the principal Arguments and
Answers of the Disputants were written by the common Notarie, chosen by both
parties, and subscribed by their own hands) Doctor Featly withstood this
motion, saying, Master Fisher, you are not a fit man to be trusted with this
Authentical writing: for, in a former conference between me and Master Musket
(whose Assistant you then were) you took upon you, (without any commission
from me, or consent) the office of a Notarie, to take my Answers: and being
upon occasion pressed by the company to read what you had written, after some
tergiuersations you read it, and thereupon were checked by the whole company,
for setting that down for my Answers, which was never spoken by me, nor any
thing like unto it: and that I charge you truly with this undue dealing, I
appeal to some here present, viz. Doctor Goad and Master Wats* who were
present at that conference. Here Doctor Goad and Master Wats affirmed to Master
Fishers face, that upon their knowledge, Master Fisher was convicted of untrue
setting down Doctor Featlyes Answers in that conference; and that upon such
conviction, Master Fisher was forced to correct what he had formerly set down.


Heerto Master Fisher, much moved at such imputation, answered:

M. Fisher. I call God to witness, that if I did set down any thing otherwise
then the truth wa^, I did it not wittingly nor willingly.


Whereunto Doctor Goad replied,

D. Goad. Whether you did it wittingly or willingly, be it between God and
your conscience: sure we are, that what you wrote down untruly, was
aduantageous to your own side; and therefore we had just cause to suspect,
that you did it wittingly and willingly.

An Attestation concerning some particulars, set down in a Relation entitled,
The Fisher catched in his own Net.
Whereas the Relation of that which passed in the Conference touching the
Visibility of the Church, June 27. 1623. is in the whole course of it truly
and indifferently delivered, and rather moderately and favorably carried, in
regard of the Adversary respondent, Master Fisher, whose part, in respect of
his delays and euasions, was not altogether so tolerably acted, as in the said
brief Relation it is represented: we hold it needless to give thereunto any
other general Attestation; especially considering, that the principal Heads
thereof are extant under the hands of both parties; and the chief substance and
current thereof, for ought we find, is not rejected by the Adversary. Yet
because a Counter-relator, calling himself A. C. has of late put forth in
print an answer to the said Relation, and therein (not content to slighten and
doubt of some passages) has by express denial excepted against diverse other
particulars, so charging the Protestant Relator with crimen falsi: we, who
were present at the said Conference, and attentive unto it, could not in equity
and conscience be wanting to the support of truth, by our joint Testimony
here following.

1. The Counter-relator avouches, Page 15.
that There, (viz. in the beginning,) and not in the end of the Disputation,
Doctor Featly did say, I wish, I warn, I command, I conjure you, etc. Herein
we find a double falsification. The first, by denial of that which, to our
perfect remembrance, was by D. Featly spoken to Master Fisher in the end of the
disputation; when Master Fisher, having bin often urged to answer the Instance
in Christ and his Apostles in the first Age, yet peremptorily refused.
Whereupon, Doctor Featly, with a loud and earnest voice, said unto him: I
charge and adjure you, as you will answer it before Christ himself at the day
of Judgment, answer now upon your conscience, Whether you believe that Christ
and his Apostles taught our faith or yours? The second falsehood is, by adding
and perverting that which was said in the beginning of the disputation by D.
Featly, without any mention of the day of Judgment, or coniuring, much less
commanding; which had bin uncivil. All that he then said to such purpose, was
this: I desire you, Master Fisher, to answer in this disputation to my
Arguments directly and sincerely, as in the sight of God. Which condition
Master Fisher did then accept, and required the like dealing from Doctor Featly.

2. In the same page is added a second Law, Page 15.
as enacted by Master Sweet, that Nothing should be spoken or heard, but to
the purpose. Which rule (though requirable and seasonable in all Disputes or
Tractates), yet was not mentioned by Master Sweet, nor prescribed by any other
in this Conference. The second then-mentioned Rule was, as is set down in the
first Printed Relation, that None should speak but the Disputants. Upon which,
diverse of the Protestant side, both Divines and others, did forbear to
interpose by way of Argument.

3. This Co^nter-relator is so bold, Page 16.
as flatly to deny that which upon our certain knowledge we testify; Namely,
that to the points of Popery instanced by Doctor Featly as novelties, Master
Sweet (interrupting him, before he had recited all of them) answered, These
are scholasticall points, not fundamental; And secondly, that hereupon Doctor
White forthwith replied with this Argument: These points are defined in your
Council of Trent; therefore they are to you fundamental; adding also expressly
this Syllogism:

Whatsoever denied makes a man an Heretic, is fundamental.

But the denial of any of these, makes a man an Heretic with you:

Ergo every one of these is to you fundamental.

To which Syllogism, being aloud and distinctly uttered by D. White, nothing
at all was answered.

4. With the same boldness, Page 16.
in the same page it is denied, that D. Featly used these words, Name but one
Father, one Writer of note, who held the Particulars there named (being points
of Popery) for five hundred years after Christ. Which words were uttered by him
distinctly and audibly, and (as it seemed to us) out of certain Notes in a
paper which he then had before him.

5. Item, Page 20.
howsoever M. Fisher might (as it seems he now interprets himself) mean
quoad nos, when he said, that A demonstration a posteriori is better than a
priori, yet in the disputation he spoke those words absolutely, and without
limitation. For which words so absolutely delivered, M. Fisher being then taxed
by M. Ailesbury, Page 32.
as defective in Academicall learning; M. Boulton, a Romanist, with indignation
replied upon M. Ailesbury in this manner: Think you your self better learned,
than M. Fisher? Whereto the other presently made Answer, I thought you wiser,
than to ask me such a Question.

6. Item, though they in general terms deny D. White to have spoken in the
manner set down, or to have used any such long discourse, yet we very well
remember, that D. White did then vpbraid the said Jesuits with those their
apparent tergiuersations, and hindering the Opponent from proceeding in his
Arguments; thereupon also requiring M. Fisher, according to the order set down
and assented unto by themselves, at length to oppose; the prefixed time, for D.
Featlie's opposing, being passed. And then D. White naming his own
propositions (mentioned in the Relation), offered forthwith to Answer upon the
same directly, without any delays or tergiuersations.

7. To M. Fishers protestation, Page 36.
that he did not wittingly nor willingly write amiss (in a former Conference
between M. Musket and D. Featly), the Popish Relator says, that nothing was
replied; and thereupon infers, that the Audience was well satisfied of M.
Fishers sincerity, in his relation and writing of the former Disputation. But
we perfectly remember, that thereunto D. Goad presently replied in this
manner: M. Fisher, Whether you did it wittingly and willingly, be it between
God and your conscience: I am sure you erred on that part which was
aduantageous for your own side. Upon which Reply (no further Answer being
given), we were and are so far from being satisfied of this Jesuits
sincerity, that we rather suspect him the more.

In this sort when the Company was willing to depart, Page 37.
D. Featly being called upon (as it seemed) by some of his companions, to go
away, did arise, and offer to be gone. Yet in his rising he turned to M.
Fisher; saying, Will you dispute of Christ and his Apostles, or not? To which
M. Fisher said, I will, if you will stay; and, stretching out his hand, took D.
Featly by the arm, offering to stay him: yet he in this abrupt manner went
away. Thus the Jesuits Relator.

This passage being of most moment, and (as we think) the principal intent of
setting forth this Counter-relation, to abate the imputation, lying heavy
upon the Jesuit, for his final refusing to answer to Christ and his Apostles,
we hold it fit, the more punctually to declare the manner and cause of the
breach of that Conference.

True it is, that upon the Jesuits often refusal to answer to Christ and his
Apostles, the Protestant auditory took much distaste, and for a short time
expressed the same, by a kind of obmurmuration, yet not by any shout of victory
(as is exaggerated by the Popish Relator). But after this noise ceased, D.
Featly still continued, urging the Jesuit to answer his said instance: which
the Jesuit peremptorily refused, persisting to the end, in his former denial
of answering Christ and his Apostles. And as for the Jesuits, by word and
gesture offering to answer Christ and his Apostles, if D. Featly would stay; we
(that were present, and diverse of us next to the Opponent) auow, that the
Jesuit used no such word at all, nor gesture of that kind: as in truth he
could not, being not so near in place to D. Featly, as that he could take him
by the arm, they being placed distant one from the other, at the opposite
ends and corners of the Table. Neither did M. Fisher arise out of his place, to
take D. Featly by the arm: nor, if he had, could he then come to reach D.
Featly, there being many that sat, or stood, close crowding about the Table,
and betwixt those two. Page 64.


The truth of his final and resolute denial is so evident, that the Popish
Relator (whom we take to be M. Fisher himself, under the Mask of A. C).
howsoever in this place he stoutly denies the said denial; yet, contrary to
the rule of his own Trade, Page 65.
Mendacem oportet esse memorem, page 64. he expressly acknowledges it: M.
Fisher and M. Sweet did very well to stand as they did, constantly to it. They
still kept the adversary to the point, and would not permit him to divert,
either to dispute about Christ or his Apostles, or any other point, until
names were given in all Ages. And page 65. he binds it with a reason, taken
from the principles of Hunting: The reason therefore why M. Fisher might well
refuse to enter into such particular Disputes, before full Induction of names
were ended was, for that this had bin to follow two Hares at once, and so to
catch neither, etc.

Lastly, as for taking D. Featly by the arm (pretended to be done by M.
Fisher, for the staying him to proceed in his proposed instance) true it is,
that when he had again and again inculcated this challenge, and could receive
no answer of acceptance, he was taken by the Arm, not to stay him, but to
pull him away; not by the Jesuit, but by two of his own side; the one wishing
him to depart, for that the time was far spent, and he could not come off
upon better terms; the Namely, M. Chamberlain.
other adding also, that himself could not endure to be an hearer any longer
of such a Dispute, where Christ and his Apostles are refused; and that he (D.
Featly) ought not to talk any longer with such an one, who refused to answer
Christ and his Apostles. And so, the Opponent being called off, or rather
pulled off, the Conference brake up.

These aboue-testified particulars, being so undoubtedly known, and perfectly
remembered by us, and many others; we cannot conceive how the Jesuit can
possibly salve those his gross denyals of them, but by the new subtle device
of refining a lie by Equivocation, and calcining any speech of their own,
though never so base and drossy a fiction, in the forging furnace of mental
reservation.

T. Lincoln, To. Warwick, Earls.

Hen. Hastings, Humph. Lynde, Knights.

Tho. Goad, Doctor in Divinity.

Richard Knightly, Edward Bugs, Esquires.

Richard Chamberlain, Esquire, Clerk of the Court of Wards.

Tho. Draper, Tho. Gataker, Batchelors in Divinity.

Tho. Ailesbury, Master in Arts; the Writer of the Conference, chosen by both
parties:

A REMONSTRANCE sent in a letter, by Doctor Featly, to his worthy Friend Sir
Humfrey Lynde, touching the former conference held at his house, June 27. 1623.
PLiny writes of one of the Roman Emperors, Natural. hist. l. 36. c. 5.
that he used to behold the Fensers (playing their prizes before him) in the
reflection of an Emerald: Gladiatorum pugnas spectabat Smaraegdo.
which so refreshed his eye with the verdure thereof, that though the Object
were not very acceptable always, and pleasing to him; yet the viewing it in
that precious reflecting Gemme was very delightful. Such a precious Emerald is
the heart and affection on of a true friend, which represents, with delight and
content, those things concerning our selves and others, which otherwise of
themselves may be irksome and grievous unto us. I must confess, your Letter
touching our conference at your house, had many Pills wrapped up in it: yet were
they so sugared with your love, and gilded with your eloquence, that I easily
and pleasantly swallowed them down. It grieueth you much, that our pains in the
conference (which took the good effect you desired) should be no better
accepted and interpreted, then they are by some, as is reported. The Roman
Senate gave public thanks to Terentius Varro, for encountering Hannibal at
Cannae, though with the loss of their (...) Army. But it falls out contrary,
say you; in this encounter. In which though the truth lost nothing, but gained
him, whose satisfaction was by it intended, and strengthened also many others;
yet you add, that you find some of our profession more ready to except
against, then approve the proceedings in this combat. I marvel not at it. For,
Saint Jerome, after he had undergone an encounter in point of faith, was taxed
by some friends to the truth, for not managing that fight so well as they
wished. Ierom. Apol. ad Pamachiu^.
To whom that accomplished Doctor of the Church, returns this smart Answer:
Delicata doctrina est pugnanti ictus dictare de muro; et cum ipse vnguentis
delibutus sis, cruentu^ militem accusare formidinis: It is an easy and sweet
kind of teaching, for a man that is safe himself, and free from danger of
blows, from a high wall to dictate strokes, and point out to a soldier in the
Field, where he should smite his adversary. If those, who are so confident of
their own strength and skill, had been on the place, and engaged in the fight,
peradventure it may be doubted, what great trophies they would have erected of
their victory over these Combatants. Howsoever, for my part, I never held that
Lacedaemonian King Eras. Apoph.
ouerwise, who, having received good approbation from Jupiter, was not content
therewith, but sends to Apollo, to know whether he were of the same
judgment. I rest upon the gracious interpretation of his Majesty, and their
approbato^, who under him are the chief Leaders in the Lords Battles. For
others, I put them to their choice, Aut Hieron. Apol. ad P^mach. cap. 8.
proferant meliores epulas, et me conuiua vtantur, aut qualicunque caerula
nostra contenti sint: Either let them provide better cheer, and I will be
their guest, or if they will needs be mine, let them take what they find; a
short supper broke off, before the principal intended and provided dishes were
served in. If this will not satisfy them, I pray them to think, that many
times as some take a liberty to themselves, to censure other men's actions, and
sleighten their endeavors: so it is not unlikely, but that they may meet with
others, who will take the like liberty to censure their censures, and contemn
their contempts. But so much am I obliged to your love, worthy Knight, that
you have not only given me an inkling, that some except, but also acquainted
me what they except against that after-noones encounter. Their exceptions lie
either against conferences in general in point of Religion, of which belike
they say, They never saw any good come; or against the passages of this
Conference in particular.

For Conferences in general with the Adversaries of our faith, either to
convert them to the Truth, or convince them with the Truth, we have not only
frequent precepts and examples in Scripture, but also an express Can. 66.
Ministers to confer with Recusants.
Canon of our Church, and an especial charge, even with increpation from his
Majesty, in his Speech in the upper House, at the first Session in the last
Parliament. And if these were not, shall we suffer Wolves to enter into our
Folds, and worry our dearest Lambs, bought at the high price of our Redeemer's
Blood, and that before our eyes, and not open our mouths for their rescue? Can
we hear our noble Champions disgraced; our blessed Martyrs blood of England
trampled upon, as spilt in vain; nay, our dearest Mother, which has brought us
forth in Christ, to be proclaimed an harlot, and all her children bastards,
nay, damned miscreants, as having no visibility of Church, no possibility of
salvation; and none of us vnsheath the sword of the Spirit in so good a
quarrel? O patientiam omni impatientia dignam! Such patience would put a man
out of all patience. Such silence deserves a long and loud declamation against
it. Is this to be ready to give an account to every man that demands a reason
of 1. Pet. 3. 15
the hope that is in us? Is this to stop Tit. 1. 11
the mouth of those who subvert whole houses, by leading away captive simple
women laden with iniquity, and by our Eue-tempting Adams to eat the forbidden
fruit? Is this to Tit. 1. 9.
convince the gainsayers? I fear and tremble when I read the words of our
Savior; Ioh. 10. 12, 13
An hireling, seeing the Wolf, leaves the sheep, and flees, and the Wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep. I speak not of public disputations
(within a State settled and resolved many years in point of Religion, as ours
has been, and is, God be thanked), but of private occasional conferences, for
the satisfaction especially of persons of quality: which, as Gaspar Laurent. de
publicis disputationibus.
Laurentius truly collects, without great offense to God, and scandal to his
Truth, cannot sometimes be anoided; the Adversaries growing confident upon
such seeming diffidence and refusal, and clamorous upon our silence. Aristotle
was wont to say, Plut. apoph.
(...): It is a shame for me to hold my peace, when Zenocrates takes upon him
to teach. May not we of the Ministry, that are Christ's maeniall servants,
reflect in like manner on our selves, and say, (...): It is a shame for me to
be silent, when Priests and Jesuits are so clamorous? It is a shame for the
Ministers of Christ to be backward to defend, when the Agents of Antichrist are
forward to oppugn our most holy faith? nay, when the Supporters of heresy and
idolatry have taken so much brass from the Images which they worship, to arm
their own foreheads with, that they dare challenge and brave Truth and Religion
to her face? Yea, but say they in the words of Tertullian, Tert. de praescript
cont. haeret. c. 17.
Quid promouebis, disputator, etc.? What shall we gain by confronting these
men? They will not yield, nor cease to blaspheme the way of truth, though they
be never so plainly confuted. Non persuadebis, nec si persuaseris. Yet the
Truth is honored, in that she has Advocates to plead her cause: and these
pleadings erunt testimonio contra eos, shall be an evidence against her
Opposites at the Bar of Christ. The Quintil. Institut. orat. Gubernator vult
salua naue in portu peruen^re: si tamen tempestate abreptus fuerit, non ideo
minus erit gubernator.
Pilot does not always bring the Ship safe to the Haven; nor the Surgeon
cure the wound; nor the Physician recover his Patient; nor the Preacher gain
his Auditory: yet, if he do his part, he loses not his reward with God, nor
approbation with men. To labor for fruit, is ours: the fruit of our labor is
Gods; who will render to every man Romans 2. 6 Apoc. 20. 13
according to his work, not according to the success thereof. And therefore
although the issue of Conferences should prove no better sometimes, than of
Synods in the days of Gregory Nazianzene, yet would not this excuse our
neglect of so necessary a duty: for, God can gain by our losses, and he
attaineth his end, even in our failing; at least, Romans 1. 20
(...), to make the enemies of the truth inexcusable. And what if we do not
win them, yet we confirm both our selves and others, that love the Truth in
the Truth. And in this respect, Conferences, if they be advisedly undertaken,
and discreetly managed, according to their Latin Etymology, always confer
and conduce to some good end; to speak nothing of the Conference at
Hampton Court, or D. Rainolds conference with Heart: the fruit whereof we gather
even at this day. Whosoever reads the life of Saint Austen, penned by
Possidonius, and Caluins by Beza, shall find, that as the Pelagians and
Manichees of old, so the Libertines and Anabaptists of late, received their
smartest blow by disputation. Did not Cyril confound Nestorius; Athanasius,
Arius; Saint Austen, Fortunatus, by disputation? By what did Luther gain more,
than by disputations? Was not Felix, Possid. in vit.
Saint Austens purchase, if I may so speak? Synop. Cent.
Was not Berillus, Saint Origens? Fabius, Dionysius his Convert by disputation?
What better issue of a Conference could be desired, than was that of Caecilius
with Octauius, related by Dial. Octa^.
Minutius Felix? which ends thus: We are both, says he, winners in this
Game: you have won me, and I have won the Truth Tu victor mei, and ego
triumphator erroris: We are both Conquerors: you have conquered me, and I
triumph over my own error.

Of writing many Books, especially of Controversy, there is no end: in which,
we have an Argument without an Answer, and an Answer without a Reply. But, in
a Conference orderly carried, the force of every Argument, and sufficiency of
every Answer, is brought to the Test; and Truth and Error, by grappling
together, try their utmost strength. As, by smiting the Flint with the Steel,
we strike out fire: so, by the conflict and collision of contrary Arguments,
the clear light of Truth breaks out. Rain. These.
Vt aurum e terrae venis effossumab admistis terrae faecibus contundendo
segregant Metallici; ita veritatis aureus Thesaurus collisu rationum mundatur a
faecibus, etc. As those that work upon Mines, sever the precious metal from
earthly dregs, by beating the Ore in the stamping-mill: so the golden treasure
of Truth is severed from dregs of error, and cleared, by being beaten out by
Argumentations to or against. de veritate religionis Christ.
Ludouicus Viues long ago observed, that the true faith and Religion is like
gold, which is bettred by the hammer: but false religion, Heresy and
superstition, are like Alchumy-stuffe, or glass, which cannot endure the
stroke, but are battered in pieces by it. The Christian Religion never refuses
touch of argument: but the Gentiles of old, and the Mahumetans at this day,
refuse all trial by disputation; nay, they prohibit it under pain of death.

The Hussites, as Cocleus relates in their story, were ready to bid their
Adversaries battle by disputation, but their Adversaries were not so ready to
undertake them. Nay, Cocleus, hist. l. 1. l. 21.
John Gerson, in his Epistle to the Archbishop of Prague, is so far from
encouraging him to put the matter to a trial in disputation, that he advises
him to take a far different course with them, whom he there falsely calls
Pseudo-doctores, false teachers. Now, says he, The only ready way to cut
down Heresies, is by the temporal sword. Miracles are ceased; neither is it
lawful now to tempt God, to confirm our faith, tanquam nouellam, by Miracles.
Neque rursus in disputando apud tales pertinaci animositate contendentes, et
innitentes propriae prudentiae, vllus vnquam erit finis; quin potius nimis
altercando, iuxta verbum Senecae, deperdetur veritas, scandalizabitur populus,
laedetur quoque summa charitas. Denique talis obstinatorum proteruitas incidit
in illud poetae, Aegrescitque medendo. Neither will there be any end of
disputing with such pertinacious contenders, who rely upon their own wisdom:
nay rather, according to the words of Seneca, the truth will be lost with much
wrangling: the people will be scandalized; charity wounded; in a word, the
proteruitie of obstinate persons will make good that of the Poet, The wound is
the worse for the cure. So little did the Papists gain (whatsoever fair
gloss Gerson puts upon it) by disputation with those noble Forerunners of our
Protestant Faith: and far less have there successors gained by their
disputations in Germany, France and England. I need add no more to our
disputers against disputations in general, because they fight but aloof off. I
am now to buckle with those who take the matter and manner of this conference
to task: against which, as I understand by you, they object, that it was but a
Flourish, no Fight; a praeludium, and no true Encounter; no Argument in it
prosecuted to the full. This objection might have been spared, because in the
Conference it self it is confessed, that it grew not to that maturity, nor
attained that progress or issue which was desired: and there also it is
expressed, whose fault it was. If a heavy and dull Beast, in rich trappings and
furniture, making great show of metal by rising and curuetting, yet, being
spurred and lashed by the Rider, and beaten by all the standers by, will not
mend his pase, what disparagement is this to the Rider?

Howsoever, say they, the grapes being not ripe, were not fit for the press;
yet as unripe as they were, they quenched then his thirst for whom they were
gathered: and they, who, without knowledge of the principal Owners, put them in
a few weeks so often in the press, affirm, that the wine Qui me vendit
Bibliopola negat. Martial. Epigr.
lies not upon their hand. Notwithstanding this and some other testimonies, of
some kind of approbation of this rather assay, then performance, I had buried
this Embryo as soon as it was borne: and as it came into the world without a
Midwife; so it should have gone out of the world without a Bel-man, had not the
slanderous tongues of enemies saved the life of it: who, both in England and
beyond the seas, reported confidently, that it was such a misshapen and
deformed monster, that the parents were ashamed it should see the Sun. To
check these most false and injurious reports, and prevent future scandal, it
was in a manner necessary, that this pamphlet should be suffered to fly
abroad. And now that it is abroad, what do they libell against this little
Impe, unable to defend it self against such strife of tongues? They say, In it
the proofs are diuersiue, and that I decline the method required by Master
Fisher, plainly to prove the visibilitie of our Church, by producing
Catalogues of names in all ages, beginning from Luther; and so, ascending
upwards to Christ and his Apostles. When I read this objection in your letter,
I could scarce forbear laughing, because it brought to my remembrance the
simple Answer of a fresh water soldier; who, when his Antagonist remembered
him with a smart blow or two upon his head and thighs, exclaimed, What, man?
Can thou not see my buckler? Is not my buckler broad enough? I saw M. Fishers
buckler, and withal I observed his blind sides, at which I laid. Am I
therefore to be blamed? should I advise him, as Ajax does Ulysses, Ovid.
Metamorph.
Post clypeumque late, et mecum contend sub illo. Lie behind thy buckler, and
contend with me under it? The truth is, that in the ages immediately before
Luther, and since the Apoc. 20. 2.
1000 year, in which Satan was let loose, the Papists have much to say for the
visibility, yea and pomp too of their degenerating Church: but in the Primitive
times, especially in the golden Age, in which Christ and his Apostles, and
their immediate successors and Scholars lived and died, they have no more to
say for the visibilitie of their now new Romish Church, then Master Fisher and
Master Sweet said in the conference. Whosoever should have discoursed in those
days, of Masses without Communicants, or Communion without the Cup, or the
Lords Supper without Bread or Wine in substance, or prayers without
understanding, or adoring the Cross, or Dirges for the dead, or blessing Salt
and Spettle, or censing Images, or baptizing bells, or hallowing grains and
medals, or wearing Agnus Dei's, or praying by tale upon Beads, or of the
circumgestation of the Host, or Priest shaven crowns, or Monks Cowles, or
Cardinals Hatts, or the Popes ^triple Crown, or his pardons, and
dispensations, and taxes for all manner of sins, or his canonizing Saints, o^
deposing Kings, or the like; would have been thought besides himself.

This is the true cause why, the question being propounded, Of all ages before
Luther, I chose rather to descend from Christ to Luther, then ascend from
Luther to Christ and his Apostles. Demosthenes Orat. de Corona.
will by no means endure, that his adversary Aeschines should prescribe him
his method: he says, It is against the golden rule, to be kept in all
judgments, (...). Yea, but they say, this is not all: for, you turned quite
out of the way: You should have proved one thing, and you proved another. The
question was of the visibilitie of Church: but your arguments were of the
eternity of faith. Is not this thiug ad Eras. Adag.
Chou^; Ego respondeo de allijs: tu disputas de cepis: M. Fisher answered of
Garlike, and you spoke of Onions. For this unsavory exception, M. Sweet was
sauced in the conference: where it was proved against him, that to prove an
effect by the cause, is a direct and natural, and not a diuersiue proof. My
argument stands thus:

The true Primitive faith, once given to the Saints, has had, must, and shall
have always visible Professors thereof.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is the true Primitive faith, once given
to the Saints:

Therefore the Protestant faith has had, and shall have always visible
Professors thereof.

The Mayor is evident in Scripture, and confessed on all hands. The Minor I
offered to prove: but the Jesuits durst not stand to their denial. The Mayor
and Minor passing without control, none but Master Fisher would have denied or
distinguished upon the conclusion. This argument I affirm not only direct, to
prove the conclusion denied; but also most pertinent to the maine scope of the
question, which is, to find out the true Church: whereof there can be no sound
and infallible proof, but out of Scripture. And for the visibility of the true
Church, either it is a matter of faith, or not. If not, what need we so much
trouble our selves with it? If it be matter of faith, De praescr. contr.
Haeret. c. 16.
Aliunde scilicet possunt suadere de rebus fidei, nisi ex literis fidei? can
they otherwise persuade in matter of faith, then out of the Writ of faith, that
is, the holy Scripture? For humane Stories and Records in all ages, they are not
easily found: and when we have found them, we find them so defective, so
corrupted and defaced, and oftentimes so contrary one to another, that they
scarce beget humane faith subject to error. And were they never so perfect, as
Bellar. confesses, they could not beget Bellar. l. 2. de effect. Sacram. c.
25. quod Histories quibus meminerint eorum Conciliorum, non potest parere fidem
nisi humanam, cui potest subesse falsa.
divine and infallible faith. If no man can be saved, without knowledge that
he is in the true Church: and no man can know, that he is in the true Church,
unless he can prove out of good Authors, the perpetual succession and
visibility of the Church to which he adhereth, as Jesuits make their
breake-neck climax or gradation; what shall become of many millions of
Christians in their own Church, who neither have time, nor means, nor
learning, to search all Records of Antiquity? Could all Lay Papists produce
Writers in all Ages, who maintained the present Tridentine faith (which none
yet of the their learned Clerks ever did, or could,) yet they are little
nearer: For Jews and Paynims, and it may be, diverse sorts of Heretics can
prove too many visible professors of their Heresies and impieties in all ages,
since Christ and his Apostles times, and some before. From visibility of
Professors no man can certainly conclude truth of saving Doctrine conformable
to Scriptures: but from conformity of Doctrine to the scriptures, a man may by
infallible consequence, grounded upon Gods promises to his Church, conclude
perpetual visibility of professors, more or less. And therefore the course I
took, is not only the straight, but the easiest and only certain way to
bring us to the true Church, which is the 1 Timothy 3. 15
house of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth. Thus much for proof
of my proof by syllogism. I will now give you an account of my Catalogue, and
show my inducements to my induction. Against which, I hear by you, it is
excepted, that in undertaking it, I leave the beaten way, and take a way by my
self, where I shall surely lose my self, and never come to an end. To this
objection, the civil Law furnishes me with an Answer: Nemo tenetur diuinare;
No man is bound to prophecy beforehand, especially of the success of
another labors. If leave be procured for a second Meeting, the golden thread
of succession, which I took hold of from Christ's blessed hand, and his
Apostles, shall be drawn down (God willing) to later Ages, even to Luthers
time. But what they mean by holding the beaten way, I cannot easily divine. If
they mean, that I ought to prove the visibility of the Protestant Church, by
having recourse merely to the corrupt Popish Church, (...); I say, that way,
perhaps beaten by some, yet seems to me a slipperie and dirty way: and I hope I
shall be able to show, that we need not Eras. Adag.
aurum in stercore quaerere, to seek the golden purity of faith, amids the dung
and dross of Romish superstitions, and deprauations in later ages. Many of our
Worthies have shown me a more excellent way; quos sequor a long, et vestigia
pronus adoro. These are, Doctor Abbot, now my Lord of Canterbury, in his Answer
to Hill; Humfrey to Campion his third reason; Doctor Usher, now Lord of Meth,
de successione Ecclesiae; The History of the Waldenses; Fox, Acts and
Monuments; Crispin, of the state of the church; Morneys mystery of iniquity,
with Riuets defense thereof; Simon Voious Catalogue of doctors; Illiricus
witnesses of the truth; Wolsius his select readings; Lydius his Waldensia, and
Mouster a Vortleys noble discourse. As those that travel by night through the
Be. Orat.
Hercynian Forest, when they are at a stand, observe certain birds fleeing
before them; and, by the brightness of their white feathers shining in the dark,
guide their steps, and find out a way: so, in vshering the Witnesses of
Truth throughout all Ages, when in the darker times mine own observations
shall fail me, I doubt not, but, by the bright wings of those auspicate birds
that have flowne before me, I mean the light* of their silver quils who have
wrote of this Subject, to find out my way.

I have omitted nothing that has been materially excepted against the
Conference, except an omission of the s^ate of the question; which they say is
not so perspicuously and dilucidly delivered, as they could wish. That which is
set down to this purpose in the entry into the Conference, they say is so
brief, that, Sen. de Ben.
instar fulguris terret magis quam illustrat, it is like lightning, which
rather scares, than lights the Passenger in his way. If this were a just
exception, yet it lies not against me, who had the Opponents part put upon me,
but against M. Fisher, who be-spoke himself to be Respondent. For, by the
orders of all Schools, it is the Answerers, and not the Opponents task, to
state the Question. He that keeps a Fort in battle, is to make his ramparts,
and guard the walls with redouts and outworks: the assailants part is to lay
well his batteries, and make breaches where he can.

At the next desired meeting, when D. White or my self should have supplied
the Respondents place, the Question should have been explicated to the full (by
the distinctions and conclusions heerin enclosed). But, as that Meeting, by
injurious suggestions, was then, so I fear, all future Meetings in this kind
will be stopped by the same Engine. The Informers, whether they were Popishly
or indifferently affected in points of Religion, I know not: sure I am, they
do the devil a great deal of wrong, by incroaching upon his office, which is,
To be (...): the Accuser of the brethren.
Accusator fratrum. As for mine own part, it grieves not m^ to receive a wound
from them, who, in due respect to Religion and Calling, should have rather
applied a salve. But I may truly say, in the words of Aria to her dearest
Partus,

-- Mart. Epigr.
Vulnus quod cepi non dolet, in quam: Sed quod tu caperes, hoc mihi, Linde,
dolet.

It grieves me, that you should suffer any thing for your religious and pious
intention, to regain your kinsman to our Church, and establish your friends in
the Truth. Yet let not this discourage you in your holy purposes for the good
of God's Church. Macte virtute. As you have raised Bertram: so raise other
witnesses of the Truth from the dust, and heal those Authors who have lost
pieces of their tongues (which the Indices Expurgatorij have cut off, for being
too long-tongued against the Church of Rome). And though peradventure you
receive no better reward, at least by some, than affronts for acknowledgements;
and rebukes for thanks; yet doubt not* one day, for a full recompense of your
pains and charges. Trust him for your Aur^ola, whom you trust for your Crown:
take his word for the Interest, upon whom we all rely for the Principal; who
as he fearfully threatens, that he will be ashamed of them who deny Mat. 10. 33
him before men, so he graciously promises to all those who Luke 12. 8
confess him before men, that he will confess them before his Father in
Heaven.

(...) DANIEL FEATLY.

Touching the Visibility of the CHVRCH.
The Questions propounded by the Jesuit, were,

1 WHether the Protestant Church was in all Ages visible?

2 Whether visible Protestants are to be named in all Ages, etc?

To the first question, I answer: This question, as all other, will be best
explicated

by Distinctions of the terms. Conclusions or Assertions upon the
distinctions.

The terms to be distinguished of, are three. The subject, A Church. The
denomination, Protestant. The attribute, Visible.


Of the term, Church.
The first distinction.
The Church may be considered Either in respect of election and inward
sanctification; Or in respect of outward vocation, and profession of the truth.


In this question, we consider the Church in the latter respect, in which
alone it is visible: for although the elect, as they are men, and profess the
true faith, are visible; yet men professing the true faith, as they are elect,
and inwardly sanctified and regenerated in their minds, are not visible.

The second distinction.
A Church professing the Christian faith, may be taken, either

More largely for a company of Professors of the true faith, whether they be
united under one government in one Country, Kingdom or Empire, or scattered
through the whole world.

Or more strictly, for a company of professors of the true faith, having
actual communion one with the other, united under one government, within
certain limits, secluded and severed from other societies and congregations. As
for example: The Reformed Church in France, at this day is united within it
self, and severed from the Popish Church, and the members thereof: among whom
yet they live, and ciuilly converse.

In this question, we tie not our selves to prove a Protestant Church in all
Ages, in the latter sense. It suffices, that we show it in the former, and
prove, that there were always those who* maintained the doctrine which we
now teach, whether they were united, or severed, had actual communion one with
another, or not; kept public assemblies by themselves apart, from the Roman,
and other Churches, or not: For as Saint Austen shows Aug. Contra Donatist.
lib. 6. cap. 4. Idem Spiritus sanctus ea dimittit, qui datus est omnibus
sanctis sibi charitate cohaerentibus, sieve se nouerint corporaliter, sieve non.
against the Donatists, The same Spirit of God is given to all Saints, who are
knit one to another in charity, whether they know one another corporally or not.

Of the denomination Protestant.
Distinction the first.
Protestants may be considered, Either according to their name, taken from at
legal act of protesting either against the Council of Trent, or against the
D. Andrew, now Bishop of Winton, Resp. ad Apolog. Bellar. page 20.
Protestantium nostris nomen ab euentu fuit: errores enim tu^ quosdam and abusus
non diutius tolerare velle se, sed ^am tollere protestati sunt; caetera vero
quae sa^a vobiscum retinere.
errors and abuses of Popery, when they grew to their full measure, and were
most insufferable, about the time that Luther began to oppose the Church of
Rome, or a little after; or from the Protestation of the Bohemians, in the
year of our Lord 1421. set down by Cocl. lib. 5.
Coclaeus, in his L. 5. histor. of the Hussits:

Or according to their faith and doctrine, positiuely comprised in, and
confined to scripture; and oppositely, as it is repugnant to all errors in
faith, and manners, against the holy Scriptures, especially against the present
errors of the Church of Rome.

In this question, we consider Protestants in the later sense, not in the
former. The name, we confess, of Protestants is not very ancient, as neither
is the name of Papists, much less of Jesuits: but the Doctrine of the
Protestants we maintain to be as ancient as Christ and his Apostles: Ignat.
Epist. ad Philad.
and we may truly say with Ignatius the Martyr, (...): Jesus Christ is my
antiquity. As the same piece of gold successively passes through diverse stampes
and inscriptions: so the self-same faith of Protestants, in substance, has
passed through all Ages, yet with diverse names; as of Becherits, Berengarians,
Petrobrusians, Henricians, Albingenses, Waldenses, Dulcinists, Lolards,
Luiddamites, Wickleuists, Hussites, Thaborits, Lutherans, Hugonots, Gospellers
and Reformers. The faithful, as we read in the Acts, Acts 11. 26.
were first called Christians at Antioch: yet were they indeed Christians, even
from Adam, after the promise was given, that the Genesis 3. It shall break thy
head.
seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. So, that although we should
grant to Apolog. ad Reg. Ang.
Bellarmine, that the name of Protestants was not heard of, for 1500. years
after Christ, yet would it not hence follow, but that the Protestants faith
might be as ancient as Christ and his Apostles, yea, in a true sense, as Adam
himself; since the Protestant faith is no other then the pure Primitive
Christian faith.

Distinction the second.
Protestants in faith and doctrine are of two sorts; either

Implicitly, and vertually: and such are all those, who holding the Scripture
for the sole and entire rule of faith, condemn consequently all doctrines of
faith, against or besides the holy Scriptures, especially if they deliver such
positions and doctrines, from whence by necessary and infallible consequence,
some particular error or other of the Romish Church (although not perhaps
sprung up in their time) may be refelled.

Or explicitly, and actually: and such are they, who directly and professedly
opposed Romish errors as they crept in, or not long after; especially those who
opposed the whole mass of Popish errors and superstitions, after they grew to
a ripe sore, fit to be lanced, about the time of Luther.

In this question, we restrain not the name Protestants, to those who
renounce all the particular errors of the present Romish church at this day:
for such Protestants could not be much before Luther. The particular diseases
must in nature be presupposed, before a particular remedy can be applied unto
them. Reformation necessarily presupposes a disorder, and deformation. Neither
do we restrain the name Protestants, to such only as in particular set
themselves directly and professedly against some special error of Popery, as
of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, etc. for such professed
opposing, could not be imagined, before such errors were in being. But as the
Fathers, before the Council of Nice, did not in words define (...), or that
the Son was of the same substance with the Father, and not (...) only, that
is, of a like substance; nor professedly wrote against the Heresy of Arius by
name: Homoousiani.
yet are they rightly esteemed (...) indeed, or maintainers of the right
belief, touching the consubstantiality of the Son to the Father; because out
of their Sentences and Writings this truth may be deduced, howsoever it be not
formally expressed in the term of (...): So all those are to be esteemed
Protestants, who, holding nothing against the protestant faith, deliver some
doctrines, and positions, from which some error of Popery or other may be
clearly refuted, whether such error were then maintained by any in the Church
of God, or no.

Of the term Visible.
A Church may be said to be visible, two manner of ways: either

Visible to the whole world, and that eminently, and in some sort pompously, as
the Roman Empire, and kingdom of Naples, or respublica Venetorum: Bellar. l. 3.
de Eccles. militante. c. 12.
in which sense, the Papists affirm, that the true Church ought always to be
visible: but we deny it.

Or visible to all the members of that Church, either such as God has already
called, or such as he will call in time, who by searching and due inquiry, may
and shall find out the true Church their mother.

In this question, we undertake not to prove a Protestant Church visible in
all Ages, in the first acception, but in the later only, we maintain a
visible; but not a conspicuous, eminent, and glorious face of a Church in all
Ages, consisting of an apparent Hierarchy, as the Papists teach.

I shall not need to add more distinctions for the explication of this first
question. I come therefore briefly to the particular assertions, serving for
the confirmation and illustration of the general and main conclusion,
touching the Visibility of the Protestant Church.

The first assertion.
The Church, in the most strict and proper acception thereof, is the whole
company of Gods elect. Thus S. Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews, describes
her: The Heb. 12. 23.
general assembly and Church of the first borne, which are written in heaven.
And Saint Gregory upon Ezechiel: There is one Church of the elect, both going
before, and following after. And again upon the Canticles: Christ, according
to the grace of his foreknowledge, has built a holy Church of Saints, which
shall eternally persevere in grace. And Saint Bernard: Greg. in Ezekiel.
This is the Church of the Elect. Hom. 15. l. 2. Vna Ecclesia est electorum
praecedentium atque sequentium.
Of this Church, Greg. in Cant. Sanctam Ecclesiam, de sanctis in aeternum
permansuris exstruxit.
Saint Austen Ber. ser. 68. in Cant. Haec est Ecclesia electorum.
speaks most expressly: He shall never be withdrawn from that Church, Aug. l.
20. de ciuit. Dei. c. 8.
which is predestined and chosen before the foundations of the world: Nunquam
ab illa Ecclesia seduceturpraedestinatae, et electa ante constitutionem mundi.
yet poor John Hus, as In his Catholic moderator.
H. C. a zealous Papist, rightly observes, was burnt, by the decree of the
Council of Constance, for saying no more in this point, then Saint Paul and
Saint Gregory said before him, viz. Cocleus Hist. Bohem. l. 3.
Catholica Ecclesia est omnium praedestinatorum duntaxat: The Catholic Church
consists of all those that are predestinate, and of them only. But the best
is, as our Resp. ad Camp.
Humfrey speaks pertinently: Combustus est, non confutatus Hussius: John Hus
was indeed burned, but he was never confuted. His doctrine is written with a
point of a Diamond, never to be razed out: for, it is Gods truth: The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. And so I fall into my second assertion.

The second assertion.
The Church in this acception, as it consists of the elect only, is known
to God only, and consequently is invisible. This the Apostle 2. Tim. 2. 29.
teaches: The Lord knows them that are his: And the Spirit intimates as
much in these words, Reu. 2. 17.
I will give him a white stone, and in it a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it. For, what man 1. Cor. 2. 11.
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? The Ier.
17. 9, 10.
heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins. This sovereign privilege of Almighty God,
to sound the bottom of man's heart, the faithful acknowledge in their
deu^utest prayers; as Solomon: 1. King. 8. 39.
Thou even thou only, know the hearts of all the children of men. And
Jeremy, Ier. 20. 12.
Thou that triest the Righteous, and see the reins, and the heart. And the
eleven Apostles: Acts 1. 24.
Thou Lord, which know the hearts of all men Now, if God only know the
heart, he only knows who believe in him, and love him in sincerity of heart.
Therefore let none, says Saint Cyp. l. 3. Ep. 3.
Cyprian, Nec quisquam sibi, quod soli filio tribuit Pater, vindicare se puter,
vt ad aream ventilandam et purgandam paleam iam far se posse, etc.
arrogate that which the Father has given to the Son only (to weet) in the
floor of the Church, to take the fan, and sever the chafe from the wheat.
The elect are the first borne, whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12. 23.
Now, what earthly man will take upon him to read that which is written in
heaven? Saint Prosp. l. de Great. and libero arbitrio, ad Ruffin: Certum apud
Deuin, definitumque esse numerum electorum ad vitam aeternam
Prosper forbeares it; defining, that God is he who defines the certain
number of those, who are predestined to eternal life. Whence we may rightly
conclude, that the Pope, in canonizing Saints, and entering them into the
heavenly Jerusalem, incurres into a pra^unire, by encroching on the
prerogative of Almighty God, who reserueth to himself alone the discerning of
vessels of honor, from vessels of dishonor, that is, the elect from the
reprobate. But our adversaries object, If we restrain the Church to the
elect, and pronounce them invisible, we make a Camp. rat. 3.
Platonicall Idea, or an aer^all body, or mathematical abstract of the Church.
Heereunto we answer, first* out of Saint Prosp. loc. sup^^ citat.
Prosper: Certum apud Deum esse numerum electorum, tam impium est negare, quaam
ipsi gratiae contraire: It is as impious to deny, that the number of the elect
is certain with God, as to deny grace it self. And will any dare to call that
a fancy or an imaginary Idea, which is most certain in the knowledge of God?
Secondly, we teach not, that the Church in this notion is an Idea, extra rem,
or singularia, or a body houering in the air, or floting in the fancy: we
teach, that it truly subsisteth, partly in heaven in the triumphant; and partly
on earth, in the militant part thereof. This militant part, though in respect of
the whole number and inward calling, it be invisible, yet in respect of the
outward calling to, and profession of saving faith, it is always more or less
visible. The elect are visible men, and exist in the visible congregations of
Christians, as the apple in the ey, or a Diamond in a Ring, or the soul in the
body. As Athens is called the (...)
Greece of Greece: so may we term them the Church of the Church: for, in
respect of them principally, are those glorious titles given, and gracious
promises made to the Church, which are registered in holy Scripture.

The third assertion (which trencheth near upon our question).

The Church, in a larger notion, comprehends all those who eternally profess
the true worship of God in Christ. Thus Lactantius Lactan. l. 4. Instit. dium.
c. vlt.
defines the Church: Catholica Ecclesia est, quae verum Dei cultum retinet:
hic est fons veritatis, hoc est domicilium fidei, hoc Templum Dei: quo si quis
non intrarit, vel a quo si quit exiuerit, aspe vitae ac salutis aeternae
alienus est etc. That is the Catholic Church, which retains the true worship
of God. This is the Fountain of truth: this the House of faith: this is the
Temple of God: he that shall not enter herein, or shall depart hence, is far
from the hope of life and eternal salvation. Of the Church in this acception,
our Mat. 18. 17.
Saviors words are to be understood, If he refuse to hear the Church, let
him be to thee as an Heathen or Publican. And Saint Lukes, Acts 15. 22.
Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church, etc. And 1. Cor.
11. 22.
Saint Paul 's, Despiseyee the Church of God, etc? And in his Epistle to the
Ephesians. 3. 2.
Ephesians: Unto him be glory in the Church, etc. And to 1. Tim. 3. 5.
Timothy: How shall he take care of the Church of God? The Church in this
notion is in Scripture compared to a field, wherein are tares with the wheat; a
floor, wherein is chafe with grain; a net, wherein are sweet fish, and
rotten; an house, in which are precious vessels and vile; to the Ark, in which
were clean and unclean beasts. To the Church taken in this sense, Mat. 16. 18.
Christ directs us: Tell the Church. And Saint Paul, That 1. Tim. 3. 15.
thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God,
which is the Church of the living God. And Saint Cypr. de simplic. praelat. Non
pertinet ad Christi praemia, qui relinquit Ecclesiam Christi. alienus est:
profanus est: habere ^am non potest Deum patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem.
Cyprian: He has no right to the rewards of Christ, who leaves the Church of
Christ: he is a stranger: he is a profane person: for he cannot have God to
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother. And Saint Aug. confess. l.
8.
Augustine, Non deputabo te inter Chr^stianos, nisi in Ecclesia Christi ^e
videro.
I will not account thee a Christian, unless, I see thee in the Church.

The fourth assertion.
The Church in this notion, as it extends to all that profess the true
Religion, and participate in the pledges of salvation, was ever, is, and shall
be in some degree visible to the end of the world. That it has ever been
hitherto visible, all Histories accord: and that it shall so continue to the
worlds end, our Saviors words are our warrant, Mat. 28. 20.
Go ye, and teach all nations, etc. andle, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world. For the continuance of Gods Word, the Prophet Esaias is
most peremptory: This Esaias 59. 21.
is my covenant with thee, says the Lord, etc. My words which I have put into
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from hence-foorth for ever. And Christ's
words are as direct for the Sacraments, that they shall be administered, till
his second coming: 1. Cor. 11. 26.
As often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye show forth the
Lords death till he come. And lastly, S. Paul 's words are as express for the
Ministry: Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. till we all come in the unity of
the faith, etc. It is true, Antichrist shall make great havoc of the Church,
and there shall be such a falling away, that Christ at his second coming shall
scarce find faith on the earth: false prophets, and false Christ's shall arise,
and seduce, if it were possible, the elect; but that is not possible:
hell-gates shall never so far prevail against the Church. Whatsoever
becomes of hypocrites and temporizers, it is certain that the elect shall
remain in it, and retain the (...) faith; and if they retain it, they will
also p^ofessed it (...) Romans 10. 10.
for with the heart, man believes unto righteousness (...) with the tongue,
confession is made unto salvation. Saint Aug. in Ps. 110. conc. 2. Quid est
quod dicis, Iam perijsse Ecclesiam de omnibus gentibus? Quando ad hoc
praedicatur euangelium, vt possit esse in omnibus gentibus, ergo ad finem
seculi Ecclesia erit in omnibus gentibus.
Austen thus stops the mouths of the ^onatists: What is that that thou
say, The Church (...) already perished, and gone out of all Nations? (...)
therefore the Gospel is preached, that it may be in all Nations, therefore
even unto the end of the world, (...) Church shall be in all Nations. I may
save the labor of heaping more testimonies to confirm this point, because
Page 52. and 53.
M. Fisher, in his reflection on the Conference, spends many lines and much
labor in fortifying it, as a strong bulwark (as he imagines) against us. I
conclude therefore with Saint Ambrose, Hexam. l. 4. c. 2.
Ecclesia (...) potest, effluere non potest: The Church may be euershadowed,
it cannot quite fail or be (...)

The fifth assertion.
The militant visible Church is not always equally visible, but sometimes it
is more visible, sometimes it is less. It was more visible in the Prophet
David 's days, Psalm. 79. 1. 2.
when he sung, In Jury is God known, his name is great in Israel, then it was
in the time that Hos. 3. 4.
Hosea prophecies of, Israel shall remain many days without a King, and without
a sacrifice. It was more visible in the days Mal. 1. 11.
Malachie foreshews of, From the rising of the Sun, even to the going down
there of, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, then in the days 1. King.
19. 18.
Eliah complains of: I, even I, am left alone. The Church was more visible in
the days of Solomon, when she is compared to a Psalm. 45. 10.
Queen honorably attended, then in the days Saint John foretells of, when
she is compared to a Reu. 12. 7.
Woman flying into the wilderness. She was more visible in the days Esaias 49.
23.
Esaias fortelleth of, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
nursing mothers, then in the days of Antichrists tyranny, when Kings Apoc.
17. 17.
shall give their Kingdom to the beast. In regard of this mutable estate of
the militant Church, Mica. 7. 8.
Micah gives her this Motto: Rejoice not over me, O my enemy: though I fall,
I shall rise again. And Solomon likeneth her to the Moon: Cant. 6. 10.
My Love is fair as the Moon. To which ground Saint Austen alluding,
interprets, Aug. in Psalm. 10.
Obscuram Lunam Ecclesiam, the Moon in the Eclipse or darkened, the Church in
trouble and persecution. And Saint Ambrose. Hexam. l. 4. c. 8.
Ambrose, Ecclesia, vt Luna, defectus habet et or^us frequentes: The Church, as
the Moon, has her often waxings and wainings. And in his Ambrose l. 5. ep.
31. Luna ipsa (qua propheticis oraculis species Ecclesiae figuratur) cum primum
resurgens in menstruas reparatur aetates, tenebris noctis obsconditur,
paulatimque cornua sua complens, vel e^ regione Solis obsoluens, clari
splendore sulgoris rutilat.
Epistle: The Moon it self (whereby, in the Oracles of the Prophets, the
countenance of the Church is figured) when at the first rising again, she is
renewed into the ages of the month, she is hidden by the darkness of the
night; and by little and little filling her horns, or right over against the
Sun, rounding them, does shine with the light of clear brightness.

The sixth assertion
The false and malignant Church is often time (...) visible, conspicuous and
ample, then the true Church: and consequently, eminent Visibility, amplitude,
and splendour is no certain note of the true Church. The glorious face and
outside of a Church, which dazleth our adversaries eyes, was rather against 1.
Kings 22. 22.
Michea, then for him: all the Prophets prophesied, etc. It was rather against
1. Kings 19. 10.
Eliah, then for him: for there were 450 Priests of Baal, besides C^^marims;
and he took no notice in a manner of any servant of God but himself. It was
rather against Ier. 18. 18.
Jeremy, then for him, when all the Priests took counsel against him, saying,
The law shall not depart from the Priest, etc. Nay, the glorious outside and
face of a Church, was rather against Mat. 27. 1.
Christ himself, then for him. All the chief Priests and Elders took counsel
against Jesus. Since Christ's death, to instance only in one sort of Heretics,
the Arrians (undoubtedly) would have carried the truth away by voices and
outward pomp, for some hundreds of years, if that were a safe trial: for Saint
Ier^m ad Lucif. c. 7.
Jerome complains, Tunc (...).
vsiae nomen abolitum est: tunc (...) fidei damnatio conclamata est (...)
Arrianum se esse miratus est: Then the name of substance was abolished: then
the condemnation of the ^^cene Creed was proclaimed, the whole world sighed and
marvelled, that it became Arrian, Vincentius Vincent. aduers. haeres. p. 6^.
put^ the^ case what was to be done, Quando, says he, Arrianorum venenu^ non
iam portiunculam quandam, sed pene orbem totum contaminauerat, adeo vt prope
cunctis Latini Sermonis Episcopis, partim vi, partim fraud deceptis, caligo
quaedam mentibus offunderetur: When as the poison of the Arrians did not infect
a little portion, but in a manner the whole world, insomuch that almost all the
Latin Bishops, partly by force, and partly by cunning, were intrapped, and had
a kind of mist cast before their eyes. These things being so, may we not
justly vpbraid the Papists, as Gregory Nazianzen does the Arrians, Nazian. ad
Arrian.
(...) etc? Where are they now, who vpbraid poverty unto us, and boast of their
wealth; who define the Church by multitude, and despise the little flock of
Christ; who honor the sand, and reproach the greater lights of heaven; who
treasure up Check-stones, and pass by Margarites?

The seventh Assertion.
When there is a difference between the visible professors of Christianity,
and each party pretends it self to be the true Church, in opposition to the
other, the only sure and infallible means to know which of the dissident
parties are of the true Church, is, by trying their doctrine by Scripture. To
this touchstone of truth, the Prophet Esaias 8. 20.
Esaias directs us, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. And our
blessed Savior; John 5. 3. 9.
Search the Scriptures: for in them you think ye have eternal life. And S.
Peter, 2. Pet. 1. 19.
We have also a more sure word of Prophecy; unto which, you do well, if ye
give heed as to a light that shines in a dark place. By this rule, the Acts
^7. 11.
Bereans examined the doctrine of the Apostle, searching the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so. Saint Austen Aug. de unit. Ecclesiae. c. 3.
best approoueth of this course, to come to the knowledge of the true Church,
In Scripturis Canonicis requiramus Ecclesiam: in the Canonical Scriptures let
us search the Church: And, Non audiamus, Haec dico, Haec dicis: sed audiamus,
(...) dicit Dominus. Sunt certi libri Dominici, quorum authoritati vtrique
consentimus; ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam: Let us not hear, I say this, or Thou
say this: but let us hear, This says the Lord. There are certain books of
God, to whose authority we both consent; there let us seek the Church. And,
after much debating the matter, he concludes the Chapter with these words,
Ergo in Scriptur is Canonic is eam requiramus: therefore let us seek her (the
Church) in the Canonical Scriptures. And, Quisque nostrum non in iustitia sua,
sed in Scripturis quaerat Ecclesiam. Aug. ep. 48. Saint Basil. ep. 82.
Basil directs us to the same course, (...): With whomsoever, doctrine
agreeable to Scripture shall be found, the truth is always to be adjudged to
be on their side. To forbear more allegations, the learned Author of the
imperfect work on Matthew, hearing the name of S. In Mat. 24.
Chrysostom, delivers a firmer conclusion, in formal and express terms,
and that several times; showing, that his judgment was settled and resolved
upon it. (...) modis ^stendebatur quae esset Ecclesia Christi, et quae
Gentilitas: nunc autem nullo modo cognoscitur, quae vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi
tantummodo per Scripturas: quare quia omnia haec, quae sunt proprie Christi in
veritate, habent et haereses illae in schemate, similiter Ecclesiam, similiter,
scripturas, similiter baptismum, similiter eucharistiam, et caetera omnia,
dem^m ipsum Christum: Volens ergo quis cognoscere quae sit vera Christi
Ecclesia, vnde cognoscat in tanta confusione multitudinis, nisi tantummodo per
Scripturas? Et post, Qui ergo vult cognoscere quae sit vera Christi Ecclesia,
vnde cognoscat nisi tantummodo per Scriptura^? Formerly it was showed many
ways, what was the true Church of Christ, and what was Gentilism: but now it
is known no other way, which is the true Church of Christ, but only by the
Scriptures. Wherefore, because all these things which properly belong unto
Christ in truth, even those heresies have in shadow; in like manner the Church,
in like manner the Scriptures, in like manner Baptism, in like manner the
Lords Supper, and all other things; finally, Christ himself: He therefore, who
is desirous to know which is the true Church of Christ, whence should he know
it, in such a great confusion of multitude, but only by the Scriptures? And a
little after, He that will therefore know which is the true Church of Christ,
whence should he know it, but only by the Scriptures? It is observed by those
who follow the Law, that when a Defendant excepts against the judgment and
jurisdiction of the Court, he certainly despaires of his cause in that Court.
And what can we interpret it in our adversaries, but distrust and despair of
their cause, to detract as they do from the perfection, and except against the
authority and sufficiency of Scripture, for deciding all controversies?

And here I will be bold to turn the Jesuit Campions roaring Canon against him
and his fellows: Edmund. Camp. rat. 1.
Cum multa sint quae aduersariorum in ca^sa diffidentiam loquuntur, tum nihil
aque atque sauctorum may as biblioru^ foedissime violata, (...) quid causa a
fuit, vt Euangelium Mathaei and Acta resigerent Apostolica? Desperatio, etc.
Quid (...) vt omnes Pauli repudiarent Epistolas? Desperati^, I may add,
following his tune, Quid Piggi^, Hosio, Lyndano; quid Stapletono, Bellarmino,
etc? Whereas there are many things which proclaim our Adversaries distrust of
their cause, so nothing so much as their profane violating of the Majesty of
holy Scripture. What was the cause, that the Manichees repeal the Gospel of
Saint Matthew, and the Acts of the Apostles? Desperation. What was the cause
that the Ebionites rejected all the Epistles of Saint Paul? Desperation. I may
go on, following the same note and tune, and say, What is the cause that
Ludouicus calls the Scriptures, Dead ink? Desperation. What is the cause that
the Bishop of Poictiers styles it in like manner, rem inanimem et ^^tam, a thing
without life, and dumb? Desperation. What is the cause, that Piggius, Ecehius,
(...), Pereonius, Norris, and diverse others so much detract from the authority
and sufficiency, and obscure the excellency of Scripture, by terming it, Nasum
cereum, Euangelium nigrum, Theologiam atramentariam, Lesbiam regulam? a Nose of
wax, a black Gospel, inkie Divinity, a Lesbian rule? Desperation. They
appeal from Scripture, under pretense, that it is an imperfect rule, and dumb
Judge, and therefore refuse to be tried by it in the points of difference
between us: why? because that if they should refer the ending of all
Controversies to Scripture, and put themselves on Christ and his Apostles, they
soon know what would become of them and their cause.

The eightth Assertion.
The paucitie of right Believers, and obscurity and latencie of the true
Church, protesting against the corruption and idolatry in the later ages
thereof, is most clearly foretold in Scripture. First, by our Luke 18. 8.
Savior: When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? In
hunc locum.
Maldonat the Jesuit answers, Vix fideminueniet: He shall scarce find
faith. False Mat. 24. 11, et 24.
Christ's and false prophets shall arise, and shall seduce many, yea, they shall
do signs and wonders, and seduce, if it were possible, the Elect. Secondly, by
Saint 1. Tim. 4. 1.
Paul, the Spirit speaks (...), exerte, expressly, that in the latter days
some shall fall from the faith. And in the second, to the 2. These. 1.
These. 1. There shall be a falling away first. Thirdly, by Saint Reu. 10. 3, 12.
John, After a thousand years, Satan must be loosed a little season. And, Reu.
12. 4.
The tail of the Dragon drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven. And,
Reu. 13. 3, 4.
All the world wondered after the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, et. v. 8.
saying, Who is like unto the Beast, etc.? All that dwell upon the earth shall
worship him, whose names are not written in the Book of Life, etc. Reu. 18. 3.
All nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornications, etc. And
no marvel, that the true servants of God were reduced to such a paucity, when
the devil and Antichrist set all their forces against them. Apoc. 12. 15.
The Serpent casts out of his mouth water, as a flood, after the woman, that
he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. I might allege many
pregnant testimonies, both out of the ancient Fathers, and the learned Papists
also of later time, for the black and gloomie, dark and dismal days of the
Church under the last and greatest persecution by Antichrist. But Saint Aug ep.
80.
Austens testimony is so clear for the obscurity and latency of the Church,
that I need add no more. Ecclesia est Sol, Luna, et Stellae: quando Sol
obscurabitur, et Luna non dabit lucem suam, et Stellae cadent de coelo,
Ecclesia non apparebit, impijs vltra modum saeuientibus: The Church is Sun,
Moon, and Stars: when the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not
give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, the Church shall not
appear, the wicked raging against her without all measure. Me thinks I hear
our adversaries say, What makes this observation for the Protestant Church or
faith? I answer, Much every way. It furnishes us both with a strong defensive
weapon, and offensive also. The defensive may be thus framed:

That Church which has been persecuted, massacred, wasted, and driven to
great extremity, and reduced to a small number, resembles the true Church, as
the state thereof is described in her later Ages.

But the Protestant Church, especially since the 1000 year after Christ, has
been persecuted, massacred, wasted, and driven to great extremity, and reduced
to a small number:

Therefore the Protestant Church in this respect resembles the true Church;
and consequently her obscurity makes rather for her, then against her.

We may also on this Anuil shape an offensive weapon in this manner:

The true Church, in the later Ages thereof, must be in great distress, and
driven to a narrow compass.

The Popish Church has not been so:

Therefore the Popish Church is not the true Church.

For they make eminent Visibility and splendor, a note of their Church. If
they answer, that their Church, under heathen and Arrian Emperors, has been
grievously persecuted, I reply:

First, that those who suffered Martyrdom in those days, were rather our
Martyrs then, theirs, because they sealed with their blood, the truth of
Scripture-Doctrine, and not of Popish traditions, or additions.

Secondly, those blessed Martyrs suffered in the first Ages of the Church, long
before the 1000 year, in which Satan was let loose: but we speak of the
persecutions of the true Church in her latter Ages. Therefore when the Papists
insultingly demand of us, Where appeared your Church in the Ages before Luther?
the best way to repress their insolency, is, to put a cross interrogatorie to
them, Where did your Church lie hid? When did it fly into the Wilderness, for
the space of 1260 days? When did the Beast with seuuen heads, and ten
horns, push at it? In the reign of what Popes did the red Dragon cast a flood
of waters to drown her? As for the predecessors of our faith, and
Standard-bearers of our Religion, it appears upon their own records, how the
Whore of Babylon embrued her hands, and died her garments scarlet-red in the
blood of them, persecuting and executing them under the names of Berengarians,
Lyonists, Henricians, Petrobrusians, Albingenses, Waldenses, Wickleuists,
Thaborites, Hussites, Lutherans, Caluinists, and Hugonots, and the like. Here
see the craft of Satan, and malice of Antichrist and his Ministers: they was^e
the flock of Christ with bloody slaughters, and require of us, Where are those
of our brethren whom they have slain? They traduce us for paucity, whom they
by their massacres have brought to so small a number. They vpbraid us with
those maymes, and skarres which themselves have given us, and put us to produce
those evidences which themselves have burned and made away, as shall appear
more at large hereafter.

The ninth Assertion.
Errors in doctrine, and abuses in practice, for the most part steal in
secretly, and by degrees, sensim sine sensu, and are therefore seldom
discerned, and openly opposed, before they get head and strength. This Vincent.
Lyran. de (...). c. 15.
observation I owe to Vincentius Lyranensis. L^tenter superinducunt errores,
quos nec cito deprehendere valeas, nec facile damnare: they bring in errors
secretly, which a man cannot soon find out, nor easily condemn. And
Vincentius seems to have borrowed it of Tertul. aduersus Vale^tin. c. 1.
Tertullian, Nihil magis curant, qu^m vt occultent quod praedicant, sitamen
praedicant quod occultant: they seek nothing more, then to hide that which
they preach, if yet they may be said to preach that they hide. And again, c.
3.
Obscondit se Serpens quantum potest totamque prudentiam in laqueorum ambagibus
torquet: alte habitat, in (...) detruditur, per a^fractus seriem suam (...)
procedit, nec semel totus (...) bestia. The Serpent hides himself as much as
he can, and shows his chief skill in wreathing himself into foulds, he
thrusts himself into dark and blind holes, etc. This 2. Pet. 2. 1.
note Tertullian took from Saint Peter: There shall be false teachers among
you* who shall privily bring in damnable heresies. And Saint Peter himself
might gather it from our Saviors words, Mat. 13. 25.
Whilst men slept, the enemy came, and so^ed tares. And therefore Bellarmine,
and Ca^pi^n, and M. Fisher, do but dream, when they conceive that the enemy
has not sown the tares of heresies, and superstitions, in the Church of Rome,
because (as they suppose) that we cannot show the precise time when all these
tares were sown. For, our Savior makes answer to this question (Vnde zizania?
Whence were these (...)?) for us, They were sown whilst men slept. Changes and
alterations are of two sorts: some are violent, and sudden, and with a great
noise; others are made by degrees, and come in piece-meale, and without any
sound at all. In the former kind it is no matter of difficulty, out of stories
to show the precise time, when such great and sudden alterations befell in
Church or Commonwealth: but in the latter kind it is very difficult, and for
the most part impossible. When a great tree being torn by a tempest, ingentem
traxit (...) ruinam, every man observes it: but who can tell when a great and
thick timber-tree begins first to rotte? The Historians precisely set down
the year and day, wherein the Temple of Diana was burned by Herasastratus, and
Saint Paul's Steeple in London by lightning: but who can out of any Story, or
otherwise, design the day, or year, when Paul's Church began to decay? yet
no man that now sees it, makes question, but that it is very much ruined: the
beam out of the timber, and stone out of the wall, cry for speedy reparations.
By the Jesuits argument, an aged decrepid man, all gray headed, might
forswear and outface his Age, because no man, nor perhaps himself observed
when he began to grow old first, or had his first gray hair on his head or
beard. Our Savior very fitly compares heresies to tares, which we see when
they are grown, though we see them not in their first growth, or as they
grow. No man can perceive the index in a Watch, or finger in a Dial to wagge
or stir: yet he that going abroad, when it points to one a clock, and
returning home, finds it points to six, or twelve a clock, knows
infallibly, that it has moved, and that no small space. In like manner, though
we cannot, in all particular points of difference between us and the Church
of Rome, design the moment of time, when corruptions and innouations stole in:
yet finding the doctrine and manners of the Church at one point (as it were) in
the Primitive times, and in latter Ages at a far distant point, nay quite
opposite; we know, that the finger has moved, that is, that great changes,
and alterations, and innouations have been. Shall we deny, that there is
idolatry in the world, because we know not who was the first Idolater; nor
precisely, when men first fell from true Religion? Bellarmine and some others
fetch it from some of Noah's posterity after the flood: but Haerm^n Luangel.
Barradus endeuoreth to prove, that the tares of idolatry were sown in the
world before the flood, yet it appears on no record, who was the first
Idolater in the world. Some of Noah's posterity degenerated from the true
worship and service of God, to Gentilism and superstition; yet who can
demonstrate the time when, or the place where they first began to adulterate
the true service of God, with infinite abuses and abominations? How did the
Scribes and Pharisees, at the coming of Christ, corrupt the doctrine of the Law
with false glosses, and abrogate it with their own traditions? Yet no man can
show the original or first deviser of all their false glosses and vain
traditions. To come nearer to our adversaries: The Fathers in the Sess. vigess.
2. caenone 9. decretum de obseru^ndis et euitandis in celebratione Missa.
Council of Trent acknowledge, that many corruptions and abuses have crept
into the Mass it self, either by the fault of times, or negligence and
wickedness of men. Cum multaiam, sieve temporum vitio, sieve hominum incuria et
improbitat^, irrepsisse videantur, quae a tanti Sacrificij dignitate
abhorreant, etc. Since many things, through the fault of times, or the
negligence and wickedness of men, have seemed to have crept in (to the Mass)
which are repugnant to the dignity of so great a Sacrifice, we appoint, etc.
Yet when these abuses crept in, and by whose fault, neither do they there,
neither can any Papist punctually demonstrate. The Physicians judge of their
patients two manner of ways; either a decubitu, that is, from the time of
their lying down, and yielding themselves to their bed; or ab actionibus
lasis, that is, from the time that their appetites, and disgestion, and other
faculties, sensibly fail in doing their functions. In like manner are we to
judge of the diseases of the Church: some we may adecubitu, from her apparent
declining in judgment to error: but other, which we cannot so judge certainly
of, yet we may most infallibly by the other means, ab actionibus lasis, from
her sensible failings in her vital faculties and functions, viz. Preaching of
the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, and exercise of Ecclesiastical
discipline. To cloze up this note; Though many learned Protestant Divines have
wrote to good purpose touching the first leake in Peter's ship, yet none seems
to me to hit the point more fully, then our excellently learned Rainolds.
Rainol. praelect. 1. de libris Apo^ryp^^is.
Primo ait, Gentilitios, deinde Iudaicos ritus, opiniones, concupiscentias
ingruisse, ea quasi semina^ exemplorum et placitorum fuisse, haec primum per
exig^a non internosci, inter dum conspici, et coerceri, p^st sensim augescere
magis magisque, tum confirmari et grassari latius; donec ad extremum,
Religionis facies tota, quasi cancro exaesae, immutata and Ecclesia Romana ex
sancta et fideli profana et perfid^ facta est. Ita quae Apostolis Ecclesiam
docentibus erant inandita, ea post a patribus caepere queri, ambigi. Quae
priscis (...) scrupulum m^heba^^, ea probabilia visa sunt (...) a rece^ioribus
Scholasticis et Canonistis habebantur^^ra. Quae illi opinati sunt et tennerunt,
^odie (...) defendunt pertinaciter, et dissentientes (...) First, Heathenish,
and then Jewish rites and opinions stole in: these were the seeds of ill
examples and orders, or customs: these, at the first being small, were not
observed; sometimes they were spied, and checked. Afterward, by degrees, they
more and more increased, then were they confirmed and spread further; till in
the end the whole face of Religion was eaten out, as it were with a Canker; and
the Church of Rome, (...) and faithful spouse, became a profane and disloyal
strumpet. So those things, which in the Apostles time were unheard of, after
began to be questioned and doubted by the Fathers* Those things which the
an^ient Doctors made scruple of, seemed probable to some, and were held true by
the later Schoolmen and Canonists. Those things which they held but as opinions,
the Papists at this day defend obstinately, and condemn all that dissent from
them. Just as Velleius Velleius Pater. histor. Romans l. 2.
Paterculus reports of the Roman State; that, degenerating from the ancient
virtue and glory, it fell mature a rectis in vitia, a vitijs in prana, pr^uis
in praecipitia; from good to bad, from bad to worse, from worse to worst of
all: so the Roman Church, in tract of time, fell from certain truths, to
doubtful Tenets; from doubtful Tenets, (...) manifest errors; from manifest
errors, at last to heresies: where we now find them, and there leave them,
because they are resolved there to stick.

The general Conclusion.
The Protestant Church, according to the distinctions and Assertions premised,
has been in all Ages in some degree visible.

Thus much of the first Question propounded by the Jesuit, touching the
Visibility of the Protestant Church in all Ages.

The second Question touching the Catalogue of names, follows.

Touching the Names of visible Protestants in all Ages.
The second Question.
WHether visible Protestants are to be named in all Ages out of good Authors?

To this Question I answer, as to the former, by Distinctions. Assertions.

The first Distinction.
Visible Protestants are either,

Such as subscribe to the harmony of Protestant Confessions, in each point of
faith and Theological Conclusion;

Or such as have delivered, either implicitly, or explicitly, (...),
positiuely, or (...), by way of opposition, some point or points of Protestant
Doctrine; especially, if it cannot be proved, that they held any doctrine de
fide, repugnant to the Protestants faith, or different from them in any point
of moment, or very material, much less fundamental.

In this Question, neither is it reasonable, neither indeed does the Jesuit
demand, that we should prove visible Protestants in all Ages in the first
sense, but in the later only. His words are, c. 1. p. 11.
For avoiding of all mis-taking, and consequently, needless and fruitless
Disputes, M. Fisher in his Question requires, first, that names of men in all
Ages be set down: whom Sir Humphrey Linde and his friends conceive to have been
Protestants. Secondly, that those men, whose names they set down, be showed
out of good Authors, to agree in houlding some points of faith, in which
Protestants differ from Roman Catholics. Thirdly, that Sir Humphrey Linde or
his friends will defend against M. Fisher, that the same men held no other
points of faith different one from another, and from the present Protestant
Doctrine.

The second Distinction.
The Names of Protestants are of two sorts;

Proper; as, Bertram, Lollard, Dulcinus, Calvin, Beza, Jewel, etc.

Appellatiue; as, Protestants, Gospellers, Reformers, Albingenses, Waldenses,
Lionists, Piccards, Turlepins; and generally, all such names as have either
been assumed by any society of Protestants, to distinguish themselves from
others; or cast upon them by way of reproach, by their Adversaries whose
reproaches they (and we) accounted their glory.

In this Question, although the Jesuit seems to take Names in the first
sense, yet he cannot be so grossly ignorant, as not to know, that it is
abundantly sufficient for the proof of a visible Church (even a posteriori) to
prove out of good Authors the appellatiue Names of Protestants in all Ages. No
man doubts, that it is a sufficient Argument to prove the Visibility of the
true Church in Israel in Elias time, to produce that sacred Record of seven
thousand that never bowed their knees to Baal; albeit neither does the Spirit
of God there set down, neither can any man living now tell what was the proper
name of any one of them. No Geographer will ever make question, but that there
are now many visible Churches of Christians in Africa, and diverse parts of
Asia, under the Turk and Tartar, known by the names of Abyssens, Maronits,
Cophti, Armenians, Georgians, or the like: and yet neither can the Geographers
themselves peradventure, nor you nor I presently give the proper name of any
one of them. For my part, I know but one Greek Christian, sometime Student in
Oxford; Metrophanes Critopulus.

The third Distinction.
These words, Protestants are to be named, may admit of a double construction;

Either that names ought to be produced, and that we are bound to produce them,
to prove the Visibility of our Church; as if, without such producing, the
protestant cause should any way suffer or receive any prejudice Or that such
names may be produced, and that there are such Records yet extant, out of
which we are able to makes a Catalogue of Protestant professors.

In this question, the Jesuit holds, that the names of Protestants in the
first sense are to be produced, that is, ought to be produced, and must of
necessity, to prove the visibility of our Church: but he denies it in the
second sense, that is, that such names can be produced. On the contrary, my
Tenets are, that Visible Protestants are to be named in the second sense, that
is, are ^minable; but not in the first sense. Though we need not make any such
Catalogue, yet ex superabundanti, I refuse not to do it: our cause is so
richly furnished, that we can do it though we are not bound to do it, for the
reasons partly alleged in the conference, partly confirmed and enlarged in the
defense thereof.

The fourth Distnction.
Good Authors are of two sorts;

Of the first rank: and such are Classicke, Theological or Historical Authors;
against which neither Papists nor Protestants much except, but both account
them of great worth and credit.

Of the second rank: and such are those Authors, who though they are not of
any singular or eminent note, yet they may be termed good, according to the
ages in which they lived, which afforded no better.

In this question, I restrain not good Authors to those of the first rank only,
but admit also of those of the second. For, as when the people at Bodin. de
rep. ex Liuio.
Capua were so incensed against the Senators, that they had a purpose
presently to doffe them out of their places and lives too; a wise man among
them advised them, before they put the old Senators to the sword, to think
of fitter men to put in their places: which when they could not agree upon, in
the end it was resolved, that the old should continue: In like manner, if the
Jesuits except against any of the Authors which I shall allege in the later
blind ages, as being not of sufficient credit for us to rely upon in so
weighty a controversy, as the Jesuits make this to be; I require of the
Jesuits, to produce fitter men, and better Authors, who lived in those times;
and in case they cannot, then to let those stand for good whom we allege for
our selves: for we are to take Authors and Records such as we can find, not
to make such as we wish. And therefore Scaliger, as truly as tartly, reproves
Baronius, quod Annals faceret, non scriberet, that he wrote not Annals, but
made them out of his own brain. A true Record, though never so foule-written
and torn, is better then a forged Deed, though never so fair and legible.
Some later Papists, excepting against diverse Authors alleged by us, shall not
disable those Authors, unless they can make good their exceptions against
them. For example: though Genebrard, or Coccius, or (...) disgracefully of
Abbas V^spergensis, or (...) C^rdinalis, or Platina, or Auentinus, yet unless
they can or could justly tax or charge them, they must and shall stand for good
witnesses against Papists. These cautions and distinctions premised, I will now
set down the state of this second question, in the Assertions following.

The first Assertion.
AMong the Professors of the Truth, there may be differences of judgment; not
only touching rites, and ceremonies, and matters of discipline, but also
touching points of doctrine, so the points be not main and fundamental, or
such as are clearly and expressly defined by the Church out of manifest Te^ts
of Scripture. This conclusion I ground on those words of Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 3.
12. 15, etc.
If any man build on this Foundation, gold, etc. or hay and stubble, etc. if
any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved, etc. To this distinction of Foundations-doctrine, without which a man
cannot be saved; and doctrines built upon the Foundation, which may be held, or
not held, without danger of salvation, Saint Ambrose alludes: Comment. in Luc.
lib. 5. c. 9. Si quae est Ecclesiae, quae fidem respuat, nec Apostolicae
praedicationis fundamenta retine at, ne quam labem possit aspergere, deserenda
est.
If there be any Church which refuses faith, and ^eepeth not the foundation of
Apostolical doctrine, lest it should cast any spot on us, it must be
forsaken. And Saint Prosp. de great. et lib. arbitri. ad Ruffinum. Pelagiana
haeresis quibus impietatum veneris viscera Ecclesiae atque ipsa vitalia Corpris
Christi voluerit occupare, etc.
Prosper; where he insinuates a distinction of heresies. Some like the
Pelagian, poisoning the bowels, and surprising the very vitals of Christ's
(mystical) Body; others affecting and infecting other parts further from the
heart, and therefore not so dangerous. Aduers. haer.
Vincentius Lyrinensis glanceth at the former distinction of doctrines
fundamental, and not fundamental. The former he calls, Fidei regula^^, the
rule of faith; the later, Diuinae Legis quaestiunculas, subtle questions
concerning the Law of God: in which, he says, we need not much seek the
Fathers consent. Saint Lib. 1. contra Iul. Pelag. c. 6.
Austen also, when he was pressed by Julian the Pelagian with a testimony out
of Saint Chrysostom, lays hold on the buckler of a like distinction:
Sanctus, inquit, Johannes Constantinopolitanusnegat, esse in paruulis originale
peccatum: Holy, says he, John of Constantinople denies, that original sin
is in little children. Absit, vt Constantinopolitanus Johannes de baptismate
parvulorum, eorumque a chirographo liberatione per Christum, tot ac tantis
co-Episcopis suis, maximeque Romano Innocentio, Carthaginensi Cypriano,
Cappadoci Basilio, Gregorio Nazianzeno, Gallo Hilario, Mediolanensi resistat
Ambrosio. Alia sunt in quibus inter se aliquando etiam doctissimi atque optimi
regulae catholicae defensores (salua fidei compage) non consonant: and alius
alio, vna de re, melius aliquid dicit and verius. Hoc autem, de quo nunc
agimus, ad ipsa fidei pertinet fundamenta: GOD forbid, that John of
Constantinople concerning the baptism of little or young children, and their
freedom by Christ from the handwriting, should gain-stand so many and so
worthy of his fellow-Bishops; especially, Innocent, Bishop of Rome, Cyprian of
Carthage, Basil of Cappadocia, Gregory of Nazianzen Hilarie of France, and
Ambrose of Millain. Some things there are, in which the most learned, and best
defenders of the catholic rule (the bond of faith preserved) do sometimes not
agree among themselves: and one, in some one thing, says somewhat better and
righter than another. But this, wherein now we deal, belongs to the very
grounds of faith.

Unless we admit of such a distinction, neither we, nor the Roman Church, nor
the Greek, nor any Church now in Christendom, is able to produce a Catalogue
of visible Professors of their faith in any ancient Age, much less in all
Ages. And therefore, if M. Fisher and his fellow-Iesuites require of a true
Church, a Catalogue of such Professors as in all Ages held, not only the same
fundamental and principal points of faith, but also all the same doctrinall
conclusions and particular deductions, I must advise him, in the words of
Constantine the Great, spoken to Nouatus, to make a ladder, and go up to heaven
alone. As the Fathers differ from us in some things, so also they differ among
themselves: yet, as they esteemed themselves (notwithstanding these
differences) to be members of the same Catholic Church; so do we esteem the
said Fathers, professors of our Protestant Doctrine. Our Adversaries lay claim
to them also; and yet they cannot deny, but that the Fathers dissent from them
in some points of no small moment. Papias, the scholar of Saint John the
Evangelist, did eat the sour grape of the Millenarie Error: and Justin Martyr,
Iraeneus, Lactantius, and the Fathers generally (before Saint Ierome's time),
had their teeth set on edge therewith. Joseph. Scal. Notae in nouum Testamentum.
Scaliger, well seen in Antiquity, observes, Omnes veteres Christianos, etiam
infra aetatem Augustini, putasse, animas tam piorum quam impiorum in centro
terrae, tanquam quodam conceptaculo, expectare diem iudicij: quod Tertullianus
eleganer dixit, In candida expectare diem iudicij. Praerogatiuam tamen dant
Martyribus, quos vno saltu recta in Paradisum deferri volunt: All the ancient
Christians, yea, even or within.
before the time of Saint Augustine, thought, the souls as well of the godly as
ungodly, in the center of the earth, as it were in some receptacle, to expect
the day of judgment: which Tertullian elegantly calls, Allud. ad To. Magistr.
qui candidati, etc.
In candida to look for the day of judgment. Yet they yield a prerogative to
the Martyrs, whom they will have to be carried directly into Paradise at one
leap or jump. Does your Church approve of this opinion? Saint Lib. 2. Ep. 3.
Siquis de Antecessoribus nostris vel ignor anter, vel simpliciter, non hoc
obseruauit and tenuit, quod nos dominus docuit, etc. potest simpliciter eius
per indulgentiam domini venia concedi, etc.
Cyprian finds great fault with those, who before his time administered the
Sacrament without wine, using water in stead of it: If any of our Ancestors,
either ignorantly, or simply, has not observed and kept that which our Lord
has taught us, etc. through our Lords indulgency, pardon may be granted to
his simplicity. This he proves to be a gross error, and a foul abuse; yet he
excludes not them who are tainted with this spot, from hope of salvation. And
Saint Cyprian himself had reason to censure charitably an error in others,
because himself needed at least a pardon of course for his opinion touching
re-baptizing: for, his zeal against Heretics transported him so far, that he
rejected and disannulled Baptism administered by them: whereby he may seem to
touch dangerously upon the rock of the Donatists heresy: yet Saint Lib. 1.
contra Donatistas. c. 18 Quid ergo? ille vir sanctus de Baptismo aliter
sentiens quam se res habebas, quae posteae pertractata and diligentissima
consideratione firmatae est, in catholicae vnitate permansit, and charitatis
vbertate compensatum est, and pas^ionis fasce purgatum.
Austen doubts not to affirm, that he made a recompense for this his error,
by the abundance of his charity in his life, and plentiful effusion of his
blood for the testimony of Christ at his death. As it was said of Augustus;
Tacit. annal.
Pompeij statuas erigendo, suas confirmauit; that by erecting Pompey's statues,
he made his own stand the longer: so we may truly say, that Saint Austen, by
framing the former Apology for Cyprian, made the easier way in the minds of
all indifferently-affected, for his own defense. I would, that this most
judicious Doctor of the Church (for whom all the Christian Churches strive; as
the Greek Cities, for Homer) nihil quicquam humani pateretur. But I have
learned from Lyrinen. aduersus h^res.
Vincentius, Nuditatem reuerendi patris neque meis temerare oculis, neque
alienis patere velle, sed auersum tegere; quod est erratum sancti viri, nec
approbasse, nec prodidisse. All that I have already intimated, rather than
expressed in this kind, is to show, that every prick is not a wound; every
spot, not a s^ain in an ancient Writer; that every difference in judgment,
makes not a rent in the Church; and consequently, that although Waldo, or
Wicklef, or Husse, or any other forerunner of Luther's reformation in our
days, might have some private differences between themselves, and from us, as
the ancient Doctors had, yet that these discords hinder not, but that they and
we may bear a part in some concent and harmony of belief on earth, and sing
the same Halleluiah in heaven. As for those foul aspersions of Sorcery,
Manichisme, maintenance of impurity, and subiecting God to the devil, and the
like, laid upon the Waldenses and Albingenses, Wicklef and the Hussi^es, or any
of them, we shall easily blow them away, even by the breath of our
Adversaries, in the declaration of the next conclusion.

The second Assertion.
The Professors of the truth have had always false scandals laid upon their
faith and life. Our blessed Redeemers most holy Doctrine and sanctified life,
escaped not the slanders of malicious tongues set on fire of hell. Saint
Stephen was traduced for Acts 6. 11
blasphemy against God and Moses; Saint Paul, for Acts 24. 14
Heresy. I tremble to rehearse what malice has broached against the Saints
and Martyrs in the Primitive Church; as that Minutius Felix in Octauio. Audi^
eos turpiss^i pecudis caput asini consecratum, ineptae nescio qua persuasione
venerari, etc.
they worshipped an Ass head, et antistitu^ suoru^ genitalia, that they
murdered Tert. apolog. c. 7. Dicimur sceleratissimi de sacramento
infanticidij, and pabulo inde, and post conuiuium incesto, quod euersores
luminum canes, lenone se tenebrarum, and l bidinum impiaru^ inuerecundia
procuren^.
Infants, and sed upon their flesh, and licked their blood; that, putting out
the lights, they committed incest, and all manner of filthiness, one with
another. Let Rubius, and Parsons, and Sander^^, and Coccius, and Cocleus, and
B^lsack, rid the bottom of their rancorous stomach against Walde, and Wiclef,
and Hus, and Luther, and Calvin: they cannot void worse matter of fiction, then
such as the Heathen vented against the Primitive Christians. But as God, in
former times, used the tongue of Pliny, and diverse other Gentiles, to lick out
those blots which were cast on the Christians by Gentiles: so, in these later
times also, has God made the tongues of Papists themselves to serve as
spunges, to wipe away Popish aspersions upon the aboue-named Professors of
truth, For the 9. Articles objected in particular to the Waldenses by
Antoninus, Prateolus, Lutzenburgius, and Parson; Doctor Lib. de success. et
statu eccles. c. 6. a paragraph vicess. ad sinem.
Usher, now Lord Bishop of Methe, has so cleared them, even by the testimonies
of Papists, from those erroneous assertions and scandalous aspersions, that the
Papists themselves seem to be ashamed of their shameless slander^. It shall
suffice, for the strengthening of my former conclusion, to call in three or
four Papists of note, for their purgation: they are Du Hallyan, Rainerius,
Thuanus, and Cocleus. Hallyan speaks but lispingly, because he durst not
speak plain, yet he says enough to convince the enemies of the truth, of
shameful calumniation. Hist. Gal. l. 10.
The principal point, says he, which brought the Waldenses into universal
hatred, and which charged them with more evil opinions then they had, was the
liberty they took to blame the diss^lutenes of Princes and of the Clergy,
yea to tax the Popes themselves: this was the Helena that wrought all their
troubles, as Contra Wald. c: 4. Magnam habet spec^m pietatis, eo quod coram
homi ibus just vt (...), and b^ne omnia de Deo credunt, and omnes articulos
qui in Symbolo con^ine^tur.
Rainerius the Inquisitor ingenuously confesses: This sect has a great show
of godliness, because they live justly before men, and believe all things well
concerning God, and all the articles contained in the Creed: solummodo Romanam
Ecclesiam blasphemant et Clerum; only they speak evil of the Church of Rome
and of the clergy. Lib. 6.
Thuanus, after he had set down truly the opinions of the Waldenses, wherein
they concur with the Reformed Churches at this day, adds, His praecipuis et
certis eorum doctrinae capitibus, alia affict a sunt de coniugio, resurectione,
animarum statu post mortem, etc. To these especial and certain heads of their
doctrine, there are other added concerning wedlock, the resurrection, the state
of souls after death, etc. Never did any man's stomach more boil with rancor
and malice against any, then Cocleus his against Wiclef; whom Hist. Hussit. l.
2. Multo grau^orae esse credider^m Wiclefi tormenta, quam sunt apud inferos
Iudae proditoris, vel Neronis, etc.
he condemns to greater torments in hell, then Judas or Nero: yet the truth
extorted from Cocleus himself so much, as (in the judgment of any indifferent
man) may clear him and his scholar Hus from those erroneous Articles that were
laid to Hus his charge. Cocl. ibid. En isti Episcopi hortantur me ad reuocandum
and abiurandum quod ego facere horresco, m^tuens ne in conspectu Dei ^^am
mendax, and laedam conse^en^iam meam. Et post, page 111. Protestabatur, se ad
mortem du^i propter errores ^^bi falso imputatos a falfis testibus.
When he was required by the Bishops, to abjure the doctrine he had taught,
he refused so to do, lest he should wound his conscience and the truth of God;
but withal protests, and that solemnly, and that three several times, and
that at the instant of his death, that he never held any of those Articles
which the false witnesses deposed against him, but held, and taught, and wr^te
always the contrary. In a word, he breathed out his last gasp, with a
complaint against his false accusers, for laying to his charge doctrines he
never held; taking it upon his death, that he taught nothing but the truth of
the Gospel, which he would now seal with his blood. He had no sooner thus
cleared his innocence, but his enemies set fire on the ^agot, and burnt the
Saint of God to ashes. And shall we imagine, that Wiclef, with whom John Hus
prayed, that his soul might be after death, whose picture Jerome of Prague
had in his study, painted with a garland about it; and the University of
Oxford crowned his person and doctrine with a more fragrant Garland of praises;
whose doctrine was not only favored by diverse Nobles, but also the Vid. M. S.
Wiclef. in Biblio them, Bodl^i, etc
third part of the Clergy of England: I say, shall we so much wrong our
judgments, to imagine, that a man of so rare learning both divine and humane,
so excellently read in Scriptures, should be the Father of such monstrous
bastardly opinions, as are fathered upon him by some of the Fathers in the
Council of Constance, viz. God is bound to obey the devil.
Deus tenetur obedire diab^lo, and the like? No, no. That devil was a lying
spirit in the mouth of his accusers, which afterward possessed the Romish
Priests and Jesuits, and by them vented these prodigious slanders upon our
doctrine; affirming, that we teach, Came. rat. 8 Deus est author and causa
peccati, omnia peccatae paria, Christus desperationis vocem emisit.
that God is the author of sin; and that all sins are equal in Gods sight;
that a man may lie for Gods honor; Bristow mot.
that Protestants are bound to avoid all good works, and many the like
Assertions, much more condemned, and substantially refuted by Protestants, then
any Papists whatsoever.

The Lact. divine. institut. l. 1. c. 21 Apud Lindum Herculis s^cra sunt, quorum
a ca^ter is long diuersus est ritus, siquidem non euphemia s^d maledictione
and execration. ^us celebrantur.
Lyndians, as Lactantius reports, worshipped God by execrations and
maledictions. Lyndanus and other of our Papists, as it seems, are akin to
them: they think, they do God good service, in blaspheming and scandalizing
the truth of God, and the professors thereof. The best is, illi linguarum, nos
^urium Domini sumus: their tongues are their own; so our ears are our own:
they are masters of their speech; we, of our belief: they may speak what they
list; but we are not bound to believe, but what we see proof and reason for.

The third Assertion.
God has, and always had, many true servants and worshippers of him in
secret; whose names cannot be produced nor rehearsed by an exact Catalogue. I
suppose, no Papist will deny this conclusion, because it is grounded on the
Oracle of God. When 1 Kings 19 14. and 18
Eliah complained, The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown
down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword; and I, even lonely,
am left, etc. the Oracle answers, Yet I have reserved to my self seven
thousand in Israel, etc. Such were they that sighed for all the abominations
that were in Jerusalem: upon whose forehead, God commanded a Ezekiel. 9. 4
mark to be set. Such were those, who though they remained most of them in
the outward communion with the Church of Rome, yet groned under that Babylonish
yoke, and in heart abhorred the idolatry and superstition reigning in that
Church; and they desired, with sighs and tears, a reformation before Luther.
Of whom, De refor. eccl.
Petrus de Aliaco the Cardinal thus writes: As there were seven thousand that
had not bowed to Baal: so it is to be hoped, that there are some that desire
the Churches reformation. Though Rain. contrae Wald. c. 3. Inquisitioni
haereticorum frequ^nter interful, and computatae sunt scholae in diocaesi
Paetauiensi 41.
Rainerius speak but of one and forty schools, and somewhat a lesser number of
Churches of the Waldenses, yet no man will make question, but that there might
be in all the world very many more; especially, ^ith all those Churches and
Schools he speaks of, were in one Diocese. When L. 4. Petierunt castellum
cui Bechnigne nom^e est, vt a^t Arneus, ^ctauo f^re milliario ab oppido quo^
nunc Tabor, etc. C^rciter trigmta ^illia hom^num conue^e^unt, atque ibi
trece^tas mensas in pat^ntibus camp^s erexerunt, ex quibus Sacramentum Caluini
administrarunt.
Cocleus mentions thirty thousand who, at the Castle of Bechnigne, eight
miles from Tabor, received the Communion under both kinds, maugre the decree
of the Council of Constance: will any man doubt, but there were many thousands
more, who received the Sacrament in like manner at other places? When ^. 10.
D^ Hallyan reports, that the army of the Albingenses consisted of about the
number of 100 thousand fighting men; every man's discretion will add, that
there must needs be among them a greater number of all sorts, old men, women,
and children, which were not able to bear Arms. And therefore Rerum Angl. l.
2. c. 13. In latissim^s Gaelliae, Hispaniae, Italiae, Germaniae prouincijs tam
multi infecti hac pes^e esse dicuntur, vt multiplicati esse supra numerum
maeris videantur.
Gulielmus Neubrigensis speaking of them, says, that their number in France,
Sapin, Italy, and Germany, was multiplied above the sand of the sea: Rainerius
the Popish Inquisitors own words amount to near as much, Contra Wald. c. 4.
Haec secta generalior est omnibus alijs quae adhuc sunt vel fuerunt: This sect
is the most general or farthest spread of all sects that ever were: fere enim
nulla est terra in qua haec secta non sit: for there is almost no sect in all
the world, in which this sect has not a part. I conclude therefore this
Assertion with the words of Epist. 78.
Synesius, (...): What need we Catalogues? we are to fight with hands, not with
names.

The fourth Assertion.
Some Ages of the Church afford very few Authors of note, whose Writings have
come to posterity. Whosoever peruseth the Church story, digested into Centuries
or Annals, or cast but a glance of his eye upon the Catalogues of Writers made
by Saint Ierom, Suidas, Photius, Gennadius, Abbas, Tritemius, Illyricus, and
Bale, shall find the Ages of the Church, to resemble the Stars of the sky.
In some parts we see many glorious and eminent Stars; in others, few of any
remarkable greatness; and in some, none but blinkards and obscure ones: In
like manner, in some Ages of the Church, we may behold many worthy and glorious
Lights, like Stars of the first or second magnitude; in others, few of any
note or bright luster; and in some, none but obscure and unknown Authors;
resembling the least and obscurest Stars in the sky. After we have passed
the eightth Age of the Church, we fall into Cimaerian darkness. Lib. 4. de
Romans pontif. c. 12.
Bellarmine cannot speak of the ninth Age with patience, Saeculo hoc nullum
extitit indoctius aut infelicius, quo qui Mathematica aut Philosophiae operam
dabat, vulgo Magus putabatur. Then this Age, there was none more unlearned or
unhappy; in which, whosoever studied the Mathematics or Philosophy, he was
commonly accounted a Magician. ^unead 9. Mirum est, quanta omnium bonarum
artium obliuio per id tempus mortaelium aenimos obrepserit, vt ne in
pontificibus quidem v^^isue principibus quicquid illu^eret quod vitam i^uare
possit.
Sabellieus is at a stand in admiring at the palpable Egyptian darkness of
this Age. It is wonderful to consider how great forgetfulness of all good
Arts, during this time, did steal upon men's minds. So that there was no light
of knowledge found, either in the Popes or Bishops, or any other Princes, which
might further life. Genebrard. Chronol. lib. 4.
Genebrard, after a sort, blesses himself from this Age* Infelix dicitur hoc
saeculum exhaustumb^minibus doctrina and ingenio claris, sine etiam claris
principibus and pontificibus. This is called an unhappy Age, empty of men,
famous in learning and wit, yea, without famous Princes or Popes. Nay, what the
Physicians speak of slegme, It is an humor, ne ad ma^la quidem bonus, not good
for any thing, no; not to nourish and provoke to vice; so it may be said of
this Age, that it yielded no eminent men, Catholics or Heretics. And
therefore you shall find in Prae^^olus his Catalogue of Sectaries, a great
baulk in this Age. And S. N. Appendix to the Antidote.
Norice a Jesuitical Quack saluer professes, That in this Age no new heresy
began, and consequently, that he wants drugges for his Antidote. But both
Prateolus, and his bold borrower Norice, are much beholding to the
Magdeburgenses, who handsomely and trimly excuse the matter, saying, F^gisse
Haereticos, atque in praelatos ac monachos se abdidisse; that the Heretics
which seemed to be flowne away (in this Age), were not indeed vanished out of
the world, but lay close, and hid themselves under Bishops Rochets, and Monks
Coules; where neither Prateolus nor Norice durst to search for them. As this
ninth Age, so the tenth, and some others after were very barren of learned
Writers. And therefore no marvel, if the harvest we gather in these Ages, of
the professors of the truth, and defenders thereof by writing, be very thin:
for, to leave an Army of bastard apocryphal Authors (as the Papists do, to
maintain the Popes title), or in so weighty a cause to rely on the ragged
regiment of Authors mustred up, in Orthodoxographia and bibliotheca veterum, et
Epistolae obscurorum virorum, etc. I hold it rather a dishonor, and
disadvantage, then any credit or advantage to the truth.

The fifth Assertion.
Since Boniface the Third's time, in the seventh Age, and much more since
Hildebrand in the tenth, such was the greatness of the Pope, and transcendent
power of the Sea of Rome, that few durst or might write freely against the
errors and usurpations thereof. And therefore it is not to be maruailed, that
we have not many; but it is rather to be maruailed, that we have any who have
displayed the abominations of the Whore of Babylon. The Answer of a Poet in
Augustus time, is very famous; who being demanded why he replied not upon
Augustus, who had writ against him a bitter Satyr, cleanly wiped his lips, and
said, Periculosum est (...) ^um scribere, qui potest proscribere: It is a
dangerous thing to give him a dash with a pen, who is like to requite it with a
slash of a sword; to object against him in ink, who can return an answer in
blood. Iuuenal Satyr. Tacit. Eorum corporae in vsum noctur^i luminis
comburebantur.
Pone Tigelinum, teda lucebis in illa:
Qua stantes ardent, and fixo gutture fumant.


Set the Pope or Church of Rome out in her colors, and she will make you a
light of the Church, by burning you at a stake. Platina and Occham long ago,
upon just cause and lamentable experience, cast this bloody aspersion on the
Pope and his Adherents. Occham frames his indictment in these words: Vt
intentum (...) horrendum ad finem possint perducere, defendentes v^ritatem
prosequuntur, interimunt, innoxium sang^^nem fundunt: That they may bring their
horrible purpose to pass, they prosecute such as maintain the truth, murder
them, and shead their innocent blood. Platina^ in these words: (...) mandata^
Christi, quise Vicarium eius dicit, and cred^^^ in verba Dei exurit: He
condemns the commands of Christ, who professes and calls himself his
Vicar, and burns such as believe in the words of God. Laurentius Valla, for
writing freely against the forged donation of Constantine, lost his liberty
and Country too. Occham was so bold to strike at the Popes triple Crown, and
to oppose some doctrines of the Church of Rome, that he was therefore
excommunicated by the Pope, and so grievously persecuted, that he was
constrained to fly to the Emperor for succor: to whom he made this
reasonable motion; Tu defend me gladio ego defendam te calamo: Defend thou me
by thy sword or power, I will defend thee by my word or pen. Were the Waldenses
and Albingenses murdered by thousands, for Heresy? No: Contra Waldens. c. 4.
Rainerius clears them of that; Omnia recte de Deo credunt: They believe all
things rightly concerning God. Why then? Solummodo Romanam Ecclesians
blasphemant and Clerum. They speak evil of the Church of Rome and the
Clergy. The opinions of the Albingenses, Histor. lib. 10.
says Hallian, did not so much stir up the hate of the Pope and great Princes
against them, as the liberty of speech did, wherewith they used to blame the
vices and disolutenes of the said Princes and Clergy, yea to tax the vices and
actions of the Popes themselves. This was the principal point that brought
them into universal hatred. What was it so inflamed the Pope against the
Hussites, that he proclaimed two Croisadoes, and employed great armies against
them? Their administering the Sacrament in both kinds, maugre the sacrilegious
decree of the Council of Constance? No. That Cocle. l. 7. Hist. Hussit.
he could and did dispense with all. It was that article of the Hussites,
gathered out of their writings by Alanus. Papaest ^estia de qua habetur in
Apocalypsi, 12. Datum est ei, bellum facere cum sanctis. The Pope is the beast,
whereof it is said in the 12. of the Revelation; It is granted to him (the
beast) to war with the Saints. Hincillae lachrymae. Nay rather, Hinc ille
cr^or. This kindled such a fire against the dear servants of Christ, that
nothing could or did quench it, but their blood shed in great abundance.

For some hundreds of years, Assert.
the chief Records and Monuments of the Western Church have been in the hands
of our Romish adversaries, who have partly burned them, partly corrupted them,
and partly kept them from us. And herein they deal with us, as Theramenes
Bodin. de repub.
his Colleagues dealt with him: who having a purpose to question him for his
life, first struck his name out of the Catalogue of the governors of the
City, and then articled against him. And when he pleaded the privilege of all
those whose names were written in the Catalogue, they barred him from this
defense, saying, That he could not plead that privilege, because his name was
not in the Catalogue. In like manner our adversaries take away from us, or make
away from us our records; and then they non-sute us, for want of evidence.
Gregory the great wrote many things prejudicial to the Popes pretensions and
usurpations, and therefore Sabinianus his successor burnt diverse of his books,
as Platina in Sabin.
Platina intimates: and Sixtus Senens^s Lib. 4. Maiorem partem operum Gregori^
statim post mortem eius amul^ flagitiosissimi excusserunt.
expressly affirms, That his most wicked emulators did burn the greater part
of Gregory's works, presently after his death. Auentin. annal. Boior, lib. 5.
Hildebrand. in Templo Dei, sedet supra omne quod colitur, extollitur. Non
solum, ad ambitionem suam occulendaem, fabulas comminiscittur, annals
corrumpit, res gestas inuertit, sed etiam coelestia Oracula adulterat.
Auentine brandeth Pope Hildebrand with the mark of a corrupter of Chronicles,
and a razer out of them the things that were done. Cocleus Coc. hist. Hussit.
l. 2.
writes of Hus, Dum duceretur ad locum poenae, videns in coemiterio libros
suos comburi, subrisit proper eam stultitiam: While he was led to the place of
execution, seeing in the Churchyard his books to be burned, he smiled at
that folly. And his smiling may seem prophetical: for, notwithstanding all
the means that they could possibly use, to root him and his writings out of
the memory of men; yet both (through Gods mercy) are preserved; and some few
works also of Wicklef. But the great bulk of them, not much Cocleus lib. 1.
Scripsit quidam Episcopus ex Anglia esse ^ibi adhuc body duo maximae Volumma,
quae inde Sancti vndeantur aquare opera Augustini.
inferior to the quantity of Saint Austens works, could not escape the fire,
being so narrowly searched after by the command of diverse Popes, yea and Hen.
4. and Edw. 4.
Kings too. If we might have access to the Popes Library, we doubt not, but
that we should find many more books written, both in Latin and Greek,
against the Pope. This, Cope acknowledges in his Dialogues. As for corrupting
ancient Authors, and circumcising later, I refer all that desire to be
satisfied in this point, to T. I. his Treatise of the corruptions, etc. as also
to the Indices expurgatorij, Quiroga and Sanctouall.

The flourishing Fencer, Campian, in his first reason, terms Protestants,
difficiles Aristarch^s, (...) arrepta virgula censoria, si quae ad stomachum
(...) faciunt obliterant. But do not Papists more truly deserve to be
censured censorious Aristarchi? For as Aristarchus used to raze out the verses
of Homer, which he liked not: so he that has but half an eye, may see, that
the Romanists, in their Indices expurgatorij, blot out of all sorts of Authors,
whatsoever likes them no^, or any way makes against them. But we hope, we
shall shortly have a Vindex for their Index. And therefore, leaving the further
prosecution of this point, I will now set down my last Assertion and general
conclusion.

Notwithstanding all the difficulties abouementioned, The general Conclusion.
yet God has not left his truth, though too much opposed, (...), to be without
witness in all Ages, as may appear by the learned labors of diverse Protestants
above Remonstrance, about the end.
mentioned: out of whose large fields, as also mine own particular
observations, I have gleaned a brief Catalogue, which may suffice to point out
a Protestant successiue Church, from Age to Age.

The beginning of the Catalogue.
For witnesses to the truth of the Doctrine we now profess, and maintain in
the Church of England, I allege,
IN the first Age from Christ's birth, to 100 yeeeres, CHRIST JESUS. The twelve
Apostles. Saint John Baptist. Saint Mark. Saint Luke. Saint Paul, with his
scholars, Titus, Timothy, and the Churches planted or watered by them.
Romans, Corinthians, etc. Clemens, about the year 90. Ignatius, about the
year 100. with the Churches to whom he wrote. The Tralians, Magnesians,
Tarsians, Philadelphians, etc. In the second Age, from 100. to 200. Polycarpus,
140. Justin Martyr, 150. Methodius, 155. Dionysius Corinthiacus, 158.
Hegesippus, 160. Melito Sardensis, 170. Polycrates, cum Synodo Asia^^ca, 180
Saint Irenaeus, 190. Clemens Alexandrinus, 200.


These Professors of the truth ((...) denying others) I allege for the two
(...) centuries: further we proceeded not in (...) Conference: and therefore,
here I (...) a stop for a time, and withal a challen^^ to M. Fisher, to set
down the names (...) his supposed Papists for these two (...) Ages, together
with such points of (...) Romish Religion, as he will prove (...) they
maintained: which after he ha^^ done, I will make good my witnesses, an^
disprooue his, and then proceed to (...) succeeding Ages, even unto Luther, if
(...) permit. Hic rhodus, hic saltus.

Hic modus, haec nostro signabitur area curr^*
A defense of Doctor FEATLY his proceedings in the Conference, together with a
refutation of Master FISHERS Answer (under the name of A. C.) to a Treatise
entitled, The Fisher caught in his own Net.
AS Velleius Paterculus observes, that In the battle at Philippi, in which
Brutus should have taken Anthony to task; and Cassius Augustus; it fell out
clean contrary, so that Brutus met with Augustus, and Anthony marched against
Cassius: So it came to pass in this present combat. D. White prepared and
provided to encounter M. Fisher, his former Antagonist; and D. Featly was
entreated as in Assistant, to deal in a second place with M. Sweet, if
occasion were offered. Yet upon a cunning trick of the Jesuit, discovered
immediately before the Conference, it was then on the place of the meeting,
resolved otherwise by some that were principally interessed in the business,
that D. Featly should begin with M. Fisher, and oppose him in the Jesuits
question touching the visibility of the Protestants Church; and D. White (as
there should be cause) should take off M. Sweet, if he interposed, as also
answer in the contrary question propounded to the Jesuits, touching the
Visibility of the Romish Church in all Ages. Thus D. Featly, who intended to be
but an Assistant, contrary to his expectation, was made the principal Opponent
in this Disputation. Wherein, that he might the better manage the truths
quarrel, and satisfy his Auditory, he set before his eyes certain rules,
partly taken out of Scripture, partly out of the ancient Fathers, to direct his
proceedings by them.

The first rule is Phil. 2. 3.
Saint Paul's: Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory. God is not
in the fire of contention, nor in the whirle-winde of passion, but in the still
voice of them, who in meekness of spirit seek the truth out of love of truth
it self, not of desire of victory. Nolunt Scripture ae docere nisi eos qui
doceri quaerunt: The Scriptures will not instruct those, who seek not to be
instructed by them in this manner. Democritus fitly compared truth to a jewel
in the bottom of a Well: Veritas in profundo dimersa.
if the water be clear, we may easily discern it; but if troubled, it is
impossible to see the bottom of the Well, much less discern the most
precious Jewel of truth lying in it. For this cause, D. Featly, in the
beginning of the disputation, as is confessed by A. C. Page 15.
earnestly besought M. Fisher to deal sincerely, as in the sight of God,
setting aside all passion, and by-respects: and when M. Sweet propounded that
condition, that all bitter speeches should be avoided, D. Featly with the rest,
most willingly accepted of it, and commended M. Sweet for proposing of it.

The second rule is Naz. Apolog. 1.
Nazianzens: (...): It is the best order in all speech and actions, to begin
and end with God. According to which prescription, D. Featly began with a
short Prayer, (...) and ended partly with a Thanksgiving.
doxologie, adding to his instance in Christ our Lord and Savior, blessed for
ever, at whose Name all knees must bow, both in heaven, and earth, and under
the earth; partly, by an holy adjuration: M. Fisher, I charge you, as you will
answer before Christ at the day of Judgment.

The third rule is Ha^res. 76.
Epiphanius his; who observes in a Disputation against the Photinians, quod
adhibiti sunt, qui vtrinque exciperent ea quae dicebantur, quae postea ab
vtraque part obsignabantur: there were appointed Notaries, who did take that
which was said on both sides, and their notes afterward were signed by both
parties. According to which observation, M. Ailsbury was chosen and accepted of
as Notary on both sides, and D. Featly did set his hand to each Syllogism, as
likewise did M. Fisher to his Answers: and this schedule, containing the
substance of the arguments and Answers in the end of the Conference, was sealed
with three seals; the Earl of Warwicks, Master Boultons, and Master Bugges.

The fourth rule is Tertul. aduersus Iudaeos.
T^rt^llians, first, to (...) the ground, and set up as it were the goales, by
determining the state of the question. Summam quaestionis, says he, certis
line is determinemus, and aduersus Marcionem, L. 17. His lineis materiam
clausimus, inter quas congredimur. According to which prescription, D. Featly,
as soon as he received the Question from M. Fisher, returned it in another
paper, in which he briefly stated it.

The fifth rule is Aug. contra Cresc. l. 1.
Saint Austens, to observe Logic Form in Disputation. Quid tu disputas, si
disputare non noueris? Quid est aliud dialectica, quam peritia disputandi?
Nonne etiam dialectice Christ us cum Iudaeis egit? Why do thou offer to
dispute, if thou know not how to dispute? What is Logic, but the Art of
disputing? Did not Christ dispute Logically with the Jews? And a little after,
Dialecticam nunquam doctrina Christiana for^^dat: The Christian doctrine never
fears Logic. According to which prescription, D. Featly desired, that both
the opponent and respondent should be tied to Logic Form: for, nimble wits,
like Proteus, will turn themselves into all Forms; and, unless they be held
fast, and in a sort forced and wrung with the Nex^ Syllogistico.
knots of Logical Arguments, they will never be brought to agnize the Truth.
Aristotle speaks of certain Wouerus de Polymathia.
Organa mechanica, artificial Frames used in Greece, quae teneros infantium
artus coercerent, ne in praua deflecterentur, sed concinna illorum forma nihil
foedum aspectu aut distortu^ praeferret: which frames served to keep straight
the limbs and joints of the infants, that they should not go away, but keep
due proportion, and a comely shape. Such artificial instruments are Logic
Forms: they serve to make us to walk straight, (...), neither treading inward
nor outward in our discourses. To dispute without Logic, is to rule without a
Ruler, or draw a Circle without a Compass, or steer without a Card. In which
respect, although M. Fisher were very unwilling to be bound to his Logical
behavior, yet D. Featly had great reason to require it of him, because he
bound himself to it, proposing all his Arguments in Logic Form, and disposing
them in Logic Method; premising Arguments a priori, before his Argument a
posteriori; and Syllogismes, before his Induction; beginning at the top in the
first Age, and descending to the later, according to the order of time, nature
and dignity.

The most cunning Workman that ever* wrought with the tools of natural wit,
forces all Arguments into two kinds; (...) or reprehensorie. (...) or
demonstratiue.


Elencticall or reprehensiue drive at an Adversary.

Dicticall or demonstratiue aim at a Thesis or Position of our own. The
former sort serve to beat down an enemies weapons on his own head; the later,
to make good our own ground. The former may not unfitly be called, (...)
Arguments; the later, Simply and directly proouing. D. Featly, in this
Disputation, made use of both: first, of Elencticall Arguments, to discover the
weakness of his Adversaries; and then of Dicticall, to show the strength of the
Protestants cause, and the Visibility of their Church in all Ages.

The first Argument of the former sort was couched in these words: Although
divine and infallible faith is not built upon deduction out of humane History.
Which may be thus propounded at large:

Whosoever propounds such a Question, in which he requires a conclusion of
faith to be proved out of mere humane Testimonies and Records, betraieth his
gross ignorance in Divinity.

But M. Fisher propounds a Question, in which he requires a conclusion of
faith to be proved out of mere humane Histories and Records:

Therefore M. Fisher betraieth his gross ignorance in Divinity.

The Mayor, or first Proposition, was proved by Bell. l. 2. de Sacr. effec. c.
25
Bellarmine's confession; Historiae humanae faciunt tantum fidem humanam, cui
subesse potest falsum: Humane Stories and Records beget only an humane faith,
or rather credulity subject to error. And it may be more strongly confirmed by
the testimony of Tertullian: De praescript. c. 16.
Aliunde suadere possunt de rebus fidei, nisi ex Literis fidei? Can they
otherwise persuade in matters of faith, than out of the Writ of faith? And
Saint Augustine: De not. et great. c. 61. And Epist. 112. Si quid diuinaru^
Scripturarum perspicua firmatur authoritate, sine vlla dubitatione credendum
est: alijs vero testibus and credere vel non credere licet, etc
Solis Canonicis debeo absolutum, sine vlla recusatione, consensum: I owe
absolute consent, without any refusal, only to the Canonical Scriptures. The
effect cannot exceed the cause; nor the conclusion, both the premises: and
therefore we cannot build a divine and infallible conclusion (such are all
conclusions de fide) upon mere humane testimonies, which are not of infallible
truth. All other humane Histories come short of the Apocryphal Books of
Scripture: for, you rank them with the Canonical Scriptures; and we give them
the Zanch. de Relig. christ. and alij.
next place to them: yet the testimonies out of the Apocryphal of Scripture,
may not be alleged to ground any conclusion of faith upon them, as Ruf. in
Symb.
Ruffinus affirms in express words: Quae omniae legi quidem in Ecclesiis
volucrunt, non tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex his fidei confirmandam: All
which Books they would have read in the Churches, but not be produced to
establish faith out of them.

The Minor or Assumption is thus proved:

The perpetual Visibility of the Church is a conclusion of faith, evidently
grounded (as is confessed) on Christ's promise in Scripture.

But M. Fisher requires in his Question, the perpetual Visibility of the
Church to be proved out of mere humane Authors and Stories, expressly excluding
Scripture:

Therefore M. Fisher propounds a Question, in which he requires a conclusion
of faith to be proved out of mere humane Histories and Records.

The second Elencticall or reprehensiue Argument was couched in these words:
Although this Question be grounded on uncertain and false s^pposals, etc. Which
may be thus propounded at large.

That Question which is grounded upon an evident false supposall, needs not
to be discussed, but ought rather to be exploded.

But M. Fishers Question is grounded upon an evident false supposall:

Therefore M. Fishers Question needs not to be discussed, but ought rather to
be exploded.

The Mayor, or first Proposition, is evident in it self: for, to such a
Question there needs no other Answer to be given, but simply to deny the
supposall.

The Minor, or second Proposition, was thus proved:

First, if the names of all Professors are not, nor ever were, upon Record,
then M. Fishers supposall is false, viz. that A Protestant Church could not
have been visible in former ages, unless the names of all visible professors
can now be showed.

But all visible professors names are not, nor ever were on record, as it is
certain, and confessed by A. C. p. 33.

Therefore Master Fishers supposall is false; viz. that A Protestant Church
could not have been visible in former ages unless the names of those visible
Professors could be showed.

Secondly, if all ancient Records are not now extant, then it is no good
Argument, to say, The names of visible Protestants in all ages cannot now be
showed upon Record; therefore they were never upon Record.

But all ancient Records are not now extant:

Therefore it is no good Argument, to say, that because the names of visible
Protestants in all Ages cannot now be showed upon Record; therefore they were
never upon Record.

These Arguments Master Fisher passed by with a dry foot, and by his silence
grants it.

Thirdly, the people of Africa mentioned by Pliny, were visible men, yet cannot
their proper names be showed and proved out of good Authors: for, good Authors
report, they had no proper names at all. With this rather tentatiue then
serious instance, M. Fisher and Master Sweet were blankt: but Master Boulton,
though he confessed in effect, that they were gone at the common Law: yet he
sought to relieve them by the Chan^^^^, by saying, that Though those people had
no proper names, yet they had some descriptions, and might be known by some
periphrasis. But it may be replied,

1. A description or periphrasis is no proper name.

2. They cannot produce out of any good Authors, any particular description of
these men, whereby they may be personally and indiuidually distinguished one
from another; but only a general description, that They are a people in
Africa, near the hill Atlas, which have no proper names; and thus it will be
easy to produce Protestants in all ages, in a general description of certain
men, who opposed certain errors against, and besides the Doctrine of
Scripture, and especially the errors of the Church of Rome.

Fourthly, the Author and Head of the Heretics called Acephali, was a visible
man, but his name cannot be showed and proved out of good Authors: for those
Heretics were therefore called Acephali, or headless, because the certain
Author and Head of that Heresy could never be known. And here, if it be
lawful to pay Master Fisher with his own coin, a man might truly say, that
both himself, and his as^istant Master Sweet, and their good friend at a dead
(...), Master Boulton, were all nonplussed with this argument, for they replied
nothing to it.

Fifthly, the falsehood of Master Fishers supposall (the defense whereof Master
Sweet rashly undertook in the conference) may be farther manifested by diverse
other instances; as

First, there were 7000. in Elias time, who never bowed their knee to Baal: yet
their names cannot be showed nor proved out of good Authors.

Secondly, there were who opposed corrupt glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and their false doctrine, or at least assented not unto it, in the age
immediately before Christ's Incarnation: yet their names cannot be showed and
proved out of good Authors.

Thirdly, the first brocher of the errors touching the proceeding of the holy
Ghost, and Authors of the schism and rent between the Greek and Latin
Churches, were visible men, yet their names cannot be showed and proved out of
good Authors.

Fourthly, they who first brought into the Church the administration of the
Sacrament under one kind only, were visible men: yet the names of Greg de
Valent. de legit. us. Eucharist.
them cannot be showed nor proved out of good Authors.

Fifthly, there were Bishops in almost every Diocese of England and Ireland,
and other Countries, as also Parsons of Parishes, succeeding one the other for
above 1000. years: yet the names of such Bishops and Parsons cannot be showed
and proved out of good Authors.

Sixthly, Master Fishers and Master Sweets Ancestors from Noah, according to the
flesh, were visible men: yet all their names cannot be showed and proved out
of good Authors.

And here the Protestants might justly call for names, as the Papists did in
the conference when their Champions were at a fault.

First, there were a people of Africa, never christened by any proper names.
Names, Names, where are their Names?

Secondly, there was an Author of the Heresy of the Acephali. Names, Names,
where is his Name?

Thirdly, there were 7000. in Elias time, who never bowed their knees to Baal.
Names, Names, where are their Names?

Fourthly, there were those who opposed the corrupt glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees in the age before Christ's Incarnation. Names, Names, where are their
Names?

Fifthly, there were those that first broached the error touching the proceeding
of the holy Ghost. Names, Names, where are their Names?

Sixthly, there were those that brought into the Church the administration of
the Sacrament under one kind only. Names, Names, where are their Names?

Seventhly, there were Bishops almost in each particular Diocese of England,
and Ireland, and other Countries, as also Parsons of Parishes for above 1000.
years. Names, Names, where are their Names?

Eightthly, M. Fishers and Master Sweets Ancestors, descended from Noah, were
visible men. Names, Names: where are their Names?

The third Elencticall or reprehensiue Argument was implied in D. Featly's
challenge to M. Fisher, to name any City, Town, Village or Hamlet, where the
present Romish faith was taught for five hundred years and more next after
Christ. And indeed here the Title of the Conference was verified, M. Fisher was
caught in his own Net: for, in propounding the Question of the Visibility of
the Church in all Ages, he spread a strong Net (as he thought) to catch D.
White and D. Featly, in supposing it to be impossible for them to prove the
Visibility of the Protestant Church in all Ages, especially in the Ages
immediately going before Luther; but he was caught in his own Net, by being
put to prove the Visibility of the Romish Church for five hundred years
immediately after Christ. And therefore we turn his own Ordnance upon him,
wherewith he intended to batter down the walls of our Sion.

The true Church must have been visible in all Ages before Luther; yea, so
visible, as M. Fisher pretends, that The Names of the Professors of the faith
thereof may be showed and proved out of good Authors.

The Romish Church has not been so visible:

Therefore the Romish Church is not the true Church.

The Mayor or first Proposition is the Jesuits own.

The Assumption is thus proved:

No Church, holding the entire doctrine of the Council of Tre^t in general,
or the fifteen Tenets set down in the Conference in particular, can be showed
for five hundred years and more after Christ.

But the Romish Church holds the doctrine of the Council of Trent in
general, and those fifteen Articles in special:

Therefore the Romish Church cannot be showed to have been visible for five
hundred years after Christ.

And first, that no Church within the space aboue-named, can be proved to
have held the foresaid Tenets of the present Romish Church, was proved in the
Conference by M. Fisher's silence, and much more by A. C. his silence in his
Answer to the former Conference. Here M. Fisher was as mute as a Fish. Campi^^
in his tenth reason boldly affirms, that (...) prove the Romish faith: but
we could not hear so much as any v^ces or (...) from M. Fisher, to testify,
much less to justify the Romish faith in the first and best Ages. Pour
contrel.
Pli^^^ writes of the Plin. l. 9. not. hist. Poly^um in tantum Locusta pauet,
vt si iuxta viderit, omni^^ moriatur.
^^custa or Lobster, that he is so afraid of the (...), that it is death for
him to see him: so we may truly say, that M. Fisher was so afraid of the
fifteen Articles mentioned in the Conference, to be justified by Antiquity,
that it was death to him to name them. And therefore when he comes to that
part of the Conference, he passes away in an Homericall Cloud, saying, Here D.
Featly made an insolent Challenge. But A. C. durst not set down so much as the
words of the Challenge in particular, lest his Catholic Disciples should be
scandalized at it.

Secondly, the Inuisibility of the Romish Church, for many hundreds of years
after Christ, may be inferred from the confessions of our learned Adversaries.
Alfonsus confesses for Indulgences; Roffensis, for Purgatory; and Gregory de
Valentia, for Communion under one kind, that they were no part of the belief
or practice of the ancient Church. Verily I believe, Alfonsus a Castro and
Roffensis needed a pardon for so expressly professing the nouelty of Pardons and
Indulgences. L. 8. contr^ haeres. verbo. indulg.
Alfonsus his words are, Multa sunt Posterioribus nota, quae Vetustissimi
Scriptores prorsus ignorarunt. De Transubst antiatione, rara in Antiquis
mentio; de Purgatorio fere nulla. Quid ergo mi^um, si ad h^nc modum contigerit
de Indulgentijs, vt apud Priscos nulla sit menti^? There are many things known
to later Writers, which the Ancients were altogether ignorant of. There is
seldom any mention of Transubstantiation among the Ancients; almost none of
Purgatory. What marvel then, if it so fall out with Indulgences, that there
should be no mention of them by the Ancients? Contrae Lutherum, c. 18.
Roffensis strikes in Unisons with him: Cum Purgatorium tam sero cognitum (...)
receptum vniuersae Ecclesiae fueri^, quis iam de I^^^lgentijs mirari possit?
Since Purgatory has been so lately known and received of the whole Church, who
can now wonder concerning Indulgences? As for communion under one kind, and
depriving the Laity of the Cup (which Gelasius calls, Grande sacrilegium, a
great sacrilege) that it was an abuse lately crept into the church, we need no
more pregnant testimony, than Gregory de Lib. de legit. vsu Eucha^. c* 8.
Valentia voluntarily affords us: (...) negamus, qu^m vtraque species olim
administr^^^ sit, vt apparet ex Paulo, 1. Cor. 10. Cypriano, Athanasio,
H^eronymo, etc. We deny not, that the Communion in ancient times was
administered under both kinds, as appears out of Saint Paul, Cyprian,
Athanasius, Hierom, etc. and in his tenth Chapter. Et quidem quando primum
vigere c^pis consuetudo communicandi sub altera tantum specie in aliquibus
Ecclesiis, minime constat: coepit autem (...) c^nsuetudo in Ecclesia Latina
esse generalis non (...) ante tempor^ Concilij Constantiensis: And truly it
appears not when this custom of communicating under one kind only, began in
some Churches: but it began not to be a general custom in the Latin Church,
much before the Council of Constance. I will here instance in one Particular
more: and That is the public Service in an unknown tongue, which was brought
into the Church by Pope Vitalian; who, as (...)* Lect.
Wolphius shows, brought-in the Latin Service, and obtruded it to the whole
Church precisely, in the year 666, which is the number of the Name of the Beast
in the Apocalypse. I entreat the Reader to take special notice of it, that
Iren. l* 5. aduers. haeres. c. 3^ (...), nomen hab^t 666. et valde verisi^ile
est, and (...) regnum hoc habet voc^^ulum: Latin e^im sunt qui nunc regna^t.
Irenaeus finds the numerall Letters, 666, in the word (...): and Wolphius
proves out of Popish Writers, that this very year, 666, the Latin Bishop
Vitalianus commanded Latin Service in the whole Christian world.

And this may serve for the confirmation and illustration of the former sort of
Arguments used by D. Featly in the Conference.

For the later, which were Dicticall or demonstratiue, partly drawn a priori,
from the cause, and propounded in Syllogisticall Form; partly a posteriori,
from the effect; and propounded in an Induction; they march on in their own
strength, and need no conuoy. Some weak resistance has been made by some stray
Troops, who are met withal in the precedent Remonstrance. But now, after five
Months, M. Fisher, leuying all his forces, bids them battle, and
proclaims it by his Herald, A. C.

A Prooem to the Answer to the Conference.
WE read a pleasant Story in (...), of a fellow, that, being somewhat heavy,
took a brass pot which he had in his hand, and put it under his head for a
pillow, and so laid him down to sleep: but finding That his pillow somewhat
uneasy, with all the wit he had, he rose up, and filled it full of feathers
and straw within, and thereby thought he had made it much softer, and took a
nap upon it. If I should not apply this Story, the intelligent Reader soon
would: You, M. Fisher, are the man, who finding your former Answers, upon which
you relied in the Conference, to be very hard, uncouth, and not to be endured;
now, in this your defense of them, you as it were fill the brass pot within,
with feathers and straw, that is, stuff out and bumbaste your former Answers
with verbal distinctions, impertinencies, tautologies, cauils, and untruths:
for all the feathers and straw, the pot is brass still, as hard as ever it
was; and, for all your new qualifications and falsifications, your former
Answers are as harsh and insufferable, as ever before: so that he needs a
brow of brass, that will rest or rely upon them. For example:

1. About the beginning of the Conference, you were driven to these Soloecismes
in Grammar, to affirm, that Two vtrums imply not two quaeres; that whether the
Church, etc. and whether the names, etc. make but one whether; that the
Copulative (and) coupleth nothing; that these words (It is not) in the
singular, are to be referred to that part of the question, Whether names, etc.
in the plural. To these absurd paradoxes in Grammar, Page. 17.
against all common sense, you answer, To cut off all needless wrangling about
the Aduerb vtrum, whether, and the Copulati^e et, and, as if Grammarscholars
had been disputing, rather then grave Divines, who were not to stand on rigor
of Grammar, etc. Belike, grave Divines are privileged to be (...),
unlettered, vnchristcrost, to utter nonsense, to speak false English at their
pleasure, as the Pope did false Latin, when he said, Fiatur, for fiat, in
contemptum omnium Grammaticorum. But, as the Roman Grammarian told the
Emperor, who used an uncouth word, Bentius orat.
Ciuitatem ab Imperatore hominibus d^ri posse, verbis non posse, that it was in
the power of the Emperor, to make men free of the City of Rome, but not words:
so let me tell you, that the Pope may dispense with you for breaking the rules
of your order, in so much intermeddling (as you do) in civil affairs; but he
cannot dispense with you, for breaking of Grammar Rules* Priscian may lay his
action against you in all (...), and there lies no prohibition in a case of
this nature.

2. You were driven to these Soloecis^es in Logic. First, In a true Syllogism
to answer to the conclusion: For which you would have been ^issed out of the
Schools in our Universities. Secondly, distinguish upon a proposition, and
apply the distinction to no term. To the former you answer, The idle
exception, Page 24.
M. Fisher, attending to the (...), did not regard; but might have told him,
that it is not unusual, after a distinction made both to Mayor and Minor, to
apply the like to the conclusion. It is true, he might have said so (as you do
now): but is that sufficient without farther proof? Name the place where it is
usual. I am sure it is always improper and needless: for the conclusion in
disputation, is always a proposition given by the answerer, to the opponent,
to infer and conclude it in his argument: and therefore it is always
supposed to be agreed upon for the meaning of it, before it comes to be
concluded in a Syllogism. The Answerer may always distinguish of premises,
because they are new propositions not before debated upon: but the conclusion
is either the original Thesis it self, propounded by the answerer, (which if
it be ambiguous, he ought to have explicated it, in setting down the sta^e of
the Question) or it is one of the premises in the Opponents Syllogism: in
which, if there lay any ambiguity, the Respondent ought to have distinguished
upon it before, when it was the Mayor or Minor proposition; and not, when being
distinguished or denied before by the Respondent, it is now by the Opponent in
a true Syllogism made the Conclusion. To the second you answer: Page. 26.
That which D. Featly thinks to be a strain of new Logic, to distinguish
upon a proposition, without applying the distinction to any particular term,
is not so strange as he makes it. As for example: When one says, An
Ethiopian is white, neither the term Ethiopian alone, nor the term white
alone, in it self, needs distinction, because it is not equivocal. (...):
What a strange speech is this? Is not the term albus, white, equivocal? Do
not almost all later Logicians give it, as a most known instance of an
equivocal term? Which may be taken two ways, either absolutely, (...), and
in whole, as when we say, Nireus is albus, Nireus is a white man, (...); or
(...), secundum quid, in some respect or part, as when we say, Ethiops est
albus, a black Moore is white, to weet, in his teeth. It is true, that as
Poison infecteth the whole blood, yet the substance of it lies but in one
principal part: so an equivocation in any part of a proposition, in some sort,
affects the whole: yet this equivocation lies always in one term, to
weet, in the subiectum, or praedicatum, if the proposition be properly
equivocal; and in the copula and construction, if it be properly
amphibologicall: as, A^o te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse:te Roman^s, or
Romanos te. But note M. Fisher (if you knew it not), that one of the three
termini in a Syllogism, may contain, many words: neither can you name any
ambiguous Proposition, in which it may not be showed, in which Logic term
the ambiguity lies.

3. You were driven in the Conference to this Soloecisme in Philosophy, to
affirm, That Media may be said directa, yet not to tend ad directum finem.
Hereto he answers, Page 30.
If M. Fisher did say these words, his meaning may be gathered out of his
former explication; in which he showed, how the direct end of the Disputation
was not, to treat of particular controversies, but to find out, first by other
means, the true visible Church, whose professors names may be showed in all
Ages out of good Authors: those Media therefore Directa, as D. Featly termed
them, might in some sort be so termed, as being directed by D. Featly, to his
own end, of transferring the question to particular Conferences, but not ad
directum finem, that is, not ordained to the direct end of the Disputation,
viz. to she^ a visible Church of Protestants in all Ages, whose names may be
showed out of good Authors. Of the end of the Dispute, and how my arguments
tended directly to that end, enough has been said before in the Remonstrance.
But admitting that they tended not to the direct end, M Fisher should have
said, Your Media were not Directa, because they tended not ad directum finem:
but he says, Your Media were Directa, but not tending ad direct ^^finem;
thereby flatly contradicting himself in the same proposition: for, Media, or
means, are said in relation to an end; therefore, if they are direct, they
must needs tend to the direct end. To say, Media are Directa, and not tending
ad directum finem, to the direct end, is all one, as if he should say, This
shoo indeed is fit, but not for the foot: This is the straight way, but not to
the place you would go to: The aim is right, but not to the mark: The saddle
serves fit, but not to the beasts back: The knife is keen, and sharp, but not
to cut. For, as a shoo is said to be fit only in respect of the foot: and the
way straight, in respect of a man's intended journey: and the ^ime right, in
respect of the mark: and the saddle to serve fit, in respect of the beasts
back, for which it is made; and the knife keen, in respect of cutting: so are
Media said to be Directa, only (...). And therefore I had just cause then to
use the English Proverb, This is a Bull; and now the Greek, (...).

4. You were driven to the worst soloecisme of all in Divinity, to refuse to
answer to Christ and his Apostles, yea though you were solemnly adjured
thereunto. To this (to (...) impudent denials and apparent contradiction
observed by the witnesses in the Attestation) you answer, Page 64. and 65.
that You would not permit me to divert either to dispute about Christ, or his
Apostles, or any other point, till Names were given in all ages: Page 65.
for, this had been, say you, to follow two Hares at once, and so to catch
neither. A light Answer, Master Fisher, to so weighty a Charge. Christ and his
Apostles should not have been so slightned. But you say, To instance in Christ
and his Apostles in the first Age, was, To follow two Hares. Do you remember
which was the Hare we were to hunt? Was it not the Visibility of the Church in
all Ages before Luther? And could a man possibly take a more direct and orderly
way, then to begin with the first Age, and the first of the first Age? If this
were not the way to catch the Hare, your own Hunts-men, that prating (...),
and his honest transcriber S. N. were at a great fault: for, they begin their
Catalogue where I do. Will you not be angry, Master Fisher, if I tell you the
truth? I hunted not two Hares at once: but when you were devising and printing
your Answer in the By Islington.
Cellar or Cell^eer the Windmill, your head swomm^, and your brains ran round,
and you knew not well your self what you did, as will appear to any, who will
compare my Reply with your Answer, which I here transcribe verbati^ (^hongh not
always following you (...), because you often double, and more often start
aside); requiring of you the like. And I begin with your Title.

An Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, The Fisher catched in his own net. In
which, by the way, is showed, that The Protestant Church was not so visible in
all Ages, as the true Church ought to be; and consequently, is not the true
Church, of which men may learn infallible faith necessary to salvation, by A.
C.
DIgnu^ patella operculu^; such a cup, such a Cover; such ware, such
inscriptio^ on the outside of the box: such as the Inn is, such is the sign:
such as the Clock is, such is the Index or Finger of the Dial. A cracked Cup,
and a false Cover; naughty ware, and as bad an inscription; a cheating Inn,
and a lewd Sign; an uncertain Clock, and a lying Index; a book full of
falsehood and fraud, and never a true word in the title: for, neither is it an
answer to the Phamphlet so entitled, but a Cavil at some passages therein;
neither in this Answer (as he terms it) is showed, that The Protestant
Church is not the true visible Church, but rather the contrary, as shall
appear by discussing it; neither was it penned by A. C. but by Master Fisher,
who before was caught in his own net, and now d^nceth in a net, under the name
of A. C. thinking, that no man sees him: yet your Net is not so close, but
that I plainly see you through it; and I guess at the reason why you shroud your
self under the Characters of A. C. There are many passages in this Answer; in
which, Master Fishers ingenuity, and sincerity, and modesty, are set upon the
Last. These commendations of Master Fisher would have lost all their grace in
his own mouth, as a Turkeys does the luster on the finger of a dead man: but it
becomes A. C. well enough, to blazon the Arms of Master Fisher. Moreover, by
thus borrowing the letters of your friends name, you play fast and loose. If
any man like your Answer, then it is yours; but if he dislike it, then it is
A. C* as Orat. pro Cu^ Plantio.
Tully being girded at by Laterensis for a common Iester, answers, Quod
quisque dicit, id ^e dixisse dicunt: ego autem si quid est quod mihi (...) esse
videatur, et homine ingenu^ dignum atqu^ doct^, non aspernor* stomachor vero,
cum a^^rum non me digna in me conseruntur: Other men's jests are fathered upon
me: and if they be witty jests, and have salt in them, I am content to
father them; but if dry and unsavory, I will not own them. In like manner in
your book: -- Si quid tamen aptius exit:
Quanqua^ haec rara auis est: siquid t^men aptius exit,


If there be any thing sharply spoken, and to good purpose, M. Fisher will
challenge that to himself: but if any thing be spoken impertinently and flatly
(as indeed the greater part of your Music goes upon flats) then A. C. must
bear it out. Howsoever, in my judgment, M. Fisher, you had better have taken
off your mask, and dealt open^y: for, by this concealing your true name, you
give your self a blow, and your cause a wound. Were not you a Nominall in the
Conference? Did not you stand wholly, in a manner, upon Names? and will not you
now set your own name to your own Work? A man would think, that you, who are
stored with so many Per^y; alias Stebden; alias, Fisher.
Names, might have bestowed, at least, one of your old cast Names at full
length on your Title Page, and not put your Reader to spell A. C. who, I can
assure you, spells them unhappily. One spelleth thus: An Answer written by A.
C. that is, A Counterfeit; another, A. C. A Cauiller; a third, An Answer
written by A. C. that is, by A Cox-etc. quod dicere nolo: but I spare you, and
leave your Title, and come to your Preface.

Master FISHER'S Preface.
GEntle Reader, although I doubt not, but all that be wise and judicious,
especially if they duly consider the occasion and state of the question lately
treated (in a Conference betwixt Doctor White, and Doctor Featly Ministers, and
Master Fisher and Master Sweet Jesuits) will easily discern (even by that
false relation which is set out in print by a Protestant) that the Protestants
cause has not gained any thing.

Doctor FEATLY'S Answer.
AS our Blessed Savior spoke to the Highpriests servant, John 18. 23
saying, If I have done evil, bear witness of the evil; if well, why
smitest thou me? In like manner, the Protestant Relator may check you: If he
have done you any wrong in the relation, or set down any thing untruly,
convince him of it; if not, why do you smite him with your tongue and pen? It
is your own Maxim, that No man will lie for the advantage of his Adversary;
or for his own disadvantage: but you here say, that The Protestant cause has
gained nothing by the relation. Therefore it should seem, by your own
argument, to be a sincere, and not malicious relation. Howsoever, if the
Protestant cause has gained nothing by it, your cause has lost nothing by it;
and if so, why do you so malign and persecute, even unto banishment, an
innocent Relation? Why do you forbid your Romish Catholics to read it? Why
apply you so many salues, both in writing and in print, if there be no sore?
What the Protestant cause gained by the Conference it self, or the relation
thereof, malo in aliorum opinione relinquere, quam in oratione mea ponere: it
is fitter for me to hear, then speak. I am sure, Doctor White and my self
have gained much ease by it: for, before the Conference, we could never be
quiet for your challenges; but since, we have never been troubled with you. It
seems, you had enough of that short Encounter. But you will say, No blow was
struck home: no arrow was drawn up to the head; no argument prosecuted to the
full, at that Meeting. How then could the Protestant Cause gain any thing by
it? By your miserable euasions, and manifest flight and tergiuersation, you,
who were ante pugnam auidus and tumidus, were in pugna pauidus and timidus:
like Captain John, mentioned by Sinesius, Epist. 104.
who in the maine fight, fled amain, digging his horse-sides, letting loose the
Reanes, laying on amain with a switch, etc. (...). etc. It will be said, If
you fled in such manner, why did not I follow after you? Because in your flight
you brake the bridge, by refusing to answer Christ and his Apostles. Scripturis
non loquentibus, quis loquetur? Where Christ and his Apostles cannot be heard,
the holy Father was resolved never to speak. I account it no foil to my
cause, to be non-futed in that Court, where Christ and his Apostles are
excepted against. Where the Charters of our salvation are not pleadable, give
me leave, M. Fisher, to speak to you Jesuits in the words of Athanasius de
Incar. Christ. Si* discipuli est is Scripturaru^, per eas nobiscum incedite; si
diuersa a Scripturis vultis fabulari, cur nobiscum decortaetis, qui neque loqui
neque audire sustinemus, quod extraneum sit ab istis, dicente Domino, Si
ma^seritis in sermon meo, eritis mei Discipuli?
Athanasius: If you are the Disciples of the Scriptures, and Christ's scholars,
walk with us by them: if you will talk extrauagantly and diversely from the
Scriptures, why do you contend with us, who dare not to speak or hear any
thing without them, or different from them; our Lord saying* If you abide in my
sayings, you shall be my Disciples?

Master FISHER'S Preface.
Nevertheless, because those who be partially affected, or of mean capacity,
may (as it is to be doubted diverse do) conceive and speak amiss of this
matter, to the disgrace of the Catholic cause, and the prejudice of their
own and other men's souls; I have thought is meet to set out a true relation
of the occasion, progress, and issue of this Conference; and this in such
sort, as diverse falsehoods of the Protestant Relator may be easily perceived,
and the weakness of the Protestant cause may be evidently discovered: which is
also so bad, as it seems it cannot be supported, but by setting out such
lying relations.

The Answer.
Nescio quo pacto vox tua facta mea est. You have said that which I should have
said. When Saint Hierom justly taxed Sabinian a Deacon, for deflouring a Nun,
Sabinian reflects upon Saint Hierom, and lays foul aspersions of lewdnes upon
him: but the difference was that which S. Hierom charged Sabinian with, which
was per veram convictionem, by true conviction: but that which Sabinian charged
Saint Hierom with, was per falsam confictionem, by false conifiction, or forged
calumniation. Thus the case stands between the Protestant Relatour and you,
Master Fisher. He lays crimen falsi to your charge, per veram conuictionem,
by true conviction: he proves falsehood by you, by unanswerable arguments
drawn from evident circumstances, and your own confession, and multitude of
witnesses beyond all exception: see the Attestation. Whereas you object
falsehood to him, it is per falsam confictionem: you falsely impose falsehood upon
him: you say, that there is falsehood in his relation, but you prove no such
thing. Your (...), here cannot carry it; first, because the particulars you
deny, nearly touch your credit and reputation: therefore it stands you upon,
Cic. in Ver.
to deny them. Negas haec facta: turpis enim et periculosa est confessio: you
deny matters of fact alleged against you in the Conference, because you
cannot with safety or credit confess them. Besides this legal exception
against your witness in your own case, you are a Friar, and therefore
(according to the ancient English Proverb) a L. with a rhyme to it. Thirdly, you
are a Jesuit: and therefore (unless you will swerve from the rule of the
prime men and Ringleaders of your society) you maintain the wholesome and
profitable use of an equiuocating Lie. What do I or any man know, whether,
when you speak of diverse false-hoods of the Protestant Relator, you reserve
not in your mind, Fained by me, or devised by me, to save my credit, and
promote the Catholic Cause? But let us see how you turn the Lie upon us.

Master FISHER'S Preface.
The sight and consideration whereof makes we more easily believe that to be
true which I have read, viz. that A Decree was made by Divines in Geneua,
defining it lawful to lie for the honor or credit of the Gospel; and that,
conformably to this Decree, an English Minister being told, that one of his
Pu^-fellows had made Lies, in stead of Proofs of his Protestant Religion, did
answer, saying, He cannot lie too much in this cause: it must needs be a weak
and bad cause, that needs to be supported by such weak and bad shifts.

Answer.
I assent to your conclusion: It must needs be a false religion, that is
supported with such lies as you have now here given us a brace. True Religion
neither is supported by lies, nor any way supports lies. Let us see then
whether your faith or ours leanes on these base and beggarly crooches.
Certainly, neither Iacobus de Voragine, nor Surius, nor Copgraue, nor
Turseline, nor any other Author of your golden Legends, serving to support your
doctrines of Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images and
Relics, Purgatory, and Pilgrimages, etc. can be proved to be a Protestant. He
that wrote Beza's Recantation; and another, who since set forth the late Lord
Bishop of Londons Legacy, was far from a Protestant. Name me any Protestant
who ever defended pias frauds, or ever propugned this Tenet, Fides non est
seruanda Haereticis, Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. The Fathers of the
Council of Constance, who, contrary to the faith and safe conduct given by the
Emperor Sigismund, burnt John Hus and Hierom of Prague, never learned from the
School of Geneua, or the English Pue you speak of, to break faith for the
maintenance of the Romish-Catholique faith, and the destruction of the opposers
thereof. The first that brake the Oath of Allegiance in heaven, was the
Devil; and by it, becam a Devil: and the first that brake promise on the
earth, was likewise the Devil, Genesis 3. whose scholars they show themselves,
who teach, that Promises even confirmed by oaths, the strongest sinews which
hold all humane society together, may be either cut asunder by Papal
Dispensation, or cunningly untied by Jesuitical Equivocation. Pray tell me in
good earnest: Sprang the doctrine of Equivocation (whereby you defend, that a
man may affirm, nay swear an untruth in words, and make it up by a mental
reservation) from us, or from you? Here you have Names, names of your own
trade, and some of them Wardens of your own equiuocating Company.
I cannot find either Nanarrus, or Gregory de Valentia, or Southwell, or
Tolet, or Parsons, among the Catalogue of Protestant Writers. These vpholders
of Equivocation, and many other, whose names deserve to be buried in
everlasting oblivion with the ancient P^iscilianists (whose old, damnable
doctrine touching the lawful use of lying, they refine with a new Burnish, to
make it more saleable), never took a Copy of the supposed Decree of Geneua,
nor gathered Notes from the English Reader you speak of. No Protestants are so
ambitious, as to steal from your Garlands the fairest Flowers wherewith you
adorn your heads and pens. If any such Flowers grow in our Gardens, either
they die of themselves, or are carefully weeded out. I appeal to all the
Confessions, Catechisms, Expositions on the Commandments, Systems of Divinity,
Common-places, several Tractates, wherein, either directly and professedly, or
occasionally, they fall on the Subject we are now about, whether they condemn
not all lying and false-hood, open or covered, with mental reservation, or
without, to the deep pit of hell from whence they came. From which pit, Iacobus
de Voragine may very well be thought to take his name, for raking hell for so
many lying miracles and fables, wherewith he has stuffed the lives of Saints.
And now having laid the Dog at your door, let us see how you beat him from
you, to ours. Your wisdom and grave fatherhood here tells us of a Decree made
at Geneua, you know not when; and a tale of a Minister, you know not who; and
for proof, are alleged Johannes Cretensis, and Gulielmus Nullatenensis, or (if
you will) Episcopus Chalcedonensis: both these, if I may take your word (for, I
hold neither of them worth looking into) relate the Stories aboue-mentioned,
and that agreeable to their names and titles, fide Graeca. A pretty Pageant: A
Jesuit cites a Jesuit against Geneua; and a Romish Priest, a new no-Bishop of
Chalcedon, against an English Minister. Aruspex Aruspicem: one Fortune-tellor.
Gypsy quotes another for the truth of his Art. Simia gives his word for
Pseudolus. Belial cites Beelzebub the god of Flies, for a Flie-blown scoffing
Iergon at Geneua: There was a decree made, defining it to be lawful to lie for
the credit and honor of the Gospel. Where was this Decree or Canon made? In
the Senate, or in the Consistory? By the Syndicks, or by the Presbytery? When
was it made? What date bears it? Who drew it? Who engrossed it? Upon what
occasion was it made? Who subscribed to it? I cry you mercy: now I remember
when it was made: it was made the very year in which Beza recanted his
Religion: and immediately thereupon, all Geneua reconciled it self to the
Pope. And at that time, the Pope's Holiness, to assure the Geneuians of his
unfeigned love and friendship to their city, sent them a Copy of the great
Charter of Constantines donation, and in the backside of it, this decree was
written, at the beginning of the Julian period, an. 764. ante orbem conditum.
Yea, but some Papists will say, If this Decree were so ridiculous a forgery,
Father Eudaemon Johannes would never have reported it, as he does, in sober
sadness. Titus 1. 12
Heerunto I answer, first, out of Saint Paul, that the Cretians are not always
the honestest men: and Father Eudaemon does not deny nor belie his Country.
Secondly, I answer out of the Acts of our Courts, and the Proceedings against
Garnet, that this Eudaemon, who takes upon him to justify that Powder-traitor,
against most uncontrollable Evidence, and the public justice of a whole
Kingdom, is none of the honestest among the Cretians. This is that monstrum
hominis, monstrum nominis, Andraeas Johannes sid^nius Cretensis. This is the
Canonizer of Garnet and his straw. Father Garnet, forsooth, at his execution
(si credere fas est) let fall some drops of blood upon a straw, which
miraculously fashioned themselves into the shape and Visage of that
Powder-martyr: which is as true, and altogether as likely, as that the Atomi or
motes, such as we now see in the Sun, by a casual concourse, made the whole
world, according to the faith of the ancient Epicures. But the best jest was,
that as Garnets tongue doubled and equiuocated whilst he was alive, so his
face equiuocated and doubled after his death. As in Plautus his Amphitrio,
Socis begat another Socia; and Blepharo, another Blepharo; and the Goblet,
another Goblet; so like, that they could not be distinguished: in like manner,
face begets face, and miracle begets miracle, and straw begets straw;
representing Garnet's feature; so like, that without miracle they could not be
distinguished. Thoughts are free. My conceit is, that Father Eudaemon, reading
Saint Gregorie's Exposition on those words of Job, Boues arabant, and asini
pascebant iuxta; the oxen plowed, and the asses fed by them; and learning, that
by oxen were allegorically meant the Clergy, and by asses, the Laity, thought
he might well defend this strawn miracle, because straw is fit fodder for
asses. For which his Apology of Garnet and his straw, as also his witty
invention of a Decree published at Geneua, for the lawfulnes of a Lie tending
to the honor and credit of the Gospel, he meriteth to have the first
syllable of his name to be cut off. As Ieconias is called by the Prophet,
Conias: so Eudaemon should be called from henceforth, Devil John.
Demon Johannes. And for the Bishop of Chalcedon, I wish him no other
punishment, for his slander of the English Minister, but to be sent to reside
on his Diocese. And so I leave them, and come to you, M. Fisher.

Master FISHER'S Preface.
I for my part will not promise to have perfectly remembered and set down every
word that passed in this Conference, especially spoke by bystanders, nor to
have strictly observed the precise order of every passage: but for the
substance and truth of the matter that I do relate, I assure, that there shall
not be found any falsehood, unless it be in some of those parcels which I do
not relate of my self, but out of the Protestant Relator whose relation
ordinarily as I do not contradict, unless it be upon necessary occasions,
so I do not intend to approve. But, simply relating what it says, I will
leave is to others to judge what they think fit of it. Only this I will say,
that every one may believe it, so far as it relates any thing which may
advantage the Catholic Defendants and their cause, or disaduanlage the
Protestant Disputants and their cause: for it is certain, that no man will lie
for the advantage of his adversary, or his cause, nor his own disadvantage.
But in such things as it has set down aduantageously for the Protestant
Disputant, or his cause, there is just reason to suspect it, inregard that I am
told, that Doctor Featly himself (who is said to be the Author) has
confessed, that more is said in the relation, then was said in the conference
it self: and I am sure, something is left out which was said, and something
mis-reported. This being premised by way of preface, I will begin to discourse
of the matter it self.

Answer.
In this part of your Preface, you arrogate truth to your own relation, and
derogate from the Protestants: to drive forward your own Bark fraught with
untruths, you fill your sails with the breath of your own praises; assuring
us, that, for the substance and truth of the matter that you relate, there
shall not be found any falsehood. How will you assure this, when so many
persons of quality, present at the conference, and attentive to it, in diverse
particulars testify the contrary under their hands? You are one of the
principal Gamesters, Master Fisher; and your credit, if not your Religion,
lies at stake. Be not your own judge, but let the standers by determine,
whether you or the Protestant Relator has played fair, and above board. For
omissions, in regard whereof, you tax the Protestant relation, they were in
your favor, and not to your prejudice. But because you could not see when you
were well, and complain without a cause, they are now supplied: make your best
of them. For additions or mis-reports to the prejudice of any, the witnesses
expressly clear the Protestant Relatour from any such imputation: and if I
should fasten any such upon him, as you covertly would insinuate, essem similis
vestri, id est, mendax. If I were the author of that relation, is it likely,
that I would discredit it my self? This were, messes meas vrere, to blur with
my pencill a true Picture drawn by my self. Itaque hic non modo crimen non
haeret, sed nec Jesuit ae cohaeret oration: as you contradict the truth, so you
contradict your self.

To conclude therefore my Answer to your Preface, and give the Reader some
light to clear his judgment in censuring both relations, the civil Law
teaches to suppose every man honest, unless the contrary be proved: and
therefore the Protestant Relator may justly challenge thy good opinion, unless
thou find some proof to the contrary. On the contrary, Qui semel probatur esse
malus, semper supponitur esse malus in eode^ genere mali: whosoever has been
once convinced of a crime, wheresoever afterward he comes in question, is
presumed always to be faulty in the same kind. But you, Master Fisher, were
convinced to your face by two witnesses, to be a false Relator and setter down
of some of my answers in a former conference: neither did you, or could you
deny it: only you blanched it over with protesting, that you did it not
wittingly or willingly: from which starting hole you were driven by Doctor
Goad, and you have here given me a staff to beat you out of it: for, you say,
It is certain, that No man will lie, but for his own advantage: but you lied,
as is confessed, in setting down and relating some of my answers, and
therefore, by your own argument, you must needs do it for your own
advantage; and consequently, both wittingly and willingly.

A Table of the principal matters contained in M. FISHER'S ANSWER.
MAster Fisher, before you embarked your self into the maine business, to
answer the three Chapters of the Protestant Relation, I expected, that, for the
better direction of the Reader, you would have some way analyzed your prolix
Answer, and set before him a Synopsis, or Table of the specialties comprised is
this your Treatise: which thing, because you have omitted, I will do you the
courtesy to perform it for you.

The principal matters contained in the Answer, may be reduced to five heads:

1. (...), or Untruths. 2. (...), or Contradictions. 3. (...), or Idle
observations and exceptions. 4. (...), or Impertinences, or mal'd proposes. 5.
(...), or Vain repetitions.
Of the first Head, (...) or Untruths, read Title Page; An Answer written by
A. C. VNTRVTH: for, M. Fisher is known to be the Author of it.

Preface, Page 2. D. Featly, who is said to be the Author, has confessed,
that more is said in the Relation, then was said in the Conference it self.
Untruth: for, D. Featly was never questioned about that Relation, nor said he
any such thing.

Page 15. Then D. Featly, beginning to argue in this place, and not in the end
of the Disputation, where the Protestant Relator places it, did say, I wish
(...) I warn, I command, I conjure you to answer truly ^d sincerely in the
sight of God, and as you will answer it at the day of Judgment. A double
Untruth. First, the words, I warn, I command, were never spoken by me.
Secondly, those words, As you will answer it at the day of Judgment, were
spoken in the end of the Disputation, and not in the beginning, where you place
it. See the Attestation to the Conference. In the same page, M. Sweet
propounded these conditions to be observed; First, that all bitter speeches
should be forborne. Secondly, that ^^thing should be spoken or heard, but to
the purpose. Untruth. The second condition was never propounded by M. Sweet;
which I thus prove. Both Relations agree, that M. Sweet propounded but two
conditions in all; likewise both agree, that the first condition was, That all
bitter speeches should be avoided. There remains then but one condition. But
all the witnesses, who have subscribed to the Conference, do, upon their
certain knowledge, remember, that M. Sweet propounded such a condition; that
None but Disputants should speak. And therefore this second condition added by
M. Fisher, that nothing should be spoken or heard, but to the purpose, is
feigned and supposititious.

Page 16. M. Sweet did not say, as the Relator reports; They are
Scholasticall points, not fundamental: neither was there any such Syllogism
then made, as the Relator annexeth. Double Untruth. We have as many witnesses,
both of that Answer of M. Sweet, and D. Whites Syllogism, made by way of
Reply, as there are words in both. In the same page: In the mean while, name
but one Father, one writter of note, who held the particulars aboue-named, for
500 years after Christ. To which instant demand of D. Featly (says the
Relator) nothing was answered: but neither was this said, neither was it
needful to answer. Untruth: for, the witnesses to the Conference, perfectly
remember, and directly affirm, that it was said. Besides, this I spoke out of
my paper, which I have yet to show: and no one thing more moved M. Bugges, and
some other in the Conference, then this, that for all the Jesuits laying
claim to all Ages, and boasting, that all the world was of the Popish Religion
before Luther, yet M. Fisher could not name so much as one man in the world,
who for 500 years after Christ, held the Tridentine faith ingenerall, or those
points of Popery, mentioned in the Conference, in special; neither does he
yet name one in his printed Answer. Nay, he dares not so much as name the
points, for fear of giving scandal to his own side.

Page 20. These formal words which he reports M. Fisher to have said, viz. A
proof a postetiori, is more demonstratiue, then a priori, M. Fisher did not
speak. Untruth: For, first the witnesses to the Conference remember perfectly,
that he said so. Secondly, M. Alesburie, the Writer of the Conference, set
down these formal words, which are yet to be seen in the sealed Schedule.
Thirdly, M. Alesburie immediately replied upon M. Fishers words, Here M.
Fisher shows his Academicall learning, in preferring a demonstration a
posteriori, before that which proceeds a priori. These words of M. Alesburie
are set down in the Protestants Relation of the Conference, and M. Fisher does
not deny them: and therefore he cannot deny those words which were the
immediate occasion of that Reply.

Page 31. But D. Featly did not say all this. Untruth: for, immediately upon
those words of mine, that the Inference of the effect by the cause, was not
transitio a genere in genus, etc. D. Goad interposed, saying; M. Sweet, You
ones learned better Logic in Cambridge, then you show now. These words of D.
Goad, set down in the Protestants Relation, M. Fisher here denies not: and
therefore he cannot reasonably deny the former words of mine which occasioned
them. Remember, M. Fisher, better your lesson; Mandecem oportet, etc.

Page 32. But D. White did not speak thus; neither did he, in all the
conference, make any such long discourse. Untruth: for, first, D. White was
appointed, in the beginning of the Conference, for the last hour and half to
answer M. Fisher in the contrary Question, for the Visibility of the Roman
Church. The first hour and half was already spent: and therefore D. White had
just occasion and reason to call upon M. Fisher as he did, to prove the
Visibility of the Roman Church: And as for the six points mentioned in the
Conference, they were the same which D. White showed Sir Humfrey Linde and me
before the Conference, and told us, that he would put M. Fisher upon the proof
of them. Secondly, those of the Auditors which sat and stood next about D.
White, testify upon their perfect remembrance, that he called upon M. Fisher
to oppose, and propounded those six points unto him, set down in the
Conference. In which, because M. Fisher found himself unable to deal with
Doctor White, therefore he makes bold to borrow a point of Jesuitical honesty;
Fairly to deny, that any such points were proposed.

Page 35. M. Fisher solemnly protested upon his conscience, that wittingly and
willingly he did never wrong either D. White, or D. Featly, in report of any
conference. To this, nothing was replied: and therefore I suppose, that the
Audience was well satisfied of M. Fisher's sincerity in his relation. Untruth:
for, D. Goad immediately replied, that what M. Fisher wrote, was for his own
advantage: and therefore he could not but suspect, that he did it wittingly and
willingly. See the Attestation to the Conference.

Page 37. D. Featly, turning to M. Fisher, said, Will you dispute upon Christ
and his Apostles, or not? To which M. Fisher said, I will, if you will stay:
and, stretching out his hand, he took D. Featly by his arm offering to stay
him; yet he (D. Featly) in that abrupt manner went away. Untruth. So many
words, almost so many untruths; and, God be thanked, there are witnesses enough
to convince the Counter-relator of a fignall and transcendent leasing in this
last passage. See the Attestation.

I might furnish this Head and common place of M. Fisher, with many more
instances; but these may suffice, to prove, that M. Fisher deemeth himself one
of those that have past Thyle; who, if we may believe Ep. 148. Conceditur ijs
qui Thylem transierunt, (...).
Synesius, may lie by authority, and without control.

Of the second Head, (...), or Contradiction, read
Page 14. He alleges my words thus: Although this Question be grounded upon
uncertain and false Supposals: For, a Church may have been visible, yet not the
Names of all visible Professors thereof now to be showed, etc. And again, page
32. Are all visible Names upon Record? Are all Records in former times now to
be produced? And again in the same page, M. Sweet, calling for Names of
Protestants, well might say, If Protestants had been in all Ages, their Names
in every Age might be produced: unto which, as the Protestant Relator says
(and the Counter-Relator denies not), D. Featly replied, saying, This is a non
sequitur. And page 19. he propounds my Argument thus: That Church which
holds this faith you believe (not we), shall be so visible, that the Names
thereof may be showed in all Ages. But the Protestant Church holds this
faith: See the Protestant Relation of the Conference, page 21. line 23.
Ergo. And again in repeating the like argument, That Church whose faith is the
Catholic and Primitive faith, once given to the Saints, is so visible, that
the Names of the Professors thereof may be showed in all Ages. To this Mayor
Proposition I added, page 21. The Mayor is ex concessis: neither does the
Counter-Relator deny, that these words were added. Yet page 49. M. Fisher, in
his Letter to the Earl of Warwick, says, They are so far from having
discharged themselves of the great enterprise they undertook, as they stand
more engaged than before; having now professed and acknowledged, that the true
Church, or (to use their own words) the Church which is so visible as the
Catholic Church ought to be, is able to name Professors in all Ages.

CONTRADICTION.
Doctor Featly professes and acknowledges, Contradiction the first.
that The true Church ought to be so visible, as that it is able to name
professors in all ages.

Doctor Featly holds not, that The true Church ought to be so visible, etc.
but disputed ad hominem, and ex concessis aduersarij, not according to his own
judgment.

Page 32. M. Fisher had no reason to divert to particular matters, in regard it
was his Adversaries fault, to spend so long time in impertinent Syllogismes.
And page 48. Your Lordship may remember the substance of all the proof to have
consisted in this, that The true Church ought always to be so visible, as the
Professors thereof in all Ages might be named. But the Protestants was the true
Church. We refused to dispute of the Minor, because it transferred the
Question. And in many other places, he calls my Argument, from the truth of
faith to the Visibility of the Church, A diuersiue Proof. And page 34. Dilatory
and i^pertinent Syllogisms. Yet Page 23. he says, In asking which is the true
visible Church, we ask, at least vertually, which is the true faith, in regard
the true visible Church cannot be without the true faith: yes therefore do we
ask which is the true Church, that of it we may learn what is the true faith.
And page 69. line 14. That the right order of things requires, th^^ first it
only be disputed, to whom the faith belongs: which is all one (say you) as
if he should say, Which is the true visible Church?

CONTRADICTION.
In the Question touching the Visibility of the true Church, it is impertinent,
and a diuersion, to dispute of the true faith.

In the Question of the visibility of the true Church, Contradiction the sec^
it is not impertinent nor a diuersion, to dispute of the true faith; because
the Question of the true faith is, vertually at least, included in the Question
of the true Church.

Page 37. Doctor Featly in his rising, turned to Master Fisher, saying, Will
you dispute upon Christ and his Apostles, or no? To which Master Fisher said, I
will, if you will stay; And in the same page, Master Fisher did not prohibit
him (Doctor Featly) to begin with the names of Christ and his Apostles. And
again: M. Fisher expressed his yielding to dispute about Christ and his
Apostles two several times; once thus: I will dispute of them in due place.
Another time thus: I will, if you will stay. Yet Page 64. he writes thus, M.
Fisher and M. Sweet still kept the Adversary to the point, and would not permit
him to divert, either to dispute about Christ and his Apostles, or any other
point, until names were given in all ages; The which course they took upon
just and good reason. And Page 65. he alleges two reasons for it. See them
there. And Page 71. M. Fisher had good reason and right to defer disputing
with him (D. Featly) out of Scripture, of Christ and his Apostles, until he
had made his full induction of names.

CONTRADICTION.
Master Fisher permitted Doctor Featly to dispute about Christ and his
Apostles. (...)


Master Fisher permitted not Doctor Featly to dispute about Christ and his
Apostles.

Master Fisher expressly yielded, that D. Featly should begin with Christ and
his Apostles.

Master Fisher yielded not that D. Featly should begin with Christ and his
Apostles, Contradiction the fourth.
nor dispute about them, nor any other point, until names were given in all
ages.

A curious eye might easily discern many more contradictions in this Answer of
Master Fisher: but these may suffice to veri^ie the truth of that observation,
or, to speak more properly, that observation of the truth, to wit, that she
usually takes this revenge of her adversaries, that they who contradict her in
the beginning, contradict themselves before the end: for truths are always
concords, but false-hoods are very often discords, even among themselves.

Of the third Head (...), or idle observations, and frivolous exceptions.
Page 13. Any man reading this parcel of the Conference, would be induced to
think, that Doctor White and Doctor Featly were summoned on the (...) to this
Conference. And what if he should think so? In the same Page: The Relator would
make (...) Reader believe, that Master Fisher had set the figure of 2. in the
middle of the question. Grande (...) A most horrible falsification, to set the
figure 2. before the second part of the question. You you^ self at that place
set two points there, thus (^) and added a second whether: therefore it could
be no irremissible sin in the Scribe, or rather the Printer, to distinguish
the parts of the question really and verbally diverse, by prefixing the figure
2. to the latter part of it. Is not this to fish for Banstikles? If you catch
no better stuff in your net, by my consent, you shall be called no more Master
Fisher, but Master Minnow-catcher.

Page 14. The Relator would make men believe, that Doctor Featly had delivered
the state of the question, memoriter. And Page 16. Diverse particular points
rehearsed by the Protestant Relator, which he (Doctor Featly) read out of a
paper. A capital accusation. Is any proposition the truer, or Argument the
stronger, because it is said by heart, or memoriter? Piere Daubignie, the French
Jesuit of your Order, thanked God, that he had a singular gift of
forgetfulness; that, what he heard in confession, it presently ran out of his
memory. This gift of forgetfulness is not now so rare; therefore you might have
spared this observation: howbeit, if my memory had been so short and sandy,
that I was not able to commit a doozen lines, or thereabouts, to memory (if I
had intended it), they were very much too blame, that made choice of me, first
at Oxford, and afterward at London, to preach the rehearsal Sermons. A very
unfit task for a Piere Daubignie to have undertaken.

Page 35. Master Fisher, hearing this slander, did rise up, and solemnly
protest. And Page 36. Master Fisher, rising up, with his hand and (...), etc.
And what if he had protested, sitting (...) Unless the Relator, Master
Fisher, would intimate, that he is alius stans, alius sedens; or that the
speech he uttered standing, were not so discreet as his other, because the
Parasite in the Poet says, Plus sapio sedens: I have more wit when I sit.

Page 63. It no way sorted with the gray (...) and gravity of a Doctor, and a
Deane, to have laughed and fleered so much, as Doctor White did, etc. (...) for
Doctor Featly, both his looks, speeches, (...) and gestures were such, as did
not become him; (...) might better have beseemed a Stage Player, then a Doctor,
and an Archbishops Chaplain. As if (f^rsooth) none were fit to be a Deane of
a Church* or an Archbishops Chaplain, but such a one as Crassus, surnamed
Agelastus, was, who never laughed but once in all his life; and that was, at
sight of an Ass eating thistles: whereupon the proverb grew, Similes habent
labra Lactucas: such Lettice, such lips. Had you set down in you^ Relation the
true cause of Doctor Whites laughter, the Reader, though a Crassus, would as
heartily have laughed, as he or I did: for, such oc^casions were diverse times
offered in the confe^rence by you and your Companion, that (...) of your Romish
spleen-bound Catholics (...) now and then a smile at your absurdities. If
(...) had meant to bar all manner of harmless (...) and innocent laughters
upon a sudden occasion given, you did ill to choose Master Sweet; you should
have chosen Master Sour to have been your Assistant. You your self, Master
Fisher, as grave a child as you are, Page 34. make the Reader and your self
very merry with my Buttery book; for which you deserve to be sconsed. Yet all
the punishment I wish you for it, and the rest of your frivolous, (if not
ridiculous) observations and exceptions in your book, is that wherein Domitian
is said to have taken much pleasure, to weet, to dart a whole afternoon at
Flies with a neat and slender iron bodkin.

Of the fourth Head, (...), or Impertinences, read
Page 18. and 19. To that answer of mine, you have a purpose, M. Fisher, to
cavil: you know my meaning well enough, by the term perpetual; to weet, That
Christian faith which has continued from Christ's first publishing it, and
shall still continue until his second coming. You reply: If this were said by
D. Featly, he should have considered, how he and D. White cauilled upon the
word, Whether and And, when they knew M. Fisher 's meaning well enough; yea,
after they had heard him plainly explicate his meaning: whereas M. Fisher
only put them in mind to speak properly like Scholars, and did not cavil
or reply, after that D. Featly did explicate his meaning. Chius ad Choum. Is it
all one to expound a term, and to confound two distinct Questions? to
explicate in what sense a man takes an ambiguous word, and to speak perfect
See the introduction to the defense.
nonsense? to speak as ordinary men speak, and to speak as no man speaks? I
called faith eternal in that sense, as the Apostle calls (...), the
eternall-couenant, Heb. 13. and as Saint (...) calls the eternal Gospel,
Apocal. 14. and as Tully proves the souls to be eternal, in his Tusc.
Quest. And will you say, that none of these spoke properly or like Scholars?
Yet lest you should happily mistake aeternum, for, ab aeterno, I added to the
word eternal, perpetual; most plainly to explicate my meaning. And therefore
your exception at the word eternal, thus expounded, could be nothing but a
mere Cavil; which you your self perceiving, in your later thoughts you help
the matter, after your manner, with a mental reservation, otherwise called, a
lie; saying, page 18: To this M. Fisher answered, first, excepting against the
word eternal, saying; Faith is not eternal, or ab aeterno. Which words, ab
aeterno, were indeed ab externe; strangers, new thrust into the Conference.
Neither did I in my Argument* nor you in your Answer, use those words (...)
aeterno.

Page 22. To that Syllogism in the Conference, viz.

That Church, whose faith is eternal, and p^^petuall, and unchanged, is so
visible as the Catholic Church ought to be, and as the Popi^^ Church, by M.
Fisher, is pretended to be.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal, perpetual, and unchanged:

Ergo, The Protestant Church is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be:

You answer, That the Mayor is not universally true, for that there may be a
Church or company, who may have inward faith, eternal and unchanged: As for
example, A Church of Angels, who, for want of visible professors, are not so
visible as the Catholic Church ought to be. Quid ad Rombum? What is this
instance to the purpose? I dispute of the Church on earth: you answer of the
Church in heaven. I dispute of faith: you answer of vision. I dispute of a
Church succeeding in all Ages: you answer of a Church, in which there is no
succeeding, nor Ages. I dispute of a Church visible in all Ages: you answer of
a Church visible in no Age. I dispute of noble Confessors and Martyrs, who have
sealed the profession of the Christian faith with their blood: you answer of
immortal Spirits. In a word, I dispute of men, named in good Authors, and
Histories: you answer of Angels, whose names are written in heaven, and were
never upon visible Record, except two or three named in the Scriptures.

Page 31. To those words of mine, I never heard that the inference of the
effect by the cause, was transitio a genere in genus: such was my Argument; for
faith in a believer, produces profession and confession thereof; You reply,
That M. Sweet 's Logic is not less to be esteemed, if he had termed that
(...) (to weet, proouing the effect by the cause) transitio a genere in genus:
for, a cause as a cause, an effect as an effect, do not only differ specie,
but also genere: and besides, a proof a priori and a posteriori, are diverse
kinds of proofs.

(...): I dispute of a transition a genere in genus, in rebus: you answer of a
transition in notionibus. I speak of a straying from the subject of the
Question: you answer of passing through diverse heads of Logic in proouing. I
speak of genus in Scientijs: you answer of (...) in the predicables, or
predicants: so well, in defense of M. Sweet, you observe M Sweets pretended
Law, of speaking nothing but to the purpose. But certainly you saw not the
But, and somissed the mark, reading M. Sweets Law without it, thus: Item 2.
That nothing should be spoken to the purpose. Every Puney in Logic can tell
you, that the meaning of transitio a genere in genus, is the proouing of a
conclusion in one science, by the principles of another distinct from it; and
no way subalternall to it: As for example, To demonstrate a conclusion in
Physic, by principles in Geometry; or to demonstrate a conclusion in natural
Philosophy, out of a principle or principles in Moral Philosophy. But if your
interpretation of transitio a genere in genus, should stand, every
demonstration of the effect by the cause, a priori, or of the cause by the
effect, (...) posteriori, in the same Science; should be a transitio a genere
in genus, because, as you say, the cause as a cause, and the effect as an
effect, differ genere: for which ignorant Arguing, as M. Sweet was pricked by D.
Goad in the Conference, so you, M. Fisher, for your more ignorant and gross
defense of it, deserve to be sent to fustitudinas ferricrepinas Insulas, vbi
viuos homines mortui incursant boues.

Page 65. You allege this for a reason, why you refused to answer Christ and
his Apostles, for that (say you) All disputation about particulars, before the
true Church were, by her perpetual Visibility, or some such evident mark
found out and known, would have been fruitless and endless which was the
reason why M. Fisher in another former conference, had with a certain
Minister, would not enter into any particulars, until he had asked these
general Questions: First, what ground the Minister would stand upon, etc?
(...)? Here you bring-in, by the head and ears, a Conference of yours with a
worthy Minister, and an acute Disputant, touching the merit of works. What is
this to the Visibility of the Protestant Church, or a Catalogue of Names? If
this be not transitio a genere in genus, I am sure it is transitio a
Quaestione in Quaestionem, a vagring from one Question to another sufficiently
distant; neither was there any cause at all given you of this digression: for,
I drew you not to dispute about any particulars, but proceeded to prove the
general Question proposed by your self, to weet, that The Protestant Church
was so visible in the first Age, that the Names of those that taught the
Protestant faith, might be produced; viz. Christ, his twelve Apostles, Saint
Paul and Ignatius: to whom after you had given your Answer, Whether they taught
our faith or yours, I would have gone on, in like manner, in naming the
Professors of the Protestant faith in all Ages. Now then, let the Reader judge,
whether this your digression into a long tale of a conference of yours with a
Minister touching merits, were any way necessary or pertinent.

Page 68. 69, 70. You allege many Sayings out of Tertullian's golden Book of
Prescriptions, to prove, that Heretics, who rejected the authority of the
Apostolical and Mother Churches, and refused also some Scriptures, or
perverted the Text by additions and detractions, should not be admitted to
dispute with Orthodoxall Christians out of Scriptures: (...). The sentences
indeed you cite, are golden, but you apply them most leadenly: for, what
Protestant (whom, by a ridiculous (...) principij, or begging the Question, you
style Heretics), what Protestant (I say) ever rejected the authority of the
Apostolical or Mother Churches, as they were in the Primitive Times; much
less, either refused or perverted any part of parcel of the Canonical
Scriptures, by addition or detraction? We attribute much more to the holy
Scriptures, and the ancient Mother Church (of which, Tertullian speaks), who
received the Original of Scriptures from the Authors themselves, then you do:
we willingly put our whole cause in their hands: we renounce any Article of
faith which cannot be proved to have been held by the Apostles and their
heirs, Tertullian speaks of. Prove, that the Apostles, or the Primitive
Churches immediately founded by them, held your Trent-faith, or those twelve new
Articles added by Pope Piu^ in the end of that Council, and imposed upon all
Professors to swear unto; and then I will acknowledge, that the Roman Church
has a good title to the Scriptures. And if we prove not; that we hold the
ancient Primitive faith, we will acknowledge, that we have no right unto them,
nor will we desire to be admitted to dispute out of them. Therefore until M.
Fisher or some other, shall prove by some other marks, than bare alleging of
the Popes names locally succeeding one another in the Sea of Rome, that they
are the heirs of the Apostles, we have a most just cause to try the title of
the true Church with them, and bring the last Will and Testament of our Lord
and Master, for our prime Evidence and surest Deed, to make good our plea.

Of the fifth Head, (...), or vain repetitions.
For the exemplification of this rare point of eloquence, bequeathed to you as
a Legacy in every line and sentence of Battus his Will and Testament, I need
not allege, as I have done before, particular leaves and pages: for, you might
far better have entitled your whole book, A Battologie, than an Apology, or,
An (...) pamphlet entitled, The Fisher catched in his own Net.

A judicious friend of mine, to whom I sent your Book at the first coming out
in Print, and demanded of him his judgment of it, returned it back again in
the words of the Poet; Ille refer aliter saepe solebatidem.

Another said, M. Fisher's legible Tautologies in this printed Defense, were as
irksome and tedious, as his audible, dilatory Answers and Te^giuersations in
the Conference. A third said, He was sure, that M. Fisher advised with the Poet
Martial; who professes, that rather than his Book should perish, by reason of
the final (...) of it, he would fill up as many pages, as (...) cobbles
verses, with that Catholic Pateh, (...). Ergo ne pereat bre^ibus mihi charta
li^ellis*
Dicatur potius, (...).


To repeat particularly your vain repetitions, would be to commit the fault I
reprehend in you, even in the reprehension thereof: and I might fear to hear
an allusion to that of Plat^ against Diogenes; Fastum caleas, sed (...): so I
might be thought to cry down a Cuckoo, (...). And therefore, passing them in
(...), from the contents of your Book, I hasten to (...) Text.

Touching the occasion and issue of the Conference.
Protestant Relation.
EDWARD BVGS, Esquire, about the age of 70. years, being lately sick, was
solicited by some Papists then about him, to forsake the protestant faith,
telling him, There was no hope of salvation without the Church; There was no
Catholic Church, but theirs.

Master FIHSER's Answer.
How far this parcel of the relation is true or false; I will not stand to
discuss, as not yet knowing how, or by whom the aforesaid Gentleman came
first to doubt of his Church, and consequently of his religion, etc.

Doctor FEATLYE's Reply.
Although I might take occasion by the counter-relation of the occasion of this
conference, to reveal diverse mysteries of the reserved Art of Iesuitical
frauds and falsehoods (for as they say in a Lamprey, so in this whole treatise
from the beginning to the ending there is a string of poison; throughout) yet
because the occasion of the conference but little concerns the cause, and less
me, in sparing the Jesuits blame, and penance, I will spare mine own pains,
and the Readers (...); who (I persuade my self) will not much regard how we
came into the field: but how we acquitted our selves upon the place, for the
papers sent to the old Gentleman (which impudently thrust themselves upon us
at every turn) in the occasion, Page 7. and (...) Conference, and afterward
in the (...) Page 48. and 49. and 60. Although they (...) been met withal by
Master Rogers, Master Walker and diverse other, and stabbed through and through
again with their (...) shall have over and above, my (...) Asteriskes, when my
tractate of the visibiliti^^^ the Church (which has lain by me in darkness
for the space of a year) shall upon some good occasion become visible and see
the light. As for the relation of matter of fact, so far as concerns the
occasion of this Conference where the Protestants Relation and the Jesuits
walk fairly together, there needs no conte^ting Answer, where they clash or
(...) one another. I can answer no otherwise the^ the O^ator does in the like
kind, Accusatar dicit, Marcus S^^^rus negat: Vtri ^redemus? A Jesuit
disparageth some passages in the Relation; a worthy Knight of known integrity,
who procured the meeting for the satisfaction of his kinsman* Master (...)
auoweth them, as follows. (...)

The answer of S. Humfrey Lynde, touching diverse passages in the Protestant
Relation, about the occasion and issue of the Conference, excepted against by
the Jesuit.
COncerning the occasion of the Conference, I a^ow, that (according to his
Majesty's command) I did set down the truth of the occasion briefly and
faithfully, to my best remembrance, as is already extant in print. And whereas
(fol. 4.) Master Fisher says, he set down two questions with my consent, and
the old Gentleman's; the first whereof being allowed by both of us, Master
Fisher wrote, It is granted; I affirm, that in process of discourse, I then
allowed, that the Church is more or less visible at all times: but, that I did
grant a necessity of such visibilitie as he intends, or that I observed what
M. Fishers marginall note was, I utterly deny. And whereas (page 12.) Master
Fisher complains of the inequality of the Auditorie, compared with the few
which Master Fisher brought: To this I say, that, upon my credit, I did not
acquaint four persons with the meeting, more then those that I invited to
dinner. Howsoever, I doubt not, but that he is rather glad he had no more
Auditors of his own side; and by this time, is more ashamed of his cause,
then of the paucitie of his parties th^re present. And yet I will let him know
(for the small acquaintance I have among the Papists) I was able to number full
twenty of that side present. And verily, had I purposedly drawn thither so
much company, the Jesuits ought me thanks for it, as therein deserving well of
the Catholic cause, by bringing a troup of spectators, to view the foil of
our own side, in a question reputed by the Jesuits so disaduantageous to us:
wherein, forsooth, the Protestants (as is triumphed, page 33.) are so far from
being able to produce three professors in every age, that they are not able to
name one; to say nothing of Christ and his Apostles (for, they were not worthy
to be answered) not one Author; no not one Actor that dares oppose two such
learned Jesuits in such a trial. Again (page 16.) whereas it is said, there
was an unseasonable motion made by Sir Humfrey Linde to Master Sweet; I answer,
that I was induced for certain reasons, then to move Master Sweet to dispute
upon Transubstantiation. First, the standers by did well perceive, that the old
man Master Fisher was much woorried, and the Auditory much wearied with his
saying nothing, and writing little to the purpose. Secondly, a Romified Lady
being present, and being troubled with those dull and weak answers, did then
entreat me to interpose, and dispute of Transubstantiation for her instruction.
And lastly, I add, that I had proposed this question to Master Sweet at my
house, 8. weeks before, where his leisure then would not give him leave to
dispute of it: and now I conceived, he was well armed for a second encounter.
Again, where it is related in the Conference, that I told M. Buggs, that the
Church was in Christ and his Apostles, etc. The Jesuit says in the margent
there, A weaker Refutation, as is showed in the ensuing Discourse.
A very weak and insufficient answer, as is showed hereafter. Surely the
Jesuit had a weak memory, and forgot a farther Reply; or else other answer
he could not make to disprove it. Neither, by Master Fishers leave, was it so
weak and insufficient an answer as he gave me, when, upon his first meeting,
falling into conference about the Real presence, which Master Fisher would
prove out of these words, Hot est corpus meu^; I answered, that Scotus, and
Cameracensis, and Bellarmine, were of opinion, that that Text was not strong
enough to enforce Transubstantiation. To which objection, he gave this Answer
as a full satisfaction to the standers-by: What care I for Bellarmine, or
Scotus, or Cameracensis? Again, by Master Sweets leave, it was not so weak
and insufficient an answer, as when I propounded to him four questions, viz.
The worship of Images, Prayer in an unknown tongue, Communion in one kind,
and Transubstantiation; with this assurance, in the presence of Recusants, that
if he could prove either all, or but any one of those, held by the ancient
Fathers in the Primitive Church, according to that form of doctrine prescribed
in the Council of Trent; I would then subscribe to Popery. All his answer was,
that he brought a book that would prove them all. So for that time I was
content, he should be saved by his book. But Doctor Featly (in whose hands
he is now) will not let him escape so easily; but, calling him into the inner
bar, will find, that non legit vt Clericus. At that time Master Sweet
farther added, that he for his part had other business, and could not intend
to argue with me about those questions. If his superior had heard him,
certainly he would have enjoined him penance, for neglecting so fai^e an
opportunity of converting such an Heretic as he takes me to be: he
knows, there ought to be no business pretended, where there had been a
possibility to make a proselyte.

Lastly, concerning the issue of the Conference, I auow and protest, that old
Master Bugs came then to me, and gave me thanks in the same room before his
departure, and told me, that he well perceived, it was be the great brags of
the adversaries for their Church; that he well perceived, they could say but
little for it: and withal, he did acknowledge himself to be so well
satisfied at that time, that he professed unto me, that if his son would not
leave his religion, and the priests company, he would leave him, etc.

HVMFREY LYNDE.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the first, touching the entry into the Conference.
DOctor White, and D. Featly, being invited to dinner by Sir Humfrey Lynde,
and staying awhile after, had notice given them, that M. Fisher and M. Sweet,
Jesuits, were in the next room, ready to confer with them touching a
Question set down by M. Fisher, under his own hand, in these words, viz.

First, Whether the Protestant Church was in all Ages visible, and especially
in the Ages going before Luther; and secondly, Whether the names of such
visible Protestants in all Ages can be showed and proved out of good Authors.

This Question being delivered to the parties aboue-named, and it being
notified unto them, that there were certain persons who had been solicited,
and (remaining doubtful in Religion) desired satisfaction, especially in this
point, they were persuaded to have some speech with the Jesuits touching this
point; the rather; because the Priests and Jesuits do daily cast out papers,
and disperse them in secret: in which they vaunt, that no Protestant Minister
dare encounter them in this point.

Master Fisher his Answer.
First, any man reading this parcel, would be induced to think, that D. White
and D. Featly had never had notice before, for what end they were invited to
dinner, or for what end they were to meet with the Jesuits; but that they
were on the sudden summ^ned to this Conference, without any preparation, or
knowledge of the Question: which not to be so, is evidently convinced, partly,
by that which is already said, partly* by that which I am after to say.

Secondly, this Relator would make his Reader believe that M. Fisher, under his
own hand, had set down the words of the Question, distinguished with the
express figure of 2. which is not so: for M. Fisher did not write any such
figure of 2. in the middle of the Question, nor did not mean to make any more
then (...) only entire Question, as Sir Humfrey himself had desired.

Thirdly, he seems willing to persuade, that Priests and Jesuits do daily
cast out papers: which is not true.

Doctor Featly his Reply.
The Heathen accounted it an ominous thing, offendere in limine, to stumble as
a man is going out a-doores, in lifting his leg over the threshold. You do
so, M. Fisher: you stumble at the first setting your foot out a-doore, and
(which is far worse) you stumble at three strawes.

The first is, that (forsooth) any man reading this parcel, would believe,
that D. White and my self were on the sudden summoned to this Conference. And
what if he should believe so? What does this advantage our cause, or prejudice
yours? It matters not much, how we came to this encounter, but how we came
off. Yet are there no words in the Relation, which imply any such thing, that
we came sudden or unprovided; nay, whosoever reads the first Chapter,
touching the occasion of the Conference, cannot but perceive that we had
notice of it before, and came provided. The truth is, for mine own part, I
knew of it two days, and no more, before the meeting; and I excepted against
the day appointed, as being too near, and sudden, for a man to prepare,
either to oppose or answer in so spacious and ^ast a Question, (...) from
Christ to L^ther: yet being ouer-intreated to be there as an Assistan^ only,
in the (...) yielded.

The second straw you stumbled at, is, That the Relator would make the Reader
believe, that M. Fisher put a figure of 2. at the second part of his Question.
And what if the Reader did so believe? It is certain, that there is a second
(...) in your Question. And what (...) then had it been, to set before the
second Vtrum, the figure 2? Howsoever, there was no fault in the Protestant
Rela^our, but in the Printer, who mistook the interrogatiue point in the copy
(?) for the figure 2. In the original written Relation, there was no such
figure infarced. The Printers tripping is not to be taken for a stumble of the
Relators: nay, it is rather marvelled, that he tripped no more, being so
hasty to (...) without his err^nd. And to thrust out a Relation without
direction and authority of the like stamp, is that error of the Printer, Page
20. line 6. where the original copy went thus, (...) again, those of M.
Fisher 's side calling for (...), Where are your names? D. White said, This is
nothing but apparent tergiuersation, etc. The shallow Printer, not
understanding this passage, inuerted the sentence thus: D. White said, Where
are your names? and thereby wholly perverted the sense, D. White called not for
names, but (...) the Popish Auditors for unseasonably and uncivilly calling for
names, when M. Fisher was at a stand.

The third straw you stumble at, is, That the Protestant Relator seems to
say, that the Priests and Jesuits cast out papers, etc. You say this is not
true, and yet you your self here mention three such papers scattered by you;
and I have received a fourth, written by your man; and Sir Hamfrey Lynde has
seen a fifth; and M. Walker and M. Rogers, a sixth and seventh. Whereunto also
they have returned Answers; the one in print, the other in written hand. Let
the Reader then judge, whether the Protestant Relator any way ouerlashed, in
charging you with the dis-spreading of such papers.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the second, touching the state of the Question to be disputed of.
At the beginning of this Meeting, when the Disputants were set; D. Featly drew
out the paper, in which the Question aboue-rehearsed was written, with the
words in the Margent, viz. I will answer, that it was not; and demanded of M.
Fisher, whether this were his own hand: which (...)

Doctor Featlie's Reply.
You talk of prescribing methods and proportions to be observed on both sides,
as if we fought under your banner, or were to receive the law from you. Who
made you dictator; and M. Sweet your Magister equitum, that you take upon you
to enact Martial Law, for sacred (...) in the truths quarrel? Verily, if you
prescribe no better laws in this kind then those that are set down in the
Conference, and auowed in your defense, viz.

In a good Syllogism, to answer to the conclusion; To distinguish on a
proposition, and apply it to no learn; To prove an effect always by an
effect, because a^ effect is posterius, etc. you are fitter to be a Lawgiver
among the Alogi, a sort of Heretics.
Alogi, then the Logicians; inter Alogos, then Logicos.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the third, touching the conditions to be observed by the Disputants.
M. Sweet. Before you proceed to dispute, desire, these conditions may be
assented (...) on both sides;

First, that All bitter speeches be forborne; Secondly, that None speak, but
Disputants.

Master FISHER.
About this time, M. Sweet propounded these conditions to be observed.

First, That all bitter speeches should be for borne.

Secondly, That nothing should be spoken or heard, ^ut to the purpose. Which
second he did propound, to prevent impertinent digressions.

Doctor FEATLY.
This second condition was not propounded by M. Sweet at the Conference, as is
proved in the Attestation, page 40. but is since devised by M. Fisher, to set
a fair Gloss, and color on his and M. Sweet's miserable shifts and euasions:
responsum nullum dant praeter vnicum, quod semper dant nihil ad propositum:
whatsoever they are not able to answer to, that is with them nothing to the
purpose. To the instance in fifteen novelties of the Romish faith, M. Sweet
answered, as you report, page 16. that Those things were then impertinent, and
nothing to the purpose. To Sir Humfrey Lynde's motion to M. Sweet, to dispute
of Transubstantiation out of Saint Austen, M. Sweet answered, That is not now
to the Question. To my proof a priori, of the Visibility of the Protestant
Church. M. Sweet answers, page 19. That is not to the Question: you ought to
prove the truth of your Church, a posteriori. That is to the Question. To give
some relish and taste to these unsavory Answers of M. Sweet's, You feign a
Prouiso of his, which indeed is a Procudo of your own; That M. Sweet answered
this according to law, for there was a Law (forsooth) made, That nothing should
be spoken or heard, but to the purpose How those things aboue-al-leadged, were
to the purpose, and touched the very* Apple of the eye of the Question, shall
be showed in due place. In the mean time, let the Reader note, that M. Fisher
takes more liberty, then the fained supposititious decree of Geneu^, gives
him: for, that allows a man, only to lie for Gods honor; but here M.
Fisher coyneth a lie, only for M. Sweet's credit.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the fourth, touching the Inuisibility of the Romish Church for more
than 500 years after Christ.
Before I propound my Argument, I crave leave in few words to lay open the
vanity of the usual discourse, wherewith you draw and delude many of the
Ignorant and Unlearned. You bear them in hand, that there was no such thing in
the world as a Protestant, before Luther; and that all the world believed as
you do;

That your Church has not been only visible in all Ages, and all times, but
eminently conspicuous and illustrious. Which is such a notorious untruth, that
I here offer, before all this Company, to yield you the better, and acknowledge
my self ouercomne, if you can produce out of good Authors (I will not say, any
Empire or Kingdom, but) any City, Parish or Hamlet, within five hundred years
next after Christ, in which there was any visible assembly of Christians to be
named, maintaining and defending either your Trent-Creed in general, or these
points of Popery in special;

That there is a Treasury of Saints merits, and superaboundant satisfactions at
the Pope's disposing;

That the Laity are not commanded by Christ's Institution, to receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both kinds, etc. (...) (...) then to answer
them, yet certainly it is now most needful. If you mean not to answer them, at
least repeat them. This you dare not do, for fear your disciples should take
offense. You dare not pull away the curtain, lest your nakedness should be seen.
You are wise in your own generation: you know how to keep those in the
dungeon, whom you hold in captivity. They must not see a glimpse of light,
lest they should look after more. You forbid your Captives to read our
Relations; and in your own, you slubber-ouer whatsoever touches you near. You
well knew, M. Fisher, that Antiquity never knew your drossie treasure of
superaboundant satisfactions, nor your dry suppers without the Lords Cup, nor
your solitary Communions without Communicants, nor your unintelligible prayers,
nor your ignorant de^otion, nor your irregular canonizing of Traitors, nor your
painted flames o^ Purgatory, nor your conycatching Indulgences, nor any of the
like new trash. And therefore you do well and wisely here not to lay these
blocks for your blind children to stumble at, which neither you, nor all the
Jesuits in Christendom are able to remove.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the fifth, concerning the parts of the Question.
D. Featly. There are two Quaeres in your Question: First, Whether the
Protestant Church were in all Ages visible; and secondly, Whether the Names of
visible Protestants in all Ages can be showed, etc.


M. Fisher. There are not two Quaeres or parts in the Question: it is but one
Question.


D. White. Where there are two Propositions, with two distinct Vtrums, there
are two Questions, etc.


M. Fisher. Conclude any thing syllogistically, D. Featly.


D. Featly. And is a Conjunction copulative, and must add somewhat to That
that goes before. It is all one, as if you should expound the words of the
Apostle, Provide honest things before God and men; before God, that is, before
men.


Master FISHER'S Answer.
My Question is meant to be but one entire Question. And so, to cut off all
needless wrangling (made by D. White and D. Featly about the Aduerb Vtrum,
whether, and the Copulative et, and; as if Grammar-scholars had been disputing,
rather than grave Divines, who were not to stand on rigor of Grammar,
especially in this case, where the sense of the speaker is plain, and may well
stand with Grammar) Master Fisher said, The question being mine, it pertains
to me to tell the meaning: and my meaning was only to make is one question,
viz.

Whether the Protestant, Church were so visible, as the Names of visible
Protestants in all Ages may be showed out of good Authors?

Wherefore if you will dispute, you must dispute in my sense, and must conclude
the affirmative, viz. The Protestant Church was so visible, as the Names of the
professors in all Ages may be showed out of good Authors.

Doctor FEATLY'S Reply.
First, the parts of your question are distinguished really: for a Protestant
Church may have been visible in many Ages, and yet not the names of visible
Protestants living in those Ages now to be produced, as your self confesses
in effect, page 33. line 23. We do not require, that all visible men's names
should be upon record, nor all records produced.

Secondly, they are distinguished formally in words, whether the protestant
Church, etc. And whether the Names, etc.

Thirdly, they are distinguished by points: for in the middle of your question,
before the second part of it, you your self put a colon thus(:).

Fourthly, you distinguish them your self in your answer, in the written copy
which I have: for to the first part you answer in the margent, It was not:
which answer was not, nor can be applied to the latter part.

Either the parts of your question are distinct in sense, or out of question
you propound them senslesly, whether and whether, two whethers, meaning but
one. Admit the construction you give of the first part, viz. Whether a
Protestant Church were visible in all Ages, that is, so visible, as the Names
of visible Protestants may be showed: what construction then will you make of
the latter clause, and whether the Names may be showed?

Is not this just like Battus his spell in the Latin Poet; -- Subillis
Montibus, inquit, erant, et erant sub montibus illis:


Or the like of the French: Car com^' vn' Aigle mountant an clair soleil.
Car c'estoite vn' Aigle mountant an clair soleil.


It is as if I should propound such a question: Whether Jesuits be so honest
men, that they will not equivocate, and whether they will not equivocate?

Or whether the letters in a small print are so visible that they may be read,
and whether they may be read?

Or whether the parts of this question are so distinguished that they are not
altogether confounded, and whether they are not altogether confounded?

But you say, I am bound to dispute in your sense. What sense mean you? The
sense that is to be made of your words, or the sense which you make by your
mental reservation? It seems you are so used to your Iesuitical Cabala, that
you cannot in your disputing but smacke of it. I am bound to dispute with you,
you say, in your sense. I grant you: am I therefore to dispute with you in your
nonsense? But you say, that it is for Grammar Scholars to argue about the
Aduerb Vtrum, and the copulative et and. Tell your great Clark, Cardinal
Bellarmine, so, who wier-drawes your Sacrifice of the Mass out of the
Copulative (et) and: And he was a Priest of the most high God, etc. and your
Transubstantiation, out of the Pronoune, hoc: Hoc est Corpus, etc. and your
Popes supremacy, out of the Pronoune, tibi: Dico tibi Petre, etc. Does not
Saint Austen press Grammatical Arguments against Cresconius the Grammarian?
Nay, does not Saint Paul himself press a Grammatical argument Against the
Jews? Gal. 3. 16. etc.
Non ex seminibus, sed ex semine; Not of seeds, as of many, but of thy seed,
as of one.

How many ancient and later Divines (whose books you are not worthy to carry
after them) have substa^tially proved the Trinity, by a Grammatical Argument
drawn from the Plural Number, Faciamus, Let us make man; yea and the Trinity
in unity, by an Argument founded upon the construction of a Verb Singular with
a Nowne Plural, Elohim, that is, Dij crea^it. It is no disparagement, Master
Fisher, for the greatest Clarke to remember his Grammar: But he, who so far
forgets his Grammar as you do, deserves to be turned back to the Grammar
School, and to have his Garmmar-Rules better imprinted into him with a
Schoolmasters Ferula, or somewhat else. Yea, but Aquila non capit Muse a^:
you are a high flyer, and therefore scorn to strike at a Fly: Yet take heed
of such Flies, lest you be choked with one of them, as your Pope Adrian was.
Such dead Flies as you here swallow, are able to corrupt and spill a whole
box of the sweetest Ointment.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the sixth, touching the pretended necessity of naming Protestants in
all Ages.
Master Sweet. What need you stand so much upon this? If there were visible
men, certainly they may be named: name your visible Protestants, and it
suffices.


Name visible Protestants in all Ages. A Romanist standing by.


D. Featly. It seems you are nominals, rather then reals, you stand so much
upon naming: will you undertake to name visible Papists in all Ages?

If neither you, The same Romanist standing by.
nor we can name visible professors of our Religions in all Ages, for ought I
know, the best way for us is, to be all natural men.


D. Featly. This is the right reason of a Natural.


M. Sweet. If there were visible Protestants in all Ages, certainly they may
be named.


D. Featly. That is a non sequitur, for the reasons before named by me. What
say you to a people of Africa, who, if we may believe Pliny, have no names at
all?


M. Boulton. Yet they have descriptions, and may be known by some periphrasis.


D. Featly. What say you then to the Heretics called Acephali, who are so
called, because their Head and Author cannot be named, nor particularly
described, yet the Author was a visible man? Are all visible men's names upon
Record? are all the Records that were in former times, now to be produced?


Here diverse of M. Fishers company called, Names, Names, Names.

D. Featly. What? will nothing content you but a Buttery-book? You shall have a
Buttery book of names, if you will stay a while.


Master FISHER'S Answer.
To this objection (touching the Acephali) M. Boulton answered, that those
Acephali held some particular Doctrine, which did amount to the nature of a
name, sufficient to distinguish them from others, insinuating hereby, that
these Acephali were not Anonymi.

Further it may be answered, that it is not certain, whether they had any
particular Author: for some say, that they were a company, who in the
controversy betwixt John the Bishop of Antioch, and Cyril of Alexandria,
behaved themselves like Neutrals, submitting themselves to neither as to their
Head. Others think, that they were certain men, who, being the Favorers of
Petrus Mogus Moggus.
the Heretic, did afterward renounce him from being their Head, because he
would not accurse the Council of Chalcedon. Others say, that one Seueius,
Bishop of Antioch, was their Author.

But howsoever this particular were, it does not conclude, that there could be
in all Ages visible professors of the Protestants faith; whereof no story, nor
other ancient Monument makes mention of names, or opinions, or places of abode
of any of them, or of those who opposed them, as Stories make mention of some
of these circumstances both of the Acephali, and whatsoever other eminent
professors of every true or false Religion. We do not require, that all
visible men's names should be upon Record, nor all Records produced. For,
although to prove such a visible Church as that of our Savior Christ,
described in Scripture, to be spread over the world, a small number of visible
Professors be not sufficient, Lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
as Saint Austen proves against the Donatists; yet to show how confident we
are of our cause, we for the present only require, that Three eminent
Protestants names in all Ages, be produced out of good Authors. But they are so
far from being able to produce three, as they cannot name one in every Age
(as is clearly proved in the Protestants Apology) neither indeed can they
abide with any patience, when they be much pressed in this point, as appears
by diverse who have been urged, and in particular by D. Featly in this
Conference; who having been called upon several times to produce Names, as
he had undertaken at one time, he burst forth into these words, set down by
the Protestant Relator: What? will nothing content you but a buttery-book? you
shall have a buttery-book, if you will stay a while. Note (Reader) this Doctors
want of gravity and patience, and what a fit title he gives to a Catalogue of
names of Protestants, who indeed are more like to be^ found in a Buttery-book,
then in any good Record of antiquity, as having had their beginning of late in
one Martin Luther, who, after his Apostasy, more respected the Buttery, then
any Ecclesiastical Story.

Doctor FEATLY'S Reply.
In the Answer to this Paragraph, first, you shake hands with the Acephali:
afterward, you salute the Donatists: in the end, you take up your lodging with
the Spright of the buttery; in whose company, it seems, you take most delight.
About the year 480.
To begin with your Acephali. These Acephali were a shole of Heretics, bred
(as it should seem) of the spawne of Eutyches and Dioscorus: for they held,
that there was but one nature in Christ, viz. the divine, which they affirmed
to have been crucified. These differed from other Heretics, in this
especially; That whereas other Heretics for the most part took their names
from the Author and Head of their Sect, (as the Arians from Arius, the
Nestorians from Nestorius, etc); these Heretics, because their first Author
could not be certainly known, were termed Acephali from (...) priuatiuo, and
(...), signifying a Head; as if you would say, Head-lesse Heretics. So that,
as Pliny writes of the herb Anonymos, nomen non inueniendo inuenit, that it
took it is name Anonymos, from the want of a name; so it may be truly said of
these Heretics, that they took their name from the want, or at least,
ignorance of the name of their parent and first Author. Thus your Alfonso
deduceth, and expounds their name: Haeretici Acephali dicti, Alfonsus a
Castro aduersus Haereses. l. 4.
sic nominati sunt, (...) simul insurgentes, nullus repertus est, quiillarum
esse^ princeps atque magister. The Heretics termed Acephali, were so named,
because multitudes of them rising together, there was found none, who might be
their Head and Master. Neither do you in your Answer contradict, but rather
confirm this Etymology, by rehearsing diverse and sundry opinions touching
their Head and Author. Which variety of opinions, and difference of Authors
about him, plainly argues, that no certainty was, or can be had of him, who
he was, and much less what was his proper name. Wherefore, distrusting your
former Answer, you add a second, saying, Howsoever this particular were, it
does not conclude, that there could be in all Ages visible professors of the
Protestant faith, whereof no Story nor other ancient Monument makes (...) of
names, or opinions, or places of abode of any of them, (...) of those who
opposed them. I grant, it does not conclude so much, neither was it brought to
conclude so much: it proves sufficiently what intended, viz. That your
Question is grounded upon a false Supposal: it cutteth M. Sweet's reason in the
hams, If there were visible Protestants in (...) Ages; then certainly they may
be now named. The Head and Author of the Heresy of the Acephali was, I
suppose, a visible man: yet can he not now, nor, for ought appears, could he
then, when he broched his Heresy, be named. In like manner, the 7000. that
never bowed their knees to Baal, and all your Ancestors descending from Noah,
were certainly visible men: yet can they not now be all named; and therefore M.
Sweet's Argument, ab authoritate negative, and a negatione vocis ad negationem
rei, is a poor fallacy, fit to be ranked with that which they wrongfully
fasten on my Argument a priori, viz. petitio principij, or the begging the
Question.

I will not say, that in disputing about the Acephali, you show your self
(...): but certainly in that which follows, you show your self (...), else
you would not so ignorantly apply Saint Austens proofs in his Book against
Donatists, to disprooue our Church. For it is well known, that we teach with
Saint Austen, that Christ's visible Catholic Church is dispersed far and
wide over the face of the whole earth. But you are the Donatists of our Age:
for, as the Donatists confined the Catholic Church of Christ, to Africa, and
therein, to the Sect of Donatus: so you also restrain the Church of Christ to
Rome, and the Popes adherents. Aug. Epist. 80. ad Hesychium.
We teach with Saint Austen, Non Romanos, sed omnes gentes Dominus semini
Abrahae media quoque iuratione promisit: That God promised with an oath to
Abraham, not the Romans, but all Nations for his seed. We believe, that
wheresoever the Scriptures are received, and Christ's Sacraments administered,
God calls some by ordinary means; and consequently there is a Christian
Church (though never hearing of Rome, or Papal Jurisdiction) who are ordained
to salvation. We account all that profess the name of Christ, and Doctrine of
the Gospel, to be members of the visible Catholic Church; yet with this
difference, some are sound members and parts, others unsound, and these more or
less. We doubt not, but Christ has his flock under the Turk and Tartarian,
and Mogol, in Asia, Africa, Europe, yea Italy, and Rome it self, even in the
den of Antichrist. And therefore we are the true Catholics, who maintain
vere Catholicam Ecclesiam, a Church truly Catholic: and you are the Donatists
and Masters of the separation of these times, who damn all sorts of
Christians, save those who are content to receive the mark of the Romish Beast
in their foreheads. What then speak you of three Protestants to be named in
every Age? Although our Saviors words are most true, Mat. 18.
Where there are two or three gathered in my name, there am I. And although
Tertullians inferences from those words, Exhort. ad virg.
are most true, Vbi tres sunt, Ecclesia est, licet Laici sint: Where there are
three, de poe^it.
there is the Church, yea though those three be Laymen: and, In (...)
Ecclesia est, the Church is in one or two men: yea Alensis, and diverse among
you, remembered by Tostatus, Prolog. in Euangel.
affirm, that from the time of Christ's suffering, until his resurrection,
sides in sol^ remansit beata Virgin, that only the blessed Virgin perseuered
in the faith; and consequently, that the Church subsisted for that time only
in her. Yet God be blessed for it, we need not to fly to any such defense. We
shall bring into the field, pares aquilas, nay, plures aquilas, more ensigns
and banners then you, yea incomparably more, for the first and best Ages: and
if you exceed us in the latter, I wish you to remember, that in time, in
liquors, the lees and mother gathers toward the bottom: and a spoonefull of
pure wine is better then a Hogs-head of dregs.

Yea, but we are so far from being able to produce three Protestants in all
Ages, as we cannot name one in every age. How prove you this? Forsooth M.
Brierly has proved it to your hand. A beggarly Rapsodist, whose patched cloak
is already all to-be-tome by one of our noble Mastiues, and the rags that
remain, as I am informed, will be shortly by another pulled away. Were M.
Brierly a man of better judgment, and more integrity then our worthy Morton,
now Lord Bishop of Couentry and Litchfield, has proved him to be: yet being
a known Papist, to allege merely his work and words, to me is but a dry
kind of proof; and therefore you did well in this place, to knock at the
Buttery-dore.

And here I entreat the Reader to note, how the very name of the Buttery
reuiues the Jesuit. In all the other passages of his Book, there is nothing
that pretends to wit or mirth: but here he is very pleasant, now his dull wit
is whetted: he was not able in all the Conference, nor since in his Answer, to
send out such a flash. Will you know the reason? The Spright of the Butterie
possesses him, and thus he divines; The Protestants cannot abide with any
patience, when they be much pressed in this point, as appears by diverse that
have been urged, and in particular by Doctor Featly in this Conference, who
having been called upon to produce Names, burst forth, etc.

It is true, I burst forth, not into a passion, as you would make the Reader
believe, but into a laughter, as did the rest of the company: neither did I by
any gesture or speech, discover my impatience, but your folly, who, when I
alleged you reasons and testimonies, were not content with them, but called
for empty names, etc. And what was this, but to call for a College
Buttery-book; which is nothing but a Register of the names of such as are in
that society? If the sprite of the Butterie had not obfuscated your brain,
and surprised your judgment, you might have understood, and plainly perceived,
that I compared not a Catalogue of noble Confessors and Martyrs of the
Catholic Protestant faith, to a Buttery-book; but such a Catalogue as you
then required, and you usually bring, to prove the visiblity of your church,
viz. a company of names, and nothing else; testes sine testimonijs, witnesses
deposing nothing for you. And, may not such empty Catalogues be fitly compared
to Butterie-books? Note, Reader, say you, what a fit Title he gives to a
Catalogue of Names of Protestants; who, indeed, are more like to be found in a
Butterie-booke, then any good Record of Antiquity, as having had their
beginning of late in one Martin Luther; who, after his apostasy, more
respected the Butterie, then any ecclesiastical story.

I marvel not, that you, Yeomen of the Popes Butterie and Pantry, and the
Blacke-gard of Rome, have a sharp tooth against Luther; who, by burning the
Popes harvest of Indulgences, has made the Catalogue far less of those that
brued for the Friars Buttery, and baked for the Popes Kitchen. Certainly, if
Martin Luther had so fat a belly as you paint him with, he did but hold that
which he got among you: for, after he for sooke Sodom (which you Apostataes
call apostasy) he so hated and detested the gluttony and drunkenness of
Monks and Friars, and so sharply inueighed against them, that Erasmus
sometimes spoke as truly as wittily of him; That though he otherwise highly
esteemed of him, yet he could not but confess, that he was much too blame in
two things; that he presumed to touch the Both being No^me ta^gere.
Popes Crown, and the Monks belly. Wherefore seeing Luther deserves no
better of your fraternities, strike him out of your Butterie-booke, and put
Father Parsons in his place, the grand Master of your new equiuocating
Religion, or religious equivocation, because, good man, his name was struck
out of the Buttery-booke of Bailliol-Colledge in Oxford; and he expeld, for
falsifying the Butterie-booke, and thereby cozening, and purloining the
Students of that College.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the seventh, touching the comparison between a proof a priori,
and a posteriori.
Doctor Featly. That Church, whose faith is eternal, is so visible, that the
Names of some professors thereof may be showed in all Ages.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal and perpetual: Ergo.


Master Fisher. Faith eternal? Who ever heard of faith eternal? Saint Paul
says, that faith cease.


Doctor Featly. You have a purpose, Master Fisher, to cavil: you know my
meaning well enough by the term perpetual, to wit, that Christian faith which
has continued from Christ's first publishing it, till this present, and shall
continue till his second Coming. The Church which houldeth this faith, you
believe, shall be so visible, that the Names of the professors thereof may be
showed in all Ages.

But the Protestant Church holds this perpetual faith: Ergo.


Master Fisher. Your Argument is a fallacy, called, Petitio principii.


Doctor Featly. A demonstration a causa, or a priori, is not Petitio principij.

But such is my Argument: Ergo.

Is it not a sounder Argument, to prove the visibility of the professors from
the truth of their faith, then (as you do) the truth of your faith from the
visibilitie of professors? Visible professors argue not a right faith.
Heretics, Mahumetanes, and Gentiles, have visible professors of their
impieties: yet will it not hence follow, that they have a right belief. On the
contrary, we know by the promises of God in the Scripture, that the Church
which maintains the true faith, shall have always professors, more or less
visible.


Master Sweet. You ought to prove the truth of your Church a posteriori, for
that is to the question, and not a priori.


Doctor Featly. Shall you prescribe me my weapons? Is not an Argument a priori,
better then an Argument a posteriori? This is, as if in battle you should
enjoin your enemy to stab you with a knife, and not with a sword or dagger. I
will use what weapous I list: take you what buckler you can.


Master Fisher. A proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue, than a priori.

Here Master Fisher shows his Academicall learning, in preferring a
demonstration a posteriori, A Protestant standing by.
before that which proceeds a priori. Is not a demonstration of the effect
from the cause, better then of the cause by the effect?


In this place, or upon the like occasion again offered, nearer the end of the
disputation, Master Sweet replied.

M. Sweet. This is to divert the question. The question is not now, Whether our
faith or yours be the Catholic primitive faith, but the question now is of
the effect, to wit, the visibilitie of your Church, which you ought to prove
out of good Authors.


Doctor Featly. May not a man prove the effect by the cause? Is there no other
means to prove the effect, but by naming men, and producing authors for it?


Master Sweet. An effect is posterius; the question is about an effect:
therefore you ought to prove it a posteriori.


Doctor Featly. What a reason is this? May not an effect be proved by his
cause? Must an effect be needs proved by an effect? or a posteriori, because
an effect is posterius?


Master FISHER'S Answer.
Thus far the Relator, who has here added much more then was said: and in
particular, those formal words which he reports Master Fisher to have said,
viz. A proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue, then a priori, Master Fisher
did not speak: perhaps he might say, That a proof a posteriori does better
demonstrate to us, then a priori; not meaning in general to prefer a
Logical demonstration a posteriori, before that which is a priori; but that
such a proof a posteriori, as he in this present question required, and as
the question it self exacted, would better demonstrate or show to all sorts of
men, which is the true Church, then any proof which Doctor Featly or D. White
can make a priori, to prove the Protestant Church to be the true Church, as
shall be showed when need is, hereafter. At this present, it may suffie^^^
say, to that which Doctor Featly now obiecteth against the proof taken from
visibility, that Although all kind of visible professors do not argue right
faith, yet want of visibile professors argues want of Christ's true Church.
For, supposing it to be true which even D. Featly himself here says
(according to the Protestants Relator) viz. we know by the promises of God in
the Scripture, that the Church which maintains the true faith, shall have
always professors more or less visible, and (as Master Fisher further proved
in one of the foresaid papers, given to the old gentleman before this meeting)
so visible, as their Names in all Ages may be showed out of good Authors;
supposing also out of Doctor Whitaker, contr. Dur. l. 7. p. 472. that
Whatsoever is foretold by the ancient Prophets, of the propagation, amplitude,
and glory of the Church; is most clearly witnessed by Histories; and supposing
lastly, out of Doctor John White, in his way, p. 338. That things past cannot
be showed to us, but by Histories. Supposing all this (I say), it is most
apparent, that if there cannot be produced (as there cannot) Names of
Protestants, or of any other professors of Christian faith in all Ages, out of
Histories, to whom Gods promises agree, besides those which are known Roman
Catholics: not Protestants, nor any other but only the Roman Catholics are
the true church of Christ which teaches the true faith; and of which, al sorts
are to learn infallible faith necessary to salvation.

Doctor FEATLY'S Reply.
I marvel not, M. Fisher, that you leave M. Sweet in the suds: for, you have
much adoo, with all your strength and skill, to get yourself out of the mire. M.
Sweet, since he left our Universities, and was metriculated into your Society,
seems (to speak in our Academicall Phrase) to have resumed gradum Simeonis,
and to have proceeded backward: for, whatsoever truth, in Logic or Philosophy,
he had learned in our Schools, he has learned to vnlearn in yours. It
seems, he has met with some such Master as Timotheus the Musician was; who
took double pay of his scholars, for vnteaching them what they had learnd of
others. He was taught in our Schools, that an effect cannot be scientifically
proved or demonstrated, Arist. analy^. poster. l. 1. c. 2
but by the cause: for, Scire, est causam scire propter quam, etc. and
Demonstratio is Syllogismus scientificus, (...), a scientificall Syllogism,
proceeding of those things that are former in nature, and more known, and
causes of the conclusion. All this he has unlearned, and will needs go about
to persuade us, that An effect, because it is posterius, must needs be proved
by an effect; and by the same reason, that effect, by another effect; and (...)
(...) Thirdly, the Roman or Western Church ought to be distinguished from
the Papacy, or mystery of iniquity in it; which is not the Church, but a
preualent and predominant faction in it. The Roman Church we acknowledge to
be a member (though a sick and weak one) of the Catholic visible Church; and
consequently, to have some part in the gracious promises made to the Church, in
the Gospel: but the Papacy, or that predominant faction, is no member, but a
botch or an aposteme in the Church; to which none of those promises belong, yet
many prophesies are clearly fulfilled in it.

First, 1. Tim. 1. 4. Now, the Spirit speaks expressly, that In the later
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats,
which God has appointed to be received with thanksgiving. This Prophecy has
been fulfild in the Papacy ever since Pope Hildebrand's time; Auent. annal.
Boior. l. 5. edit Basil. ad Pern. p 448.
in which, as Auentin^^ reports, the people in some places trod under foot the
Hoasts that were consecrated by married Priests: Tales enim non esse
sacerdotes, neque sacrificare, Hildebrandus docebat: for, Hildebrand taught,
that such were no Priests. And again, Maritos ab vxoribus separat, scorta,
pudicis coniugibus: stupra, incestus, adulteri^, casto praefert matrimonio: He
severed men from their wives: he preferred harlots before married wives;
fornication, adultery, and incest, before chaste marriage. And likewise in the
Papacy that part of the Prophecy is fulfilled, touching the forbidding of
certain meats; as for example, flesh, and eggs, and white meats, and the like,
and that for conscience sake, and under pain of deadly sin, and accounting
such abstinence meritorious.

Secondly, that Prophecy in 2. These. 2. 9. Coming, after the power of Satan,
in all power of signs and lying wonders, is daily fulfilled in the Papacy, and
no where else. See their Legends, old and new.

Thirdly, that Prophecy, 2. Pet. 2. 18. They allure by the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantonness, etc. is fulfilled in the Papacy, which permits
public Stews, I might say, allows, because who keep those houses, do
therefore pay a pension to the Pope.

Fourthly, that Prophecy, Jude 16. speaking great swelling words of vanity, is
fulfilled in the Papacy; which teaches, that the Church of Rome is the Mother
and Queen of all Churches; that the Pope cannot err; that he is above the Law
of God; that those who adhere to him, can more than merit heaven: they can
supererrogate.

Fifthly, that Prophecy, 2 Pet. 2. 3. and Apoc. 18. 3. The Merchants of the
earth are waxed rich, through the abundance of her delicacies. Through
covetousness, shall they with feigned words make Merchandise of you, and the
like in the Apoc. is fulfilled in the Papacy, which draws an infinite
treasure, by the Merchandise of pardons and indulgences for releasing souls
out of Purgatory.

Sixthly, that Prophecy, 2. These. 2. 4. He as God sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God, is verified in the Papacy, which gives
the Pope the style of Lord God, Head of the Church, Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
etc. and power to dispense with breach of oaths, and incestuous marriages, etc.

Seventhly, that Prophecy, 2. These. 2. 7. The mystery of iniquity does already
work: only he who (...) lets, will let, until he be taken out of the
way, and (...) shall that wicked man be revealed. This I say, according to the
interpretation of the Fathers, Ter^^l and Chrysostom, De Resurrectione.
is fulfilled in the Papacy. Tertullian says Romani imperij absessi^, in
december Reges diuisa, Antichristum superinducit: The decay of the Roman Empire,
divided into (...) Kings, Homil. in 2. These.
shall be the bringing in of Antichrist. Chrysostom gives some more light,
saying, When the Roman Empire shall be taken away, (...).
then he shall come. Now all the world sees, that the Papacy is built upon
the ruins of the Roman Empire, and at this day possesses the seat thereof.

Eightthly, that Prophecy, Revel. 9. 3. and 7* There came out of the smoke
Locusts upon the earth, etc. and on their heads, were (as it were) Crowns,
etc. agrees to your swarms of Monks and Friars: and one of your own
Expositors interprets their Crowns, the round circle upon your shauelings
head, like unto a Crown.

Ninthly, That Prophecy, Revel. 13. 11. And I beheld another Beast coming up
out of the earth, and he had two horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon,
and he exercises all the power of the first Beast, etc. agrees to the
Papacy and Pope, who resembles Christ, whose Vicar he calls himself, and
yet carries himself like a Dragon in the Church, and he exercises also the
power of the first Beast, to weet, the Roman Empire, described in the first
verse, by seven heads and ten horns, because, as the first Beast, the Roman
Empire, by power and temporal authority, so the Pope, by policy and spiritual
jurisdiction, rules over a great part of the world.

Tenthly, that Prophecy, Revel. 13. 18. Let him that has understanding, count
the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.
agrees to the Pope, as I showed before out of Irenaeus. L. 5. aduersu^ Haeres.
c. 30.
(...) nomen habet 666. et valde verisimile est, et nouissimum regnum hoc habet
vocabulum: Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant: that is, that name Latinus has
in it these numerall letters, which make up 666. and this is very like to be
the name of the Beast: the last Kingdom has this name, for they are Latins
who now rule. Arethas agrees with Irenaeus in judgment, as Fever dentius
himself notes.

Eleuenthly, that Prophecy, Revel. 17. 3. I saw a woman sit upon a
scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten
horns, and verse 9, The seven heads are seven hills, on which the woman sits.
and verse 18, The woman is the City which reig^eth over the Kings of the earth,
agrees with the Papacy, as Saint Ierom teaches us.

Twelfthly, Epist. 17. ad Eustochium, c. 7. et l. 2. aduer. Iouinianum.
that Prophecy, Revel. 17. 4. The woman was araied in purple and scarlet
color, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden
cup in her hand, full of abominations and silthinesse of her fornication: and
supra, verse 2. With whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication,
and the inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication, agrees to the Papacy, which is set forth in most pompous manner,
and enticeth the Kings and people of the earth to idolatry, which is spiritual
fornication.

Thirteenthly, that Prophecy, Revel. 17. 6. And I saw the woman drunken with
the blood of the Saints; and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, agrees to
the Papacy or Romish Synagogue, which has spilt the blood of many thousand
protestant Martyrs, since the 1000 year; in with, Satan was let loose, under the
name of Waldensian and Albige^sian heretics, and the like names of reproach.

Fourteenthly, that Prophecy, Revel. 17. 16. 17. And the ten horns shall
hate the Whore, etc. for, God put in their hearts, to give their Kingdom to
the Beast, till the Word of God be fulfilled, agrees to the Pope and Papacy;
to which, the greater part of the Kings of the earth, after a sort, gave their
Kingdoms, by submitting themselves, and subiecting their Kingdoms to the
Antichristian Yoke. But now (God be blessed) diverse Kings and States, whose
eyes God has anointed with the eyesalue of the Spirit, have discovered the
abomination and filthiness of the Whore of Babylon, and begin to hate her, and
make her desolate: and we doubt not, but in time other Princes and States will
join with them, and perfectly accomplish this Prophecy, by stripping her
naked, and eating her flesh, and burning her with fire.

Now to sharpen my weapons a little upon M. Fisher's Whetstone, Confingant tale
quid Haeretici: confingant tale quid Papistae: Let the Papists feine some such
like thing: let them devise, if they can, any Protestant Church, or any other
society or person in the world, in which the marks of Antichrist
aboue-described, are so conspicuously to be seen, as in the Romish Synagogue,
and the Head thereof, and then I will confess, I have spilt all my pains in
deciphering these characters: but, till they have brought some man, State,
Society or Church in the world, in whom the former marks are more visible, than
they are at this day in the Romish Church and her Head, I shall be ever of the
opinion of that learned Judge and Statesman, who said pleasantly, that, If the
Pope of Rome were not Antichrist, he had very ill luck: for, if there should be
a proclamation or warrant, to send for a man described by such marks as
Antichrist is in the Apocalypse, without all question, the Pursuiuant would
attache and bring the Pope of Rome.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the eightth, touching the demonstration of the Visibility of the
Church, by the eternity and immutability of faith.
Doctor Featly. That Church, whose faith is eternal, perpetual, and
unchanged, is so visible as the catholic Church ought to be, and the Popish
Church by M. Fisher is pretended to be.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal, perpetual, and unchanged:

Ergo the Protestant Church is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be.


M. Fisher. I distinguish the Mayor. That Church, whose faith is perpetual and
unchanged, so as the names can be showed, is so visible as the Catholic
Church ought to be, and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be, I grant
it.

That Church, whose faith is perpetual, and unchanged, yet so, as the names
cannot be showed in all Ages, is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church ought to be, I deny it. To the
Minor I apply the like distinction, and consequently to the conclusion in the
same manner.


Doctor Featly. What? Answer you to the conclusion also? This is a strain of
new Logic.


Master FISHER'S Answer.
This Argument, as it is set down, is so far from being a demonstration (whose
property is, To convince the understanding) as it is not a probable or moral
persuasion: for, I am verily persuaded, that no wise man (not already
possessed with Protestant opinions) will or can be so much as morally
convinced, or in any sort probably persuaded by it, that Protestants be the
true visible Church, more then a man (in case of doubt) can be by the like
Argument, which a man may make, to prove himself and his brethren to be as
well spoken of, as any in all the parish, thus:

Those who are in heart true honest men, are as well spoken of, as any in all
the parish.

But I and my brethren are in heart true honest men: Ergo.

As this proof is not able to make any man, not partially affected, to believe
these men to be well spoken of, or to be honest-men: so neither can Doctor
Featlies proof make any wise man believe Protestants to be the true visible
Church, or to have the true faith.

Secondly, if the term, That Church, be understood only of a particular
Church (as for example, the Church of England) it is so far from a Logical
demonstration, as it has not in it any Logical Form, according to any of the
usual moods, Barbara Caelarent, etc. But if it be understood universally of
every Church that is or may be, then both Mayor and Minor are false: and so
it cannot be a demonstration, whose property is, To consist of most certainly
true propositions. The Mayor in this latter sense is false, for that there may
be a Church or company, who may have inward faith, eternal, and unchanged (as
for example, a Church of Angels) who, for want of visible profession, are not
so visible as the Catholic Church ought to be. The Minor is false also: for,
the Protestant Church has not the true primitive faith, neither is that faith
they have, unchanged; but so often changed, and so much subject to change, as
one may say (as a great person in Germany once said of some Protestants) What
they hold this year, I do in some sort know: but what they will hold next
year, I do not know. Which is true, in regard they have no certain and
infallible rule, sufficient to preserve them from change. But if Doctor Featly
shall say, that he neither meant the term, That Church, in either of the
aforesaid senses, but meant to signify by it, That one, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, which the holy Scriptures do show both to have perpetual
unchanged faith, and also to be perpetually visible, then indeed the Mayor is
true; but the Minor is most false: and so the argument is far from being a
demonstration; especially, when it endeavors to prove magis notum per
ignotius, viz. the visibilitie (which is easily known) by the truth of
Doctrine (which is more hard to be known) especially by only Scripture. Of
the sense whereof (according to Protestants, who say, The whole Church may
err) no particular man can be infallibly sure: for if the whole Church or
company (to whom Christ promised the Spirit of truth to teach them all truth,
may err, then much more may every particular man err: and consequently, no
particular man can be infallibly sure of the sense of Scripture.

Thirdly, this Argument beggeth or supposes that which is in question; for in
asking which is the true visible Church, or congregation of the true faithful,
we ask, at least vertually, which is the true faith: in regard the true
Church cannot be without this true faith: yea therefore do we ask which is
the true Church, that of it, being first known by other marks, we may learn
what is the true faith in all points, in which we yet know not what is to be
held for true divine faith.

Fourthly, although faith be prerequired to be in some or other members of the
true Church, yet inward faith alone, without some outward profession, by which
it is made visible or sensible, does not sufficiently make a man to be a
member of the visible Church.

Let D. Featly look back upon his Argument, and tell us what Academicall
learning taught him to call it, A demonstration a priori.

Doctor FEATLY's Reply.
I know, diverse learned men have been of the opinion, that Aristotle's
Demonstrator does dwell under the same roof, with Tullies Orator, and
Xenophons Prince, and Castilians Courtier, namely, Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia,
extra anni solisque vias. To undertake to make a demonstration, consisting ex
veris, primis, immediatis, prioribus, notioribus causis conclusionis, is all
one, says Ludouicus Viues, as if to cure a most dangerous disease, a
Quacksaluer should promise a strange receipt made of four simples; the first
whereof is found in India; the second, amongst the Ceres; the third, in the
Riphean Hills; and the fourth, in the nest of a Phoenix. If that demonstration
which they call potissima, the sovereign demonstration, and non par^iell,
containing the quintessence of al necessary proof (consisting of all terms
reciprocal, and all propositions enabled, and qualified with those three
degrees of necessity, so called, (...), and (...), de omni, per se, et
quatenus ipsum) were any where in use, it should seem to be in the
Mathematics, the most certain Science, and fullest of evident demonstrations:
but Pererius the Jesuit, and others with him, undertake to prove, that the
Mathematicians use no such demonstrations: and therefore many Logicians and
Philosophers conclude, that such absolute demonstrations, exalted to the
highest degree of necessity, presently conuincing and captiuating the
understanding, are mere imaginary speculations. Let the Philosophers and
Logicians, among themselves, end this controversy. I will pronounce sentence
peremptorily on neither side. But setting aside that Idea of demonstration, and
speaking of such demonstrations a priori, or a causa, as are usually found in
Scholastic Divinity, I will maintain this Syllogism to be a good
demonstration (as demonstrations go), current against all M. Fisher's and M.
Sweet's Logic.

The Church holding the perpetual faith, grounded on the eternal Gospel,
has perpetual visible Professors of that faith.

The true Church of Christ holds the perpetual faith, grounded on the
eternal Gospel:

Therefore the true Church has perpetual visible Professors of that faith,
etc.

For the Mayor or first proposition, it is partly grounded upon Christ's
promises rehearsed before, in the setting down of the state of the Question,
touching the Visibility of the Church, assertion the fourth; and partly upon
that Text of the Romans 10. 10.
Apostle, With the heart man believes unto righteousness: and with the tongue,
confession is made unto salvation.

The Minor or assumption is most necessarily true, because this eternal faith
is the formal cause, constituting and making the true Church; for, Gasp.
Lauren. De public, disputat.
as Laurentius rightly argues, Homines non constituunt Ecclesiam, quat^nus
simpliciter sunt homines Europei, Romani etc. sedquatenus sunt fideles: ergo
fides and doctrina fidei, est causa formalis and interna Ecclesiae, et per eam
Ecclesia constituitur, et per eandem dignoscitur: Men make not the Church,
simply as they are Europeans, or Romans, or Africans, or Britans, or the like,
but as they are of the faithful, or holding the faith: therefore, faith and
the Doctrine thereof, is the formal and internal cause of the Church, and by
it the Church is made a Church, and distinguished from all other societies.
Here then you have the confession of visible men to salvation, or the
Visibility of professors of the saving faith: a proper attribute, or (...),
demonstrated of the proper subject, the true Church, by the proper and nearest
cause, the eternity of faith: and what more is to be required in a true
demonstration, a priori? You will say, this demonstrateth, that the true Church
shall be always visible, but not that the Protestant Church. I reply, either
the Protestant Church is to be supposed to be the true church, or not: if it be
supposed to be the true Church, then, having demonstrated the perpetual
Visibility of the true Church, I have consequently demonstrated the perpetual
Visibility of the Protestant Church; if this be not to be supposed nor
granted, then you should have primarily denied this, and put us to the proof
of it; which being proved, would infer the Visibility: but this you did
not, and (I think) durst not in the Conference, for fear you should have been
presently convinced; yet now, since the Conference, you are grown so hardy as
to deny it, and therefore thus I prove it.

A Church, holding and professing entirely the perpetual faith, needful to
salvation, is a true Church.

The Protestant Church holds and professes entirely the perpetual faith,
etc.

Therefore the Protestant Church is a true Chur.

The Mayor is confessed of all sides, and must be so, because there is no
salvation without the Church: where therefore the saving faith is held and
professed, there must needs be the Church.

The Minor or second proposition is thus confirmed:

The Primitive Catholic faith, Iud. 3. Reu. 14. 6.
once given to the Saints, is the perpetual faith grounded on the everlasting
Gospel.

But the faith which the Protestant Church holds, is the Primitive Catholic
faith, once given to the Saints:

Therefore, the faith which the Protestant Church holds, is the perpetual
faith, etc.

The Mayor in this last Syllogism is of undoubted truth.

The Assumption is thus confirmed:

The faith derived from the holy Scriptures, contained in the three Creeds; The
Apostles Creed, the Nicen Creed, and the Creed of Athanasius and the four
first general Councels, is the Primitive and Catholic faith once given to
the Saints.

The Protestants faith is derived from the Scriptures, and contained in the
three Creeds, and four Councels aboue-named:

Therefore the Protestant faith is the Primitive Catholic faith, once given
to the Saints.

In this last Syllogism, the Mayor cannot be denied by any who receive these
Creeds and Councels.

The Minor may be confirmed three manner of ways.

First, by the public profession, and practice of the Church of England, and
other Protestant Churches.

Secondly, by deduction of each particular head of the Protestant faith, out of
the principles aboue-named.

Thirdly, by the Confession of the Romish Church it self.

And first, it is well known to all who are conversant in the harmony of
Protestant confessions, or have observed the practice of the Protestant
Churches, that the Protestant Doctrine is, that No article of faith ought to
be believed, under pain of eternal damnation, which is not either expressly
contained in Scriptures, or may be necessarily and evidently deduced from them.
All the Protestant Churches read or sing the Creeds aboue-named: and for the
four first general Councels, there is no Protestant, who will not seal the
true faith delivered in them with his blood, if he be called thereunto.

Secondly, there is no particular positive Article of the Protestant faith,
which we will not undertake to prove by Scriptures. Let Master Sweet or Master
Fisher instance, where and when they will; we will never refuse to meet them in
this field. On the contrary, besides those fifteen points set down in the
conference, there are many other Tenets of the Roman Church, which no Papist
dare undertake to prove by Scripture: and therefore, according to the manner of
the ancient Heretics, Irenaeus aduers. Haeres. l. 3 c. 2.
Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem conuertuntur ipsarum
Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex authoritate, and quia
vary sunt dictae et quia no^ possit ex his inueniri veritas ab his qui
nesciunt traditione^, no^ enim per literas tradita^ illam, sed per viuam voce^:
When they are convinced by Scripture, they fall on accusing the Scriptures
themselves, as if they were not as they ought to be, or were not of authority,
and that they are variously or ambiguously uttered, and that out of them the
truth cannot be found, by those who are ignorant of tradition; for that it
(viz. the truth) was not delivered by letters, but by word of mouth. Is not
this in part your plea at this day, that the scriptures are full of ambiguities;
that they receive countenance and whole authority quoad nos, from the Church;
that the written Word, without unwritten traditions, is not sufficient.

Thirdly, there is no positive Article of our faith, which you your selves, or
the learned among you do not hold and believe as Catholic: therefore we
are on a sure ground, even by your own confession.

To instance in most of the principal Articles.

First, we believe the Canonical Scripture to be the Word of God: you believe
them also to be so, but add unto them the Apocrypha.

Secondly, we believe the Originals of the two Testaments, in Hebrew and
Greek, to be authentical, and of undoubted authority: you (I hope) believe
so too; but you add, that the vulgar Latin Translation is authentical also.

Thirdly, we believe the written Word of God to be the ground of faith: you
believe so, but add thereunto the unwritten word.

Fourthly, we believe, that Christ is the Head of his Church: you believe so
likewise, but add unto him a visible Head, the Pope.

Fifthly, we believe, that there are two places; Heaven for them that shall be
saved, and Hell for them that shall be damned: you believe so too, but add
thereunto other places more, Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and Limbus infantum.

Sixthly, we believe, that the true God is to be worshipped in Spirit and
truth: you believe so too; but, you add, that he may be analogically and
relatiuely worshipped by Images.

Seventhly, we believe* that we ought to call upon God: you believe so too; but
add heereunto, that you may call upon Saints.

Eightthly, we believe, that Christ is our Mediator, both of redemption and
intercession: you believe so too, but you add to him Angels and Saints, upon
whose intercession and merits you in part rely.

Ninthly, we believe; that the Saints departed bear most ardent affection to
the Saints living upon earth, and pray in general for the Church militant: you
believe so too; but add, that they have knowledge of our particular
necessities, and pray to God in special for us.

Tenthly, we believe, that Christ has instituted two Sacraments in his Church;
Baptism, and the Eucharist: you believe so too, but add to them five other;
Matrimony, Penance, Ordination, Confirmation, and Extreme Unction.

Eleuenthly, we believe, that grace is annexed to the Sacraments in such sort,
that all those who worthily receive them, participate also of sanctifying
grace: you believe so too; but add, that the Sacraments confer this grace ex
opere operato (a worse Solecism in Divinity, than in Grammar), and that God is
tied unto them; so that all children, dying without Baptism, are necessarily
damned.

Twelfthly, we believe, that the intention of the Minister is requisite to the
right administration of the Sacrament: you believe so too; but you add, that
the effect of the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the Minister.

Thirteenthly, we believe, that in the Eucharist the worthy Communicant really
partaketh of Christ's Body: you believe so too; but add, that Christ is
received orally and carnally under certain Accidents, the elements being
transubstantiated.

Foureteenthly, we believe, that we are justified and saved by the merits and
Passion of Christ: you believe so too, but add thereunto your own merits and
satisfaction.

Fifteenthly, we believe, that we ought to pray for all the members of Christ's
militant Church upon earth: you believe so too; but add thereunto, that we may
and ought to pray for the Dead also.

Sixteenthly, we believe and receive the three Creeds; the Apostles, the
Nicene, and that of Athanasius, and the four general Councels: you believe
them also, but add a fourth Creed, viz. the twelve new Articles coined by the
Pope, and annexed to the Council of Trent.

Thus you see how the Articles of our belief are drawn out of your own
confessions. That which we hold for matter of faith necessary to salvation,
you (and, in a manner, all the Christians in the world) hold as we. And
therefore our doctrine is Catholic, according to Vincentius Rule, quod ab
omnibus, quod vbique, quod semper: whereas your additions to the Catholic
faith, were never maintained, neither by all Christians in any Age, nor by any
Christians in all Ages. Neither you, nor all the Papists in the world, are able
to prove any one point of your Trent-faith, wherein you differ from us, to be
Catholic.

And now let us hear your Paralogisms against my demonstration.

Object. 1. First, you say, it conuinceth not the understanding, and therefore
is no demonstration.

Answer. This objection of yours shows, that you need to be informed in your
understanding, how a demonstration conuinceth the understanding. It is not the
property of a demonstration, actually to convince the understanding, but
potentially or vertually. The meaning of this Proposition, A demonstration
conuinceth the understanding, is this; that A demonstration has in it power
and strength to enforce the understanding of any intelligent man, to assent to
the conclusion, the premises being before apprehended by him: and every
demonstration is a Syllogism: and every Syllogism proceeds ex quibusdam
positis. To illustrate this by that usual example of the eclipse of the Moon;
which the Astronomers demonstrate by the cause, to weet, the interposition of
the earth between the Sun and the Moon. Before this demonstration will convince
the understanding of any man, he must first have the terms expounded unto him:
afterward he must be taught, that the Moon has not light of her self, but
receives it from the Sun; thirdly, that the Sun casts his light by right
lines. Fourthly, it must be showed how, in such points, called by Astronomers,
Caput and cauda Draconis, the Sun and Moon are diametrally opposed: whereby
it comes to pass, that, by the interposition of the earth, the Moon is
debarred from receiving light by the Sunne-beames. And thus in the end, the
understanding is convinced by this demonstration.

That which is hindered from receiving light from the Sun, by the
interposition of the earth, is eclipsed.

But the Moon, in the points aboue-named, viz. the head and tail of the
Dragon, is always hindered from receiving light from the Sun, by the
interposition of the earth:

Ergo the Moon always in those points is eclipsed.

Aquinas shows, that the understanding of a Ploughman is not convinced by
this demonstration, but only the understanding of him who is sufficiently
fore-instructed in the terms and suppositions heerunto belonging. Therefore as
this demonstration conuinceth not the understanding, by the bare proposal of
the Syllogism; but, the assent having been before wrought to the premises, it
enforces and compels a rectified understanding to assent to the conclusion:
In like manner, I grant, that the bare proposal of my former Syllogism will
not presently convince a man either utterly ignorant, or in error, as I fear
you are, to assent to the perpetual Visibility of the Protestant Church. But
if, as I enforced you to assent to the Mayor, so you would have but stayed, and
suffered me to enforce the Minor, will you, nill you, you should have been
compelled to yield to the conclusion.

But say you, in your worthy witty instance, This Argument does no more
persuade a man, that the Protestants are the true visible Church, then a man,
in case of doubt, can be persuaded by the like Argument which a man may make,
to prove himself and his brethren to be as well spoken of as any in the
parish thus:

Those who are in heart honest men, are as well spoken of as any in all the
parish, etc.

Good Sir, let me advise you to obtain a writ of remove for the Windmill: for
the whirling about of the sails, wrought very much upon your brain, as you
were a-printing this Answer in the Cell. Had not you had a whimpsy in your
head, you would never have set this your Paralogisme, as a Parallel to my
demonstration. In my demonstration, the Mayor, rightly understood, is
undoubtedly true, and de fide, as your self confess, page 23. The Scripture
does show, the holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, both to have perpetual
unchanged faith, and also to be perpe^tually visible. But in your Syllogism,
the Mayor is apparently false. If honest men were always well spoken of, how
can the Apostles words stand, Sine per famam, 2. Cor. 6. 8.
sieve per infamiam, either by good report, or by evil report, etc? Nay, how
can the words of truth it self be verified, Mat. 5. 11.
Blessed are ye when men speak all manner of evil against you for my sake?
Again, perpetuity of faith is the adequate or selfe-sufficient cause of the
perpetual profession thereof: but honesty in heart is not the cause of fame,
but honest and virtuous actions. It is not the inward burning, but the outward
shining of our light before men, which makes men to see our good works, and
thereby glorify God in us for them. Yet by this your very instance and
Syllogism, we have the better: and therefore, this your Syllogism may be
fitly termed as you will have it, A demonstration, but with this addition of
Fishers folly. To be an honest man in heart, is both prius natura, and morally
eligibilius, in nature before, and more desirable, then to be well spoken of.
Mallem de me dicas, Vir bonus est, ergo bonae famae, quame contra. By this very
argument, the Visibility of the Church is but secundarium quid, and (...), a
secundary proof, and a common accident to the truth of faith. And as we
therefore enquire of fame, that we may know a man's virtue: so we therefore
enquire of the true Church, as your self confess, Page 23. that by it we may
learn the true faith. We seek a guide, that we may find the way; and not the
way, that we may find a guide. If I can otherwise infallibly know a man's
virtue without fame, (put case he lived in a Desert) I will not then set it
upon the trial of fame: but in case I should fail of other proof for a
probable Argument, I would produce fame. In like manner, if we had no other
infallible proof of the true faith, then by the perpetual Visibility of the
professors thereof, I would hold it as you do, a point of principal moment,
to enquire of the Visibility of professors: but since we have another more
easy, direct, and infallible means to prove it, viz. by comparing the
doctrine with the Canonical Scriptures; you shall give me leave, M. Fisher,
rather to follow this Method generally prescribed, and used by the Ancient
Fathers, as I have showed before, Assertion 7. then the other Method prescribed
by you. Touching the Visibility of the Church. Assertion 7.


Object. 2. Secondly, you charge my demonstration with falsehood in both the
premises. The Mayor you say is false, for that there may be a Church or
company, who may have inward faith, eternal and unchanged; as for example, a
Church of Angels, etc. An instance as wide from the mark, as the heaven is
distant from the earth. Our question is of a visible Church of which all sorts
of men may learn infallible faith necessary to salvation. Are Angels visible?
Are all ^orts of men to learn infallible faith of a Church of Angels? Do you
hold it for a good interpretation, If thy brother offend thee, tell the Church;
that is, tell the Angels, or a Church of Angels? Although Christ be the Head
of Angels, and they make a part of the triumphant Church in a large sense; yet
I never read of a Church of Angels. Bellarmine says in express terms, Lib.
3. de Eccles. Milit. cap. 12. Ecclesia est Societas quaeda^m, non Angelorum,
sed hominum. The Church is a Society or company, not of Angels, but of men. If
I should have brought such an Argument, to prove the militant Church upon earth
(of which we disputed) to be invisible, because the Angels are invisible; I
should have suspected my self, to have been as wise as he that adored, for a
Relic, one of the feathers of the Angel Gabriels wings.

Erubuit, salua res est, you seem your self to be ashamed of this Answer: and
therefore you insist not upon it, but pass to the Minor, burdening it with
falsehood; saying, The Protestants faith is not unchanged, but so often changed,
and so much subject to change, as one may say, as a great person in Germany
once said of some Protestants, What they hold this year, I do in some sort
know, but what they will hold next year* I do not know. I can requite you
with a like Apophthegme:

The Popish faith is so subject to change, that we may say of it, as a learned
person in France once said, That if a man would find the Popish Tenets, he
must look into an Almanac for them. At one time, the murder of Kings is
Catholic doctrine, viz. in the time of the League against the King of
Navarre. At another time, they pull in that horn: and then for a season, such
murder is disauowed. That the Council is above a Pope, was Catholic Doctrine
with you in Martin the fifts time: it was not Catholic doctrine in Leo the
tenths.

About the breaking up of the Council of Trent, the edition of the vulgar by
Anno Dom. 1590.
Sixtus Quintus, was authentical, and not to be rejected upon any pretense.
Not long after, it was not authentical: For Anno. Dom. 1592.
Clemens the eighth corrected it in many hundred places. Now go and upbraid us
with our late reuised translation: but see withal, that you dispense with the
Pope, that he may dispense with you. One year the immaculate conception of the
blessed Virgin is maintained in books allowed by your Church; another year it
is impugned. Lastly, in one year it is determined in books set out by
authority, among you, that the oath of allegiance may lawfully be taken by
Roman Catholics: in the next year we read, that he is no good Catholic
that will take that oath. The title of universal Bishop was held insolent,
arrogant, profane, Antichristian, Luciferian, in Saint Greg. Epist. l. 4.
Epist. 78. and 82. and alibi.
Gregory's time: but now you hold it to be the holy title of Christ's Vicar.
Yea, but say you, The Protestants have no certain and infallible rule,
sufficient to preserve them from change. Belike then, the Scripture is no
certain and infallible rule; but unwritten traditions are: the Word of God is
no sure ground, the Popes Decree is. The Apostle then has much deceived us,
who says, Let God be true, Romans 3 4.
and every man a liar. If every man a liar, every Pope too. (...), homo, not
vir only, to exclude Pope Ioane from privilege of inerrability. You add, to
piece out your former argument, that in my demonstration I prove magis notum
perignotius, viz. the visibilitie, which is easily known, by the truth of
Doctrine, which is more hardly known, especially by only Scripture; of the
sense whereof, according to the Protestants, who say, The whole Church may
err, no particular man can be infallibly sure. The edge of this argument has
been turned already in the Remonstrance; whereunto I add: First, that
visibilitie is more known to sense, then the truth of doctrine, but not to the
understanding of a Christian. Secondly, the visiblenesse of a particular
present Church is the object of sense; but not the perpetual, former, and
future visibility of any one Church, much less of the universal. And
therefore it is much easier, out of plain and evident Texts of Scripture,
together with the three Creeds, known to the simplest among us (where the
Liturgy is in a known Tongue) to deduce the truth of doctrine necessary to
salvation, then he can produce a successiue Catalogue of visible professors
out of good Authors in all Ages. Yea but no man, say you, can he infallibly
sure of the sense of Scripture, because Protestants hold, The whole Church may
err. In thus arguing, you bewray either ignorance, or an ill conscience.
Ignorance, if you know not, that we distinguish between the essential or
formal Church, and the Church representative; of points necessary to
salvation, and not necessary; of evident Texts of Scripture, and of obscure.
But if you knew these distinctions, as indeed you cannot but know them (having
read D. Field and other Protestant Writers) you dispute against your
conscience. Because, in obscure and difficult Texts of Scripture, the Church
may err; will it therefore follow, that no man can be sure of the sense of
plain and evident Texts? In which, if we may believe Aug. de doct. Christ. l.
2. c. 9. In iis enim quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa
omnia, quae fide continent moresque viuendi.
Saint Austin, all those things are found, which concern faith and manners.
Will it follow, because we hold, that your Church representative, that is, the
Pope and his Consistory, or the Pope and his Council may err, that therefore
the essential and formal Church of Christ, consisting of all the visible
Christians in the world, in propounding doctrine necessary to salvation out of
Scripture, may err? The Church following her guide, the Word of God, is sure
not to err, whether universal or particular. For which preservation from
error, we doubt not, but that there is a far higher degree of spiritual
assistance to the general Councels, then national: yet in both it sometimes
falls out, that, as Austen observes, Priora a posterioribus emendentur: the
former are corrected by the later.

Thirdly, you beg an Argument from your self, drawn from a beggarly fallacy,
called Petitio principij, or begging your maine question. You say, that my
former Syllogism was a petitio principij, and therefore no demonstration: but
I proved it then, and since confirmed it, that it was a Demonstration, and
therefore no petitio principij. Let the Reader here observe, how your Answers
and Objections interfere, and supplant one the other. Master Sweet will have my
Argument to be a transitio a genere in genus; but you, a petitio principij.
Again, elsewhere you call this Argument, A digression from the question, and a
diuersiue proof, and yet here you will have it to be identicall. Wherefore as
Xenophanes* opposed a motion made by Eleates, Arist. Rhet. l. 2. (...).
in behalf of Leucothea, to celebrate her funerals with tears and
lamentations, and withal to sacrifice to her as a Goddess: this motion, says
he, overthrows it self. If we sacrifice to Leucothea as an immortal
Goddess, we must not bewail her death: and if we bewail her death, as being
a mortal woman, we must not sacrifice to her, as to a Goddess privileged
from death In like manner, whosoever reads your said several Answers, may
object against them; If the Argument aboue-named, was a petitio principij, it
could not be a transitio a genere in genus: and if it were a transitio a genere
in genus, it could not be a petitio principij. If it were a diuersiue proof,
it could not be identicall: if it be identicall, as you here affirm, it
cannot be diuersiue: for, it implies an apparent contradiction, to say, In
proving the same thing by the same thing, digresseth from the same thing.
that a man, in proouing idem per idem, does digredi ab eodem. But you yield a
reason why this Argument beggeth or supposes that which is in question: For
(say you) in asking which is the true visible Church, or Congregation of the
true faithful, we ask, at least vertually, which is the true faith. By the
like reason, you might prove every Demonstration a priori, to be a petitio
principij: For, in propounding any question touching the effect, we enquire
vertually and implicitly of the cause. And therefore Aristotle, in lib. 2.
Poster. Analyt. acutely proves, omnem quaestionem esse quaestionem medij;
that every scientificall question is, in effect, a question of the medium or
the cause. By the like Argument you might prove, that all Arguments drawn a
definitione ad definitum, are petitiones principij: because, in propounding any
question touching the definitum, we, at least vertually, inquire of the
definition. If the terms in my Syllogism were but formally distinct, the
Syllogism could be no petitio principij: how much less then can it be
termed petitio principij: when, as it is certain, they are distinct really, as
your self confess in your fourth Argument: to which now I address my self.

Fourthly, you impeach my Demonstration, by pushing again at the Mayor;
saying, Although faith be prerequired to be in some or other members of the
true Church; yet inward faith alone, without some outward profession, by which
it is made visible, or sensible, does not sufficiently make a man to be a
member of the visible Church.

It is a true rule in Philosophy: Vehemens sensibile corrumpit sensum; the
bright light of a Demonstration so buzzardeth you, that you see not where you
are, nor know what you are about. I am so far from affirming, that inward
faith, without outward profession, makes a visible member of Christ's Church;
that from inward faith, I infer necessarily ex consequenti; outward
profession, which (as I said in the Conference) makes a member of the visible
Church. Do you grant the consequence, or deny it? If you grant it, my Argument
proceeds: if you deny it, confirmabit pro me vester Aristoteles, your great
Clerk, Lib. 3. de Eccles. Milit. cap. 13.
Cardinal Bellarmine, makes good the consequence in this manner: Qui non
confitentur fidem, sed, ea in cord retenta, exterius profitentur perfidiam et
idololatriam, non sunt boni, nec saluantur; cum ad Roman. 10. dicat Apostolus,
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem fit confessio ad salutem: et Mat. 10.
Omnis qui negauerit me coram hominibus, etc. They are not good men, nor shall
be saved, who do not confess the faith; but, keeping it in their hearts,
outwardly profess perfidiousnesse and idolatry: For, the Apostle, Romans 10.
says, With the heart man believes to righteousness; but with the tongue man
confesses to salvation: And Matthew 10. Whosoever denies me before men, him
will I deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Let Master Fisher therefore look back upon my Argument, and demonstrate to
me, though a posteriori, what Academicall learning taught him to deny it to be
a demonstration a priori.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the ninth, touching a testimony alleged by Master Fisher, out of
Doctor Field.
Doctor Featly. That Church whose faith, etc.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is the Primitive Catholic faith, once
given to the Saints: Ergo.


M. Fisher. I answer the Minor. If this Proposition be taken simply in it
self, I absolutely deny it: but if this proposition be considered (as it must
be) as related to the first Question, and the end thereof, I further add,
that it is not pertinent to that end, for which the whole Dispute was intended;
to weet, to show to those who are not able by their own ability to find out
the infallible faith, necessary to salvation, without learning it of the true
visible Church of Christ: and, consequently, the Visibility of the Church is
first to be showed, before the truth of Doctrine in particular shall be showed.


D. Featly. First, what speak you of those who are not able by their own
ability to find out faith? Is any man able by his own ability, without the
help of divine grace?

Secondly, what helps the Visibility, to confirm the truth of the Church?
Visibility indeed proves a Church, but not the true Church.

Here M. Fisher alleged some words out of D. Field, of the Church; supposing
thereby to justify his former Answer. Whereunto D. Featly promised, Answer
should be made, when it came to their turn to answer; now he was by order to
oppose M. Fisher.


Master FISHER his Answer.
These words either were not spoken, or M. Fisher did not regard them, being
in the midst of his Answer: in which he went on, showing the necessity of a
visible Church, by a saying of D. Fields, viz. Seeing the controversies of
Religion at this day, are so many in number, and so intricate in nature, that
few have time and leisure; fewer, strength of wit and understanding* to examine
them: what remains for men, desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to seek out, which, among all the Societies of men
in the world, is that Spouse of Christ, the Church of the living God, which is
the pillar of the Truth; that so they may embrace her Communion, follow her
direction, and rest in her Judgment?

M. Fisher therefore (I say) being busily speaking this, did not regard what
D. Featly did then say, but might easily have answered first, that he never
meant, that any were able of themselves, without help of Gods grace, to attain
the true faith; which hinders not, but that some may have that ability of wit
and learning, by which they can better examine controversies of faith, then
those that want these abilities. Secondly, although Visibility alone do not
prove the true Church, yet it (supposing Gods promises, that the true Church
shall be always visible) much helps: and want of Visibility in any one Age,
proves a company not to be the true Church.

Doctor FEATLY'S Reply.
This parcel of your Answer contains in it an allegation out of D. Field,
and an alleuiation or mitigation of a speech of yours sauouring of
Pelagianisme. To your allegation out of D. Field, I answer, Mitte quod scio,
Die quod rogo. D. Fields speech I acknowledge, which is very pertinent to his
end, but nothing to yours; that it is requisite for all Christians, especially
the weaker, to fly to the Church, and hide themselves under her wings, to
preserve them from the danger of Romish Kites, as D. Field prudently observes:
so no Protestant, to my knowledge, denies. Our Nouices and Catechumeni are
taught, as to honor God their Father, so also the Church their Mother. Now,
because the Whore of Babylon bears her self, as if she were the Spouse of
Christ, and true Mother of all Christians; it is most behoouefull to all those
that have care of the health of their souls, to distinguish their true Mother
from a false harlot; the sincere milk, and wholesome breasts of the one, from
the poisoned dugs of the other: to which end, D. Fields Treatise of the Church,
is a singular help: which when I read, me thinks I see that strong wrestler
Iritarius, Plin. not. histo. l. 1. cap. 20.
so much innobled by Pliny, qui rectos ^t transuersos celatim toto corpore
habuit neruos, who had double sinnewes running acrosse over all his body: so
able, so sinewie a Writer is D. Field; who having well traced true antiquity,
does in that whole Treatise take up your own weapons, and conquereth you with
them: he takes away your strongest harness, in which you trust, I mean, the
Catholic Church; proouing it to be ours, not yours. To the authority of
Scriptures (which I here begin at) he adds the consent of the Church of
the living God, the pillar of truth, in whose determination and Communion, both
we and you are to rest. But do you, M. Fisher, in earnest or with mental
reservation, appeal to D. Fields judgment? Me thinks you draw the latch, as
if you meant to enter into the penetralia and Clozet of that work of the
Church. If you be willing so to do, I will lead you into the Entry. Turn
me but the page over, you shall find, before the circuit of the sentence
alleged by you, be ended, a Writ of Error sued against that Church, which will
needs be the Mistress and Mother of the rest, nay, the whole Church. There
has she her pattern from the Donatists, of appropriating to her self the title
and privileges of the Church, excluding all other from the hope of salvation.
So the Romanists cast into hell all the Christians of Greece, Russia, Armenia,
Syria, Aethiopia, because they refuse to be subject to the tyranny of the pope;
as also the States and kingdoms of Europe, which have freed themselves from
their Aegyptiacall bondage; That the Romanists abuse us with pretenses of
antiquity, unity, universality, making the simple believe, that al is ancient
which they profess, and that the consent of all Ages is for them: whereas it
is easy to prove, that all the things wherein they differ from us, are
nothing but novelties and uncertainties; that the greatest part of the
Christian world has been divided from them for certain hundreds of years;
and more to that purpose: which in that preface he promises, and in the
tractate proves. To which book, me thinks, M. Fisher, or some other of his
pew-fellowes, should undertake in order, proutiacet, to make answer, or else
never to have been so hardy, to cite that Author, whose lines vpbraid them
with i^abilitie or negligence, so long as they suffer so learned and laborious
a treatisely bent point blank against the walls of Rome to remain vnbattered.

Now to your alleuiation: you say in that speech of yours, concerning men not
able, by their own abilities, to find out the infallible faith: you meant not
to imply, that any were able of themselves, without help of Gods grace, to
attain the true faith: I hope, you meant not, because I trust that you are not
sunk so deep into Pelagianisme. Yet you should have circumcised your lips and
tongue, and kept better the Apostles rule, 1. Tim. 1. 13.
to hold fast the for me of sound words: for, what Christian ear can endure to
hear of men able, by their own ability of wit or learning, to find out faith?
Wit and learning, I grant, are Gods good gifts, (...), not to be vnder-valued,
much less contemned; yet let me tell you, that wit and learning without grace
(such is the corruption of our nature) rather hinder, then further our
conversion, as Saint Austen writes in his confessions, not with ink, but with
tears: and on the contrary, grace without eminent wit or learning, outstrips
naked wit and learning, in our race to heaven. Indocticoelum rapiunt, et nos
cum doctrinis nostris, etc.

As for that which you add, that Visibility though alone it prove not the
true Church, yet that it much helps to the proof thereof, I much desire you
to help me here, in showing me how it much helps: for Visibility is but a
common accident, and I find no topic place in Aristotle, ab vno accidente
communi ad subiectum. Suppose a mere natural man were to choose his religion,
and his Church, what will Visibility help him? Besides, all sorts of Christian
Churches, Jewish Synagogues, Mahumetane and Gentile Congregations are visible:
will you say That is the truer Church which is more visible? If you carry it
away from us by that mark, the Greek Church will carry it away from you; the
Mahumetanes, from the Greek Christians; and the Idolatrous Gentiles, from all.
But this point has bin handled before in my sixth and eight Assertion, touching
the Visibility of the true Church: therefore omitting all farther prosecution of
this point, and my proof by Syllogism, I come now to justify my induction.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the tenth, touching the induction and breaking up of the Conference.
The Protestant Church was so visible, that the names of those who taught and
believed the doctrine thereof, may be produced in the first hundred yerees, and
second, and third, and fourth, et sic de caeteris, and so in the rest:
therefore it was so in all Ages.

First, I name those of the first Age: and I begin with Him who is the
beginning of all, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, etc.

M. Fisher. Name of all Ages, or else you do nothing.


D. Featly. I cannot name all at once. Will you have me name men of so many
Ages, at one breath, etc?


M. Fisher. You shall not begin at Christ and his Apostles.


D. Featly. You are not to make my Induction: I will begin with Christ and his
Apostles, etc.


M. Fisher. Name the rest in all Ages, and then I will answer.


D. Featly. First, answer to the first Age: and then I will proceed to the
second, etc.


M. Fisher. I will not answer you any thing, till you have made your Catalogue.


D. Featly. M. Fisher,I charge you, as you will answer it before Christ
himself at the dreadful day of judgment, to answer directly, whether Christ
and his Apostles taught our faith, or yours, etc.

Notwithstanding this deep Charge, M. Fisher still refused to answer to the
argument of instance in Christ and his Apostles, etc.


Master FISHER'S Answer by a Counter-relation.
After this, D. Featly named, for the first Age, our Lord and Savior Christ,
and his twelve Apostles, and Saint Paul, and Saint Ignatius. After which, he
stayed awhile, as if he had studied for more Names: but, not remembering any
more whom he would set down for the first Age, he said, These (not denying
others) may serve for the first Age.

Then turning to M. Fisher, he said, Let us dispute of these. No, said M.
Fisher: name, first, of all Ages. What, said D. Featly? Will you not dispute of
Christ and his Apostl^es? Yes, said M. Fisher, in due place; but first name the
rest in all ages, and then I will answer you. What, said D. Featly? Do not
Christ and his Apostles deserve the first place? M. Fisher. I will not answer,
before you have named the rest.

Then said D. Featly in a heat, Well: you will not dispute of Christ and his
Apostles: then you grant Christ and his Apostles to be Protestants. And so
instantly, without expecting M. Fisher's Answer, he turned himself to the
Audience, and said, He grants Christ and his Apostles to be Protestants.
Whereupon, diverse of the Audience made such a shout, as if they had gotten a
victory; with such a noise, as M. Fisher, endeavoring to answer, for a time
could not be heard. But he rising up, and with his hand and voice craving
silence, made such as would hear him, understand, how falsely D. Featly had
slandered him to his face: and either then, or upon some like occasion, he
said, What may I expect behind my back, when you thus mis-report me to my
face?

And in this sort, when many of the company were willing to depart; D. Featly,
being called upon (as it seemed) by some of his companions, to go away, did
arise, and offer to be gone: yet, in his rising, he turned to M. Fisher,
saying, Will you dispute upon Christ and his Apostles, or no? To which M.
Fisher said, I will, if you will stay; and stretching out his hand, he took D.
Featly by his arm, offering to stay him: yet he, in that abrupt manner, went
away.

Doctor FEATLY's Reply.
This last passage has been so duly pondered by those honorable, reverend,
and worshipful Personages, who have set their hands to the Attestation, that,
to add any more to that which is there most exactly discussed, were to offer
post Protogenem lineam ducere, to draw a line after the most curious painter.
The matter of fact then being cleared by witnesses beyond all exception, I owe
nothing to M. Fisher for his Counter-relation, save only satisfaction to a
similitude of debt, wherewith he thinks he pays me home, page 61.

Master FISHER'S reflection, cap 3.
To do as Doctor Featly did, is no fit way to give satisfaction to all sorts,
expecting resolution of the aforesaid most important question: As it were a
very insufficient way, to give satisfaction in a debt of twenty pieces of gold
to another his creditour, if in stead of actual payment required, he should
say and offer to prove by a syllogism, yea, by a demonstration a priori, that
he can pay him the said twenty pieces, and being urged to lay down the
particular pieces of gold, he says, that by an induction he will lay down
those pieces of gold one after another; and being farther pressed to do so,
he, not having one piece of gold of his own, takes out of his creditors
purse, one or two, or more pieces; and laying down one or two of them, says,
Lo, here is one or two toward the twenty: and being never so much urged, he
will not lay down any more, until his creditour first dispute with him,
whether these two or three pieces laid down be his own or no: and being
hereupon seriously told by his creditour, that unless he laid down all the
pieces of gold, he did not satisfy the debt, but lost his credit and
forfeited his band; he then falls into passion, and says, What? will you
have me eat my dinner at a bit? I cannot lay down all at once. Will you
dispute with me about these, or no? Which his creditor refusing to do, until
all the twenty pieces be actually laid down; he lastly says, Well, you
will not dispute about these: you grant these to be mine. And so, without
expecting answer, he turns to the company, saying, He grants these to
be mine, and takes up his cloak, and runs away, not regarding that his
creditour, so soon as he can open his mouth, bids him stay, and denies
any such grant to have been made by him; yea, offers to dispute with him of
that point, if he will stay. I suppose, no man will think this kind of
dealing, to be an honest and good satisfaction in a debt of money: and
therefore much less should it be accounted good in matters of for more
importance and value, and specially in satisfying this (by Doctor Featly
undertaken) debt, of showing names of visible Protestants in all ages out of
good Authors.

Doctor FEATLY'S Reply.
We have had trial before of your Grammar, Logic, and Philosophy, and here
now you give us a cast of your Rhetoric. The parts of a good similitude,
called Protasis and Antapodosis, ought to be like two eyes looking one way, and
not asquint: else they make not a similitude, but a dissimilitude. Let us then
view the aspect and cast of these your eyes. As a man, who being to pay a debt
of twenty pieces or pounds to another his creditour, Protasis.
in stead of actual paying, offers to prove by a Syllogism, that he can pay
him: and afterward being pressed, not having one piece of gold of his own,
takes out one or two pieces out of his creditours purse, and lays them
down, and will lay no more down, until his creditour first dispute with him
whether the pieces laid down be his own or no. And the creditour refusing so
to do, till the whole sum were laid down, he the debtor takes up his
cloak, and runs away: Even so Doctor Featly, Antapodosis.
being to prove the visibilitie of the Protestant Church, first proved it by a
demonstration a priori, and afterward, at the importunity of his adversary,
undertook also to prove it a posteriori, by producing a catalogue of Names
from Christ to Luther; and he began, recto et naturali ordine, with the first
age, instancing in Christ and his Apostles, very earnestly pressing and urging,
yea and adiuring also Master Fisher to answer this instance: And upon Master
Fishers final and peremptory refusal thereof, he was pulled away by the
company, and not suffered to argue any longer with such a one, that refused to
answer Christ and his Apostles. Hold hook and line, and the Fisher shall catch
a Gudgeon. I grant, a Similitude needs not currere quatuor pedibus, run
upon four feet; yet certainly it is a very bad Similitude that is lame of all
four, as this is; and therefore cannot draw Dunne out of the mire. First, to
produce a Catalogue of Names, was no debt, but rather a merit or work of
supererrogation: for the visibilitie of the Protestant Church may be, and has
been sufficiently defended, and demonstratiuely proved, without producing any
catalogue of names: and therefore your similie limpeth on the first foot.

Secondly, to prove the visibilitie of the Church by a demonstration a priori,
is not to pay a debt, by offering to prove, that a man can pay it; but actually
to pay it in the purest gold, whereas it had been sufficient to pay it in
ordinary silver or coorser gold. For, a demonstration a priori, as far
exceeds a demonstration a posteriori, as gold does silver, or the finest Angel
gold baser coin of the same metal; and therefore your similie halteth on the
second foot.

Thirdly, to instance in Christ and his Apostles, was not to lay down two
pieces for twenty, but to lay down a Diamond worth many millions, in stead
of twenty pieces: for if the Poet could say, Cic. Orator.
Plato mihi instar millium: Plato is to me in stead of a thousand; how much
more may a Christian, especially a Protestant Christian say, Christ and his
Apostles are to me in stead of millions of witness^s? Neither is it an idle
ma^ter, as in your ridiculous similie you would imply, but a matter of the
greatest importance of all, to enquire whether Christ and his Apostles be ours
or yours: and therefore your similitude halts downright on this third foot.

Fourthly, it is not all one, after a man has laid down two pieces, to stay
till they be weighed, before he lay down any more, and simply to refuse to
lay down any more. It is one thing, voluntarily to go away; and another
thing, to be pulled away by those of his friends whom he has cause most to
respect; and therefore your similie is lame also on the fourth foot: and how
then can it stand upright, much less go for current? Nay, the most beggarly
cripplenesse of this long-robed comparison, is in the begging as granted that
which is the moment and ground of the whole question. He puts the case,
that the debtor took the two pieces out of the creditours purse. Surely, a
blind or very credulous creditor, that would stand still till the debtor
picked his pocket. O patience! Good Sir Creditor, if you can, upon your credit,
make good, that those whom you intend by the two tendered pieces of coin,
namely, Christ and his Apostles, are the proper legacy and riches of the Roman
treasury, take us your bondmen in stead of payment of the rest. But if this
field, wherein this precious pearl lies, be by good title ours (as I then
would, and at any time hereafter can prove) I think, upon such conviction, you
will have small courage to clamor for the rest of your twenty. Do but look
on this coin, though loath, and see whose image and superscription it carries:
is it not the lively indeleble Character of our Saviors Charter, the
Scriptures? They are ours by Christ; Christ ours by them.

The Roman pouch is so stuffed with Traditions, so choked with counterfeit
ouergilt Copper of new-minted Articles, that Christ, and his Apostles, and
Evangelists, cannot be admitted; nay, will not be embased, to be mingled
with such dross. But I wonder that you dwell so long upon a money- Similie. I
thought you had vowed poverty, and might not touch silver. I have heard of some
of your orders, that if they touch coin, it blisters their hands: as it is
reported of a certain Lady, that if a Rose-leafe be put upon her hand as she
is asleep, it will make it blister. But it seems to me, that you are
Theocritus his Fisher; you fish for gold; and, if you are not wronged, have
caught no small number of golden gudgeons in your net, and transported them
beyond the seas, carrying, Rem ad non res, no small stock to English Nunneries,
I had almost said Iesuitisses or Loyolasses. And if you will needs have a
Similie from paying money, to illustrate this passage in the conference, thus
you may frame it: Suppose a Catalogue for sixteene-hundred years which have
run since Christ, to be sixteen-hundred pound: suppose the hundred years to
be a hundred pound: I, by producing a Catalogue of visible Protestants in the
first age, lay down a hundred pound of the sum, and bid you tell it after
me, and then demand of you, whether the sum be right? You answer, that you
will tell me, after you have told the whole sum of 1600. pounds. I press
you again and again, to answer concerning this first sum, whether it be
right or no: if it be right, I promise to lay down all the rest in the like
manner. You answer as before, Lay down the rest, or you shall not begin with
the first and next heap, but with the last in conclusion. I charge you, as you
will answer it at your peril to your Master, whose factor you pretend to be, to
giue-ouer all cauilling, and plainly and directly to answer me, whether this
first sum be right or not: and when, notwithstanding this deep charge, you
trifle and cavil, the witnesses, who were to set their hands to my
acquitta^ce, pull me away, saying, You shall deal no more with such a cauilling
factor. This is a true and perfect embled of the breaking up of the Conference:
wherewith I will break up my defense thereof.

The Protestant Relation.
Paragraph the eleventh, touching the issue of the Conference.
This Conference, though it took not that progress which was desired, by
reason of the Jesuits tergiuersation, not permitting D. Featly to come to the
ripeness of any Argument; yet it has not been fruitless: for since that
time, the aforesaid M. Bugges came to Sir Humfrey Lynde, and gave him many
thanks for the said meeting, and assured him that he was well resolved now of
his Religion; that he saw plainly it was but the Jesuits bragging without
proofs: and whereas formerly, by their sophistical persuasions, he was in
some doubt of the Church, he is now so fully satisfied of the truth of our
Religion, that he does utterly disclaim the Popish Priests company, and their
doctrine also.

Master FISHER'S Answer.
I have cause to doubt, that this which the Relator says, is not true: for
thereby he makes the old Gentleman to be but of a weak capacity, or of a
very mutable nature: for first, I am sure there was no cause given in the
Conference, of any such effectual resolution, to be made by the old
Gentleman. Secondly, I cannot see when this speech should be made by the
Gentleman to Sir Humfrey. If immediately after the Conference, it would argue
too much want of capacity: for if he did but rightly conceive the true state
of the Question, in which himself had especially desired to be satisfied (as
I verily hope he did) he might easily have marked the insufficiency of D.
Featly his diuerting proofs; which also were so answered, as the audience, for
want of satisfaction in them, urged him to leave off, and (...) produce names
of Protestants in all Ages; the which producing of names being so often and
earnestly required to be done in all Ages, and yet being only pretended (and
that most falsely) to be done for one Age, and the Conference being so
abruptly left off by D. Featly, before he would go forward to name men in
other Ages, especially in Ages before Luther; at the question required; any
mean capacity might see, that the Question in which the old Gentleman desired
to be satisfied; was not fully answered, nor consequently he satisfied.

Moreover, the same Gentleman being present; when the Earl of Warwick told M.
Fisher, that D. Featly should at another time come again to give names of
Protestants in other Ages, he might easily, and doubtless did understand;
that as yet (...) in all Ages were not given, nor consequently, the Question
satisfied, in which he expected Answer. Furthermore, presently after he went
away from the Conference, he told M. Fisher himself, that he was glad, that
at the next meeting his Question should be answered: which showed, that as yet
he did not conceive it to be answered.

Lastly, diverse dates after all the trouble and stir was past (which was made
about the Conference) the old Gentleman was not ^ore solute a Protestant (as
the Relator pretends) for meeting M. Fisher, and M, Sweet, he desired them
to give him a Catalogue of names of Professors of the (...) that if after this
the Doctors should not give him a Catalogue of Protestants he should dislike
their cause: Which Catalogue, M. Fisher, and M. Sweet have ready for him, but
will not deliver, till he get the Doctors to make theirs ready, that he bring
to them the Doctors Cat^logue with one hand, and receive theirs with the
others, to deliver to the Doctors.

All that can be suspected, is, that in the very time of the said stir, when
the old Gentleman either was, or feared to be called in question; it may
perhaps be, that he might say those words, which the Relator mentions. But
this (if it were) was only upon fra^ltie or humane fear of trouble, and not
any firm and settled resolution grounded upon the Conference, since both before
and after, he showed a contrary mind, as has been said.

Doctor FEATLIE'S Reply.
What you repeat in this passage, touching my proceedings in the Conference,
has been before upon diverse occasions answered; and I endeavor, as much as
may be, to avoid your familiar figure of battologie or repetition. For, that
which concerns M. Bugges, that he received satisfaction by the Conference,
and gave many thanks to Sir Humfrey Lynd for procuring it, and not as you
imagine, when the trouble was about the Conference, but the selfsame night, in
the very room wherein we conferd, is not only proved by Sir Humfrey Lynde his
testimony, but also by M. Bugges own subscription, both to the Protestant
Relation in general, and to this passage in particular, and that of late,
since all pretended trouble was blown over. Now M. Fisher, you are a very
merry man, that will go about to face a man out of his belief, and dispute
him out of that peace and comfort which he feels in his consciecne. M.
Bugges may well answer you in the words of Saint Austen, spoken to another
purpose, Tu ratiocinare: ego credam, etc. Do you syllogize: I will believe.
Demand you a reason, if you list: I will give thanks. Argue as long as you
please, How I could be resolved by the Conference? I am sure, I was resolved,
and so still continue. When the Philosopher in A. Gellius, sophistically
disputed against motion in this manner:

Whatsoever is moved locally, is either moved in the place wherein it is, or
wherein it is not. It cannot be moved in the place wherein it is not, because
that is not to move locally, or in place: where the body has no existence, it
can have no motion. Neither can a body be said to move in the place wherein it
is, because while a body remains in its place, it cannot move from it: One of
his Auditors there present, whose arm a little before had been put out of
joint; though he could not verbally answer that his sophisme, yet he really
refeld it thus, At ego sensi motum luxato brachio, I am sure I felt a motion
when I hurt my arm, and put the bone out of joint. In like manner, when you
argue, that M. Bugges could not be moved by any thing that was spoken in the
Conference, because his Question was not answered; or the Catalog^e of names
not produced; or because D. Featlyes proofs were diuersiue; or because the
Popish. Audience still called for names; or because you and M. Sweet are not
yet satisfied: or because I know not what: M. Bugges, in a word refutes all
your reasoning, At ego sensi motum, I am sure I felt my self moved by it: and
the doubt which sometimes shook my faith, removed: So that I wa^ thereby, not
(as the other) put out of joint, but in joint; and of lame, made whole. Neither
will it hence follow, that M. Bugges must needs be a man of mean capacity, if
he were satisfied by so short a Conference; but rather that God oftentimes
uses weak means to overthrow Satan's strong holds. Firmus the Maniche was
reclaimed from that heresy, by a digression of Saint Austens, in a certain
Homily. Alipius was drawn from heathenish sports and pastimes, by an example,
in a discourse of Saint Austens on the By. That noble Venetian Marquess, who
left both his Marquisate, and all that he had, for the love of the Gospel,
and comfortably ended his days at Geneuae, was at the first reformed, both in
his faith and life, by an elegant Simile in a Sermon of Peter Martyrs.
Sometimes an exquisite Sermon takes not the Auditory; and sometimes a far
meaner takes: now and then a stronger Argument works not upon the
understanding and will; and yet a weaker proof does at the same time. You
cannot be ignorant of the Story in Ruffinus, of an Arrian Philosopher, of whom
the learned Bishops in the Council could get no ground at all: yet a simple
unlearned man, by two or three blunt Interrogatories, conquered and quite
confounded him. Will you from this, and the like instances, infer, that the
men so converted, were men of mean capacity? The contrary evidently appears
in Story: you should rather from hence gather with religious Austen (who may
truly be said to (...) written, rather ex gratia, then degratia, so graciously
does he write of grace) totum Deo dare, qui voluntatem hominis bonam et
praeparat adiuuandam, Enchirid. ad Laurent.
et adiuuat praeparatam; in our first conversion, and every good work after, to
ascribe all to God, who both prepares the will to be aided by grace, and aideth
it being prepared.

Yea, but say you, M. Bugges much desired a second meeting: therefore it
seems, he was not so resolute a Protestant as we make him. If this were a
good Argument, you might prove all of our side to be unsettled in our
Religion; yea, M. Deane of Carlisle, and my self also, who much desired, and
yet do, a second meeting, to perfect the work then begun. Though a man be
never so well resolved in point of Religion, yet he may desire to hear
Diuinity-Disputations, and make good use of them. Yea, but M. Bugges desired M.
Fisher and M. Sweet to give him a Catalogue of names of professors in the
Roman Church; saying, that if after this, the Doctors would not give him a
Catalogue of Protestants, he would dislike their cause. If M. Bugges spoke so
(which I have reason to doubt) he spoke it, as having certain knowledge, that
we had a Catalogue, which he did or might have seen in the Conference. Nor
indeed does the desiring or requiring of a Catalogue, infer any doubt of the
conclusion. Though a plain unlearned Christian believe most firmly, that
Christ was borne of the seed of Abraham and David, yet may he desire more
particular information, by hearing the beginning of Saint Mathews, or Saint
Lukes Gospel read and expounded to him. Moreover, when I undertook to name
those who taught Protestant Doctrine in all Ages, if I should fail therein, he
should have had just cause to dislike my proceedings. Yea but, say you, there
was no cause given in the Conference at all, of any effectual resolution to be
made by the old Gentleman: therefore he could not be so resolved by it, as is
pretended. For answer heereunto, though I am loath, yet you constrain me to
recapitulate the chief points touched in the Conference. Before the
Conference, M. Bugges was somewhat staggered in the point touching the
Visibility of the Church, by your brauadoes, and Rhodomontadoes, that all the
world were Papists before Luther; That there was neither vola nor vestigium of
a Protestant Church before that time; A brief recapitulation of the Conference.
That no Protestant Minister durst encounter you in this point: if any should
be so hardy, as to enter into these lists with you; you would presently blank,
silence, and nouplus them. Thus possessed, and in some sort perplexed by your
bold and confident assertions and false suggestions; he with much ado, by Sir
Humfrey Lyndes means, procures a Conference: wherein he finds all things
otherwise then he might expect. He and all the Auditory observed D. White,
and my self, to be very ready and earnest to proceed in the Questions; both
to prove the Visibility of our Church, and disprooue theirs. On the contrary,
he could not but see you to cast all manner of Remoraes and rubs, to hinder
speedy and direct proceedings: and for the Questions touching the Visibility
of the Church,

First, he heard, that the perpetual Visibility of the Church, being a point
of faith, was not to be built upon deduction from humane Stories and good
Authors, as the Jesuit required; but upon divine revelation in Gods Word, as
is confessed by Bellarmine loc. sup. cit. Canus loc. l. 11. c. 4. praeter
auctores sacros nullum historicum certum esse posse et ^doneum, ad faciendum
certam in theologia fidem.
learned Papists.

Secondly, that a Protestant Church might have been visible in all Ages, and
yet not the names of visible Protestants now to be produced, and proved out
of good Authors, because neither all men's names ever were upon record, nor are
all ancient Records preserved to this day, neither can we come by all those
Records that are yet extant.

Thirdly, that notwithstanding the Popish brag, that All the Christian world
were Papists before Luther; yet you were not able to name any Country, City,
Village or Hamlet, nay not any man, who for 500. years and more after Christ,
either professed your Trent-faith in general, or those fifteen points recited
in the Conference in particular.

Fourthly, that the surest and strongest means to prove the perpetual
Visibility of a Church, was a priori, by the conformity of it is faith to the
Scriptures: of which faith, God promises in his Word, that it shall have
visible Professors to the worlds end.

Fifthly, that a visible Church inferrs not necessarily a right faith. Jews,
Mahumetanes, Gentiles, and diverse sorts of blasphemous Heretics, have visible
professors of their impieties: yet are they all of a wrong belief; if of any
on the contrary, the right faith infers necessarily a visible Church,
because the true faith cannot be in a Church, which professes it not openly,
or privately: therefore the prime and maine question of all is, of the right
belief, of the primitive and Catholic faith, whether we or the Church of
Rome have it; and not of a Catalogue of names.

Sixthly, that an offer was made, to name some eminent persons, which in all Ages
taught Protestant Doctrine, and opposed the Romish errors, either when they
came in, or not long after; and that this Catalogue had been a good way
proceeded in, if you had not been the cause by your delays and
tergiuersations.

Lastly, that when I instanced in Christ and his Apostles, and urged you again
and again, yea and adjured you also to answer directly, whether they taught
our faith or yours; yet you peremptorily and finally refused so to do: which
he might well interpret, to proceed from your apparent distrust in your cause.

And now let the discreet Reader judge, whether M. Bugges had not reason to
alter his opinion concerning you and your cause, at least in that particular,
of which only he seemed to doubt of.

Shortly after the Conference, M. Fisher sent this Letter ensuing, to the right
honorable the Earl of WARVVICK.
The Copy of M. Fisher's Letter.
RIGHT HONORABLE LORD:
I Esteem it a special providence of God, that your Lordship was present at a
late Conference, wherein D. White and D. Featly undertook to show against me
and my companion, that the Protestant Church had been visible in all Ages, and
that their Professors might be named, especially in the Ages before Luther.
Your Lordship may remember the substance of all the proof to have consisted in
this, that The true Church was always so visible, as the Professors thereof in
all Ages might be named: but the Protestants was the true Church. We refused
to dispute of the Minor, because it transferd the Question, and avoided that
plain proof of the visible Church, which was then propounded and expected.
If* as they conclude, they are able to name their Professors in all Ages, why
did they refuse to give us a Catalogue of theirs, as we were ready to have
given them another of ours? Why went they about to prove they were able to
name them, when with less ado they might have named them? Where deeds are
justly expected, words without deeds are worthily neglected.

Certainly, hereby they are so far from having discharged themselves of the
great enterprise they undertook, as they stand more engaged then before, to the
performance of it. For, having now professed and acknowledged, that the true
Church, or (to use their own words) the Church that is so visible as the
Catholic Church ought to be (and the Church, whose faith is eternal and
unchanged, must be), is able to name her Professors in all Ages, either for
their own honor, and for the satisfaction of the world, they must set down
the names of their Professors in all Ages; or else they shamefully discover
themselves, not to be that true and visible unchanged Church, which is able to
name them. Again, at the length yielding (as they did) to show the continual
Visibility of their Church, by a full induction of their visible Protestants in
all Ages, (which they seemed to undertake with great confidence), why did they
stick in the first Age alone, refusing to name their professors in the Ages
following, until the first were tried? May not the Answerer choose to deny
which part of the Argument he pleases? and was it ever heard, that he should
be enforced to reply to one proposition alone, before the whole Argument,
whether it were Syllogism or Induction, were fully propounded? Very nobly
therefore, and prudently your Lordship in the end desired another meeting; not
doubting, that your own party, within three or four days would be content
to give us the names of their Professors in all Ages, as we were ready to give
them the names of ours, that thereby both sides might be the better prepared
for a second trial: which when they have performed, we shall not fail to
encounter with them, either by way of speech or writing, as your Lordship (all
things considered) shall think fairest, or safest, or most convenient for the
discovery of truth. But if your Lordship shall not be able to obtain at their
hands this your most just and import^nt request, the defect of proof on their
part must needs be accounted a plain flight, and no man hereafter can
prudently rely his salvation upon that Church, which (for want of perpetual
Visibility proved) they themselves shall have concluded to be false and
feigned.

Thus expecting the issue hereof, and your Lordships further pleasure from the
mouth of this bearer, I remain, the first of July 1623.

Your Lordships servant in Christ, JOHN FISHER.

Doctor Featlie's Answer to M. Fisher's Letter.
IN perusing this Letter of yours, I could not but think of the old riddle,
Hom^ (...), videns non videns, lapidem non lapidem, etc. A man, no man, (that
is, an Eunuch) seeing, not seeing (that is, seeing dimly, being ^urblind) a
stone, no stone (that is, a pumice): for, here is a private Letter, no Letter,
relating, not relating, the substance of my Argument, not my Argument.

First, it may be called a private Letter, because it was sealed up like a
private Letter, and indorsed to an Honorable Personage; yet it was no private
Letter: for, diverse copies of it were dispersed and read, before the Earl
received it, who heard of it, before he read it. His Lord-ships name was set
upon it, only to make it more passable, and to give vent for such cheating
wares, as Master Fisher thought, would pass more current, by a Letter
addressed to so Noble a Personage.

Secondly, it relates, and not relates, because it omitteth much more then it
relates: for the Introduction in the beginning, and the Induction in the end
of the Conference, and all my Replies in the middle, they are all not
circumcised only, as the Argument here relates, but quite cut out.

Thirdly, it relates my Argument, not my Argument; my Argument, because
propounded in most of my words: yet not my Argument, because not according to
my meaning, when I disputed thus in the Conference: The Church whose faith is
perpetual and unchanged, is so visible, or ought to be so visible, that the
names of the Professors thereof may be showed in all Ages. I argued not so,
according to my own opinion, but as it is expressly set down in the
Conference, ex concessis, upon your own ground: upon which to supplant you, I
held it a great disparagement to your cause: and therefore, in repeating the
Argument again, I expressly added, as you your self confess, That Church
which holds this faith, you believe (I said not, we) to be so visible, Page
19.
as that the names of the Professors may be showed, etc. In the very entrance
to the Conference, you acknowledge these to have been my words: although this
Question be grounded on uncertain and false supposals: for, a Church may have
been visible, yet not the names of all Professors thereof now to be showed.
Page 32.
And again, Are all visible men's names upon record? are all Records in former
times, now to be produced? And again, in the same page, M. Sweet calling for
names of Protestants, well might say, If Protestants had been in all Ages,
their names in every Age might be produced. Unto which, as the Protestant
Rel^tor ^aith, and the Counter-Relator denies it not, D. Featly replied,
saying, This is a non sequitur. Out of all which passages it evidently
appears, that both you in this your Letter, and L. D. otherwise M. Sweet, in
the defense of the Appendix, belly your own consciences, in saying, that I
professed (out of mine own judgment and opinion) that the true Church must be
able to name Professors in all Ages. It is true, as Brasidas the Lacedemonian
ran through his Adversary with his own Spear; Erasm. Apophtheg.
so I took that proposition, tanquam hastam amentatam, from you, to wound you
with your own weapon. And although I needed not at all to have descended to an
Induction, or produced any Catalogue of such as maintained Protestant Doctrine
by name: yet the more to convince you, and to satisfy some of the Auditory, I
began a Catalogue, and had proceeded farther in it, if I had not been called
away by those, whose Authority and Love might command me; who would not suffer
me to deal any longer with an adversary so atheologicall, and alogicall, so
irreligious and unreasonable; so irreligious to refuse, finally and
peremptorily, to answer an instance in Christ and his Apostles; being
vehemently pressed, and not without adiuration: Secondly, so unreasonable, to
require an Opponent to prove at once, eminent professors for 1500 years, to
have taught Protestant Doctrine. Was there ever any that undertook to make good
a catalogue of Professors in all Ages, who did not first prove, that there
were such in the first Age, and then in the second, et sic de caeteris, and so
in the rest? Was there ever a Respondent, who undertook to answer an Argument
by Induction of particulars, consisting of 15 or rather 15 hundred particulars
(and al in his judgment questionable) who did not answer them piece-meale in
order, first applying his Answer to the first particular, and secondly to the
second, etc? I cannot pattern you better, then by that malefactor, who having
stolen my Oxen, and being indicted for them severally, would not answer
directly to the first enditement, Guilty or not guilty; but said; still that
he had that Ox with his fellows; hereby hoping, upon trial of the whole in
one lump, to escape by his book, or benefit of Clergy, as we call it. In like
manner, when you were put to it, to answer directly, Whether the Protestant
Professors were not visible in the first Age, and so in the second, and so in
the third, etc? you answer, It was not visible in the first Age, with the rest,
nor in the second with the rest, and further you will not go. The difference
between you, is only this, He answered so shufflingly and confusedly, to save
his neck; and you, to save the rack of an Argument; he, to slip out by his
Clergy; you, by your vnclerkly Sophistry. You may be sure, such kind of
foggie and misty answering, could no way satisfy a man of so clear a
judgment and apprehension in controversies of this nature, as the Earl of
Warwick is. Which that you may the better know from his own pen, I will
acquaint you with a Letter wrote by occasion of this business, by his
Lordship, and addressed to Sir Humfrey Lynde.

To my loving friend Sir Humfrey Lynde.
SIR, since my being at your house at the Disputation of M. Doctor Featly and
Fisher, diverse have come unto me, to know whether it was a Disputation
appointed by me, or no; and whether I was not satisfied with it. Whereby I
perceive, those that learn the doctrine of equivocation, will not spare to
tell a plain lie, to do any man wrong that is not of their opinion. And I am
the more confirmed in this opinion: for, since last night, M. Plume came to
me, and delivered this enclosed letter, which I much marvel at. I would not
answer it, but thus: that I would speak with you, and that M. Fisher should
not need fear, that D. Featly would flee from him, but meet him at any time,
to make good his Tenet. I had thought to have spoken with you my self, but my
earnest occasions pressed me to go this day into the country. Wherefore, if
you meet, I pray let the company know, for the meeting, that I knew of it but
half an hour before it was, and I came at the request of another Gentleman,
and for no desire of mine to be satisfied: for I thank God, my conscience makes
no doubt of the truth of our Religion. This I say, because I hear that some of
that Religion give it out, It was my request to have a Disputation. I pray
keep M. Fishers Letter till I see you, and restore it me again. You may
perceive the scope of it: but it is as vain, as his Answers were. Thus with my
love to you, I rest,

Your very loving friend, WARVVICK.

Master FISHER his Reflection upon the occasion and issue of the Conference.
NOW having made an end of this Relation, I am to entreat the gentle Reader to
reuiew it, or reflect upon it, and to call to mind, and mark, first, the
occasion, and consequently, the end of the Disputation; secondly, the Question,
and true meaning of it; thirdly, what method was most fit to be observed,
entreating of this Question; fourthly, what course was taken by the Protestant
Disputant, and what by the Catholic Respondent. All which being duly
considered, thou will better see what is to be judged of the whole Conference
and wilt make to thy self more benefit of the matter treated in it, then
perhaps hitherto thou have done about the occasion.

The occasion of the Disput^, was, etc.

Doctor FEATLY his Answer.
THere is a threefold sight.

First, per radium rectum, by a right beam or line between the eye and
object; as when I look directly upon a man's face, and behold the shape and
proportion thereof as it is in it self.

Secondly, per radium reflexum, by a reflected line or beam; as, when I behold
a man's face and shape in a glass.

Thirdly, per radium refractum, by a broken beam; as, when I behold the same
man's face, or any thing else through dispar medium, as water or glass.
Whosoever viewes your Reflection, as you call it, with a single eye, will
judge, that it ought rather to have been termed a Refraction; not for that it
proceeds from a man of a broken brain: (for your intellectuals are good enough)
but because you defend a broken cause; and your proofs are broken scraps taken
out of Brerelies alsme-box: and you represent no truth entirely, but brokenly.
If it represent any thing entirely, as by reflection, it is the Fisher viewing
himself unhappily caught in his own net, struggling and striving to break
out of it, but all in vain; (...).

As I have before related your Relation: so I will now reflect a while upon
your Reflection: wherein I find,

First, matter of repetition touching the question, and meaning of it, and the
occasion of the Conference and method used in it; whereunto I have answered
before, and it is very tedious to me, to seethe again your poor Cole-woort.
(...)

Secondly, matter of additions, which are of two sorts; either personal, and
these concerning

My self: for answer whereunto, I refer you to the appendix;

Master Salisburie, a diligent Preacher and smart Disputant, who either has
already, or will shortly meet with you at Fishers folly.

Or real, to wit, certain allegations crudely taken out of Master Brerelyes
Protestants Apology, falsely so called, tractatu 2. c. 2. sect. 11. subdiuis.
3. to prove, that by the confession of Protestants, there were no Protestants
before Luther.

Now, although I might justly passe-ouer in silence those testimonies, partly,
because I have no particular quarrel with Master Brerely, but with your self;
partly, because none of those allegations come near the Outworkes, much less
the Castle of my defense: yet I hold it not altogether unfit to examine them
particularly, that the indifferent Reader may see with what sincerity you cite
testimonies out of Protestant Writers. Euripides long ago observed, that things
appear otherwise to those who view them afar off, them to those that view them
near at hand: (...)

We read of (...) Spain, in which all the fish, Plin. not. hist. l. 2. c.
105. Omnes aurei coloris ostendit pisces, nihil extra illam aquam caeteris
differentes.
whilst they swim in the river, are of a golden color* but when they are
taken (...), they change their (...), nothing like themselves (...) like
manner, these testimonies, which you truly allege (some you false quote) out
of learned and renowned Protestants, in the Authors themselves have a fa^re
other appearance (...) aspect, then in this your abstract.

To pro^e* there were no Protestants before Luther, you allege, in the first
place, Luther himself.

Master FISHER'S reflection, sect. 2. p. 50.

First therefore* Luther himself says, We dare boast, that Christ was first
published by us. Luther. Epist. ad Argentin.

Doctor FEATLY'S Answer.
First, I answer, that Luthers words in his Epistle ad Argent. in all the
editions which I could find, are not so as Master Fisher cites them: that
which I find in that Epistle any way looking that way, is, Neque (...) possum
me indignum fuisse vas Dei, per quod (...) saccursum est: Neither can I deny*
that I (though unworthy) have been an instrument of God, by which innumerable
souls have been helped. A speech as modest as true, far different from that
which you quote in stead thereof.

Secondly, if you can, in any Epistle ad Argentin. or elsewhere in Luthers
works, find those words, We dare boast, that Christ was first published by
us; the meaning of them may be gathered from many other places of Luther, to
be this, that in those parts of the Christian world, he was the first that
publicly made head against the Roman errors, and sent a Flag of defiance to
the Antichrist of Rome, and vindicated the truth of Christ's Gospel, so long
withheld in unrighteousness.

Thirdly, Luther himself acknowledges, that he had many forerunners: he
gives the hands of fellowship to the Piccards, and Waldenses, and (in a
manner) canonizeth I. H^s for a Saint. In his preface to Wesselus Groningensis,
thus he writes: Helias This bites, Propheta olim, cum Sermo Domini esset
pretiosus, nec abundaret visio, occisis vniuersis pe^e Prophetis ab impissima
Iezabele, arbitrabatur sese relictu^ esse solum: ^b id vitae pertaesus, optabat
animam suam tolli, quod vnus impar sibi videretur ferendo oneri intolerabili
impijssimi populi, et pri^^cipu^ eius; nescius, adhuc 7000. Domino relicta et
Abdia^ cum 100. Prophetis latitantibus seruatu^. Quae parabola, si paruis
liceat co^p^nere magna, huius mei saecul^ esse videtur: ego enim nescio qua dei
pro^identia in publicum raptus, cum mo^stris istis indulgentiaru^ et
pontificiaru^ legum sic pugnauivt me solum esse putarem, etsi satis mihi semper
f^it animi; ita vt passim (...) et immodesti^r accuser, praenimia qua ardeb^^
^iduci^: semper tamen id optani, quo tollerer et ego de medio ^eorum Baaluarum,
et eiuiliter m^rt^^s in angulo mihi vinerem; prorsus desperans me posse quicq^^
promo^ere apud aereas istas frontes, et cer^ices ferreas impietatis. Sed ecce,
et mihi dicitur, esse (...) reliquias suas saluas (...) in hoc tempore, et
Prophetas (...) ^bscondito seruatos. Nec hoc solum dicitur, sed et (...) gaudi^
ostenditur: prodij^ enim Wesselus, quem ^^silium dicunt, Frisius Groningensis,
^ir (...) enij, rari et ra^gni spiritus, qu^ et (...) vere Theodidacton, (...).
quales prophet^^it f^re Christianos Esayas. Neque enim ex hominibus (...)
i^dicari potest, sicut nec ego: hic si mihi a^^ea fuisset lectus, poterat
hostibus meis videri, Lutherus (...) ex Wesselo hausisse, adeo spiritus
vtriusque (...) vnum, etc. To the Christian Reader, Martin Luther wishes
salvation in the Lord.

The Prophet Elias the Thisbite, when the Word of the Lord was precious, and
vision failed (all the Prophets (in a manner) being slain by the most wicked
Iezabel) thought that himself had been left alone; and therefore being weary
of his life, wished, that God would take it away from him, because being but
one, he deemed himself unable to bear the intolerable burden of a most wicked
people and their Princes; not knowing, that God had reserved to himself yet
7000. and that Abdias; with a hundred other Prophets lurking in secret, were
preserved alive. Which Story, if I may compare small things to great, seems
to me a perfect image or emblem of this age wherein I live: for, I by divine
providence being drawn into the public theater of the world, so fought with
these monsters of Popish Indulgences and Decretals, that I thought my self to
be alone, although I never wanted courage in these combats; insomuch, that I
am rather accused of the contrary, of an ouerpoignant style and fiery zeal:
yet I always wished, that God would take me from among my Baalites, and that,
being ciuilly dead, I might enjoy my self in some corner; utterly despairing
of doing any good upon the brazen foreheads and iron necks of the wicked. But
behold, it is told me also (as it was told Elias) that God has reserved unto
himself a remainder (of true believers) even in this time, and that there are
Prophets kept in secret: neither is this said only unto me, but demonstrated
unto me also, to my great comfort: for, Wesselus Frisius Groningensis (whom
they call Basil) is lately set out in print, a man of a rare and great spirit,
and admirable wit, who (it appears) was truly taught of God, as those
Christians were to be, of which Esaias prophesies. For, it cannot be thought,
that he received his learning from men; as neither did I. If I had read this
Author before, my enemies might have thought, that I drew all out of Wesselus
Storehouse, his spirit and mine so perfectly agree.

And as Luther agnized Wesselus for his noble forerunner: so he embraced with
truest affection the Waldenses (termed, fratres Pigardi) as appears in his
preface before the (...) confession.

Quanquam fratres hi, per Bohemiam et (...) agentes, (...) annis odioso nomine
Pigardi sen haretici e^schism a^ici sint traducti, visum est meo quaque
testimonia, (...) possum illis seruire^ ((...) quid volet (...) ^estimonium)
praesertim apud (...).

Cum esse^ papista, vere et (...) animo istos Pigard^s fratres odieba^ magno
zelo Dei et religionis, nullo emnin^ lucri aut gloriae studio. Denique, cum
aliquando in aliquot libros Io. Hus impru^^^s incidissem, et Scripturas tam
potenter et pure tractatas vidissem, vt ^^^pere inciperem, cur talem ac tantum
viru^ exususse^^ Papa et Concilium; mo^^ territ^^, clausi codicem, suspicatus
venenum sub melle l^cre, quo (...) infici posset: tam violentum regnabat in
(...) papalis nominis et Concilij.

Sed post ^uam, etc. ibi caepit gaudium cordis mei: et circumspectis omnibus,
quos Papa pro hareticis dam^anerat, et per^iderat, pro Sancti^ et Marty^^b^^
laudabam, praeser tim quorum pia scrip^^a vel confessiones potui reper^re.

Inter hos autem occurr^bant et isti fratres (quos Pigardos vocabant) iam mihi
non ita inuisi, vt (...) erant in papistate mea. Denique offendi in eis (...)
illud et magnum miracul^^m, in ^eclesia Pap^ pene in^uditum; scilicet quod,
omissis homi^^^ d^ctri^is, quantum poterant, meditarentur in lege Domini die ac
nocte, esseque eos in Scripturis peritos et paratos, cum in papatis
ipsimagistri nostri prorsus negligerent Scripturas.

Et gratulari tum illis tum nobis, quod qui inter nos ipsos quoque long
fuimus, destructo nunc interstitio suspitionis, quae nobis mut^o haeretici
videbamur, facti sumus prope, et reducti simul sumus in vnum ou^le. Co^mendo
igitur in Domino omnibus piis et hanc confessionem fratrum, in qua videbunt
clare, quanta iniuria hactenus a Papistis fuerint damnati et vexati.

Although these brethren dwelling in Bohemia and Morauia, have set forth the
confession of their faith and doctrine in their own books, more dexterously
and learnedly, then that they need my commendation or preface: yet in as much
as for these many years they have been branded with the odious name of
Pigards, Heretics and Schismatics, I thought fit to afford them my best
testimony among our own, if yet it bear any weight at all.

When I was a Papist, I truly and from my heart hated these brethren termed
Pigards, out of a great zeal of God and Religion, and not out of any desire of
glory or gain^ and when (...) unawares I lighted on some of the books of Iob^
Hus, and therein observed the Scriptures so powerfully and so purely handled,
that I began to marvel why the Pope and his Council should burn a man of
such worth: presently I shut the book; suspecting, that under honey there might
lie hid some poison, wherewith my simplicity might have been infected. So
strongly was I bewitched with the name of a Pope and a Council.

But after that, etc. there began the joy of my heart: and viewing all those
whom the Pope had condemned, and put to death for Heretics, I esteemed them
as Saints and Martyrs; especially those whose godly writings and confessions I
could find, etc.

Among these, I met with those brethren whom they call Pigards, who were not
now so hateful to me, as they had been formerly in the time of my Popery. To
be brief, I found in these men a miracle, and that a very great one, almost
unheard of in the Popish Church, to wit, that these men, leaving the doctrines
of men, to the utmost of their endeavor meditated in the Law of God day and
night, and were very ready and skillful in Scriptures; whereas in the papacy,
the greatest clerks utterly neglect the Scriptures.

And I could not but congratulate both them and us, that we who before were far
severed one from another (esteeming each other as Heretics) now by the
breaking down of the partition wall of suspicion, became near one to the
other, and were together brought into one Sheepefold.

Wherefore I commend to all the servants of God, this confession of the
Brethren, whereby all men may clearly perceive how wrongfully they have been
condemned and vexed by the Papists.

Now how worthily Martin Luther conceived of John Hus and Hierom of Prague, it
appears by those his words in Asser. articul. 32. Iohannem Hus et Hieronymum,
viros catholic^s, combusserunt haeretici ipsi, and Apostatae, and Antichristi
discipuli: they burnd John Hus and Hierom, both Catholic men, they being
themselves Heretics and Apostataes, and the disciples of Antichrist. And in
his first preface to some of the Epistles of Hus, prefixed to the works of Hus,
In numero istorum operum sanctissimi Domini papae habetur et hoc, quod in
Constantiensi Concilio optimum et pijssimum virum Iohannem Hus damnauit: In the
number of those works of the holy Father the Pope, this is one, that in the
Council of Constance, he condemned John Hus, a man of singular worth and
extraordinary piety: And in the second preface, Has Epistolas sancti Martyris,
Iohannis Hus, etc. These Epistles of the holy Martyr John Hus: And in his third
Preface, A fide dignis hominibus percepi, Imperatorem Maximilianum, de Iohanne
Hus dicere solitum, Hei! hei! secerunt bono illi viro iniuriam. Et Erasmus
Roter. in primis libellis (quos typis excusos adhuc mecum habeo) manifest
scribit, Iohannem Hus exustum quidem sed non conuictum esse. Tale omni tempore
bonorum virorum iudicium fuit quod illata ei sit vis et iniuria. Et paulo post
porro, In confesso est attestantibus et aduersarijs (quorum ipse nonn^ll^s,
eosque magnos theologos, audiui ante annos 30), fuisse (...) excellenter
doctum, et eruditione atque doctrina antecelluisse omnibus Doctoribus in toto
Concili^. Ego olim Erphordiae studij Theologiae tyro, incidens in librum
sermonum Iohannis Hus, prae euriositate quadam incendebar desiderio
cognoscendi, quaenam dogmata haeresiarcha ille sparsisset, cum hic liber in
publica Bibliotheca ab incendio sernatu^ esset: ^itert^ inter l^gendum
obstupefactu^, admiratione afficiebar prope incre dibili, quam ob causam tandem
ex^^^^s esset vir tantus, in explicanda et tractanda scriptura tam dexter et
grauis, etc. I have heard from men of credit, that the Emperor Maximilian was
wont to say of John Hus: Alas! alas! they did that good man wrong: and Erasmus
Roterodam in the first books which he printed (lying yet by me) writes, that
indeed John Hus was burned, but not convicted. This was the judgment of
learned men always, concerning John Hus, that great wrong and violence was
offered unto him. For proof whereof, he alleges Doctor Sta^pritius, and
Andrew Praule; and in the end, adds moreover, It is a thing confessed, even
by our Adversaries themselves (some of whom, being great Divines, I heard 30
years ago), that John Hus was excellently learned, and far beyond all the
Doctors in that Council. I my self, when I was a young Student in Divinity at
Erford, meeting with a book of Sermons, penned by John Hus, was inflamed with
a desire of reading it through, that I might know what were the heresies which
this Arch-heretick broached. This book was happily kept from burning, lying hid
among many other in the public Library: in the reading whereof, I was amazed,
and could not sufficiently admire what the cause might be, that so great a
Clarke, so expert and dexterous in expounding and handling Scripture, should
be burned.

Thus you see, how far Luther was from detracting from any of his
forerunners: to whom he yielded as ample a testimony for the Truth, as they
had yielded to the Truth. And I desire the indifferent Reader to observe, how
John Hus his prophecy before his death, was fulfilled in Luthers vindicating
his doctrine and person. John Hus his words were, which are yet to be seen,
stamped in ancient coin, current among the Hussites, Centum reuolutis annis,
etc. After a hundred years, you shall answer God and me: and some affirm,
that he added, Iam Hus, that is, in the Bohemian Language, Goose: but there
shall follow me a Swan, etc. And indeed, after a hundred years, that Swan
appeared in the world, which most sweetly began to record the pure notes of
the Songs of Sion, whose strong quill has eternized John Hus his innocence of
life, and purity of Doctrine.

Master FISHER.
Wherefore the Lutheran Conradus, In theol. Calu. l. 2. fol. 130. versus finem.
Schlusenburg says, It is impudency to say, that many learned men in Germany
(and the like is of other countries) before Luther, did hold the doctrine of
the Lutheran Gospel.

And another of them not only says in effect thus much, Geo. Mylli. iu Augu
tanae Confessionis explic. art. 70. de Eccles.
but proves it by this Argument, If there had been right believers that went
before Luther in his office, there had been no need of a Lutheran reformation.
page 137. Benedict. Morgenst. tract. de Eccl. page 145.
Another says, It is ridiculous to think, that in the time before Luther, any
had the purity of doctrine, and that Luther should receive if from them, and
(...) they from Luther; considering, says he, it is manifest to the whole
world that before Luthers time, all Churches were ouer-whelmed with more then
C^merian darkness, and that Luther was divinely raised up to discover the
same, and to restore the light of true doctrine.

Doctor FEATLY'S Answer.
First, I would have you to know, M. Fisher, that I hold my self no way bound
to give an account of every railing or ouer-lashing Lutherans speech, no more
then you will undertake to make good every inuectiue of the secular Priests
against the Jesuits: such Writers of the pet^y form, of little antiquity, and
less learning, were not wont to be alleged in controversies of moment in
Divinity. But I perceive by you, M. Fisher, that (according to the Proverb) all
is fish that comes to your net. If these three had jointly testified that for
which you cite them, yet their testimonies might soon be blown away, by the
conspiring breath of many Protestants of better rank then they. Apologet.
Regius, alleged by your own Brerely, testifyeth most expressly the contrary:
Dico fuisse ante Lutherum, verae Religionis et qui cum Luthero per omnia
consentires, coetum Ecclesiasticum etsi a pontificijs non fuerit agnitus, nec
propter tyrannidem pontificium fortasse ostendi visibiliter potuerit. I say,
that before Luther there was a company professing the true Religion of the
same belief with Luther, although this company was not agnized by the Papists,
nor peradventure could visibly be shown or poynted at, by reason of the Popish
tyranny. Whitakerus de Eccles. cont. Bellar. controuers. secunda. Nostra
Ecclesia tum fuit. At non fuit visibilis, inquit Bellarminus. Quid tum? an ideo
non fuit? Nequaquam: latc^at enim tum in solitudine.
Whitaker auowes Regius: Our Church was then (viz. in the Ages before Luther).
But it was not visible, says Bellarmine (to weet, in the Popish sense). What
then? Will it follow, that therefore it was not at all in the world? By no
means; for it lay hid in the Desert. O^colampadius and Martin Bucers Letters
to the Waldenses, are extant in their works. I might allege the testimonies of
Constance and In Apocalip.
Bullinger, In orat de Wald.
Vesembekius, De vera et falsa relig. l. 4.
Viret, In his memorials of the Waldenses.
Vignea^s, Epist. 250 et. 251 et 179.
Calvin, De viris illustrib.
Beza, In resp. ad Camp. ratio 3.
Humfrey, His acts and Monuments.
Fox, In catal test. veritatis.
Illyri^us, and many other Protestants of higher rank, then such sneakers as
Schlusenburg, or Myllius, or Morgenst. All the former acknowledge, that the
Hussites and Waldenses walked with a right foot in that way of Truth, which
since Luther (blessed be God) has been much more clearly discovered, and
trodden, then in former times. If Protestant Writers sway little with you, who
yet could better tell then you, or M. Sweet, and such other new vpstart
Jesuits, who were Luthers forerunners; learn of your own Contra Waldens.
Rainerius, and Contra Waldens.
Claudius de Seissel, and Hist. Hussit. l. 1.
Cocleus, and in tabulis and alit.
Lyndanus, and Hist. ciuit. Judge. l. 3.
Claudius Rubis, and Hist. Bohem.
Aeneas Syluius, and Hist. Bohem.
John Dubranius, and Contra haeres.
Alfonsus a Castro, and the Author of the Fasciculus rerum exet: and many
other, that the Waldenses bore a Torch before Luther, and showed him his way.
Yea but Schlusenburg says, It is impudency to say, that many learned men in
Germany did hold the doctrine of the Lutheran Gospel. Schlusenburgs words are,
Impudenter scribit Vtenboyus seex Conrado Pellicano audiuisse, multos viros
eruditos in Germania, priusquam prodiret Lutherus, euangelij doctrinam
tenuisse; adeoque, ipsum Pellicanum, priusquam auditum esset nomen Lutheri,
Purgatorium Papisticum reiecisse. Vtenboius writes impudently, that he heard
Conradus Pellicanus affirm, that many learned men in Germany held the doctrine
of the Gospel, before Luther appeared; and that Pellicanus himself impugned
the Popish Purgatory, before the name of Luther was heard. For ought I know,
Vtenboius is as honest a man, as Schlusenburgius: and if Schlusenburgius deny
it, Vtenboius affirms it, yea, and (for ought is proved to the contrary)
Conradus Pellicanus also: yet that which Schlusenburg maintains for the honor
of his Master, no way helps your cause: for, admit there were not in Germany,
yet there might be elsewhere many thousands, as in Bohemia, France, England,
etc. who, before Luther, embraced the doctrine of the Gospel.

Secondly, in Germany it self, there were not multi eruditi viri, many learned
men; yet there might be some, for ought Schlusenburg says to the contrary:
therefore Schlusenburges testimony falls very short, neither does George
Myllius his come much nearer to the mark. His words are, Si antecessores
Lutherus in officio habuisset Orthodoxos; Si Apostasia commissa ab Episcopis
Pontificijs non fuisset, Lutherana reformatione opus non fuisset. Non ergo
possumus veros monstrare Episcopos, qui ante Lutherum sub Papatu fuerint
praedecessores Lutheri. Si enim tales fuissent in Romana Ecclesia discedendi ab
ista, causa non fuisset. If Luther had had orthodoxall Predecessors in his
Office; If the Popish Bishop had not made an Apostasy, there should have been
no need of a Lutheran Reformation. Therefore, we cannot show true Bishops under
the Papacy, to whom Luther succeeded: for if there had been such in the
Roman Church, there had been no cause to depart from it. What makes this
testimony for you? Is it for the honor of your Church, to be truly branded
with Apostasy? to have no orthodoxal Bishops bearing rule in it? What though
there were no right-beleeuing Bishops under or in the Papacy; will it follow,
that there were no right-beleeuing Christians elsewhere? It is true,
Reformation presupposes a Deformation, as a remedy presupposes a disease; and
a purgation precedent matter fit to be purged. Though the Roman Church, or
rather the predominant faction in the Roman Church, was unsound in the faith,
and very corrupt and rotten; yet were there other sound members of Christ's
Church, in whose steps, it is well known, that Luther trod. What a
paralyticall Paralogisme is this? Myllius a Lutheran affirms, that There were
(...) orthodoxall or right-beleeuing Bishops in the Roman Sea, therefore there
were no visible Protestants in all the world before Luther. Now for Benedictus
Morgenst, Non est inuentus in Baliua nostra. He who found him for you, makes
him run the same way with Brerely Protest. Ap^l. Sect. 11. de Fraet. orthod.
Eccles.
Ioachimus Camerarius, but not whither you would have him. They both stand for
the honor of Luther, and maintain, that he alone laid the first stone in the
Fabric of reformation, and that none ought to share with him in that dignity,
in being the first Apostle of the reformed Churches. They will not endure,
that Luther should be thought to draw water out of any other Cisterne, but out
of the Fountain of living water, the Scriptures. Wicklef indeed, says
Ioachimus, was instructed by the Waldenses, and Hus by Wicklef: but Luther
received his doctrine neither from Hus nor Wicklef, but was (...), taught of
himself out of Scriptures. This preeminency all Protestants do not willingly
grant to Luther. Zuinglius and Pellicanus, and Vtenboius, and your own
Alfonsus a Castro, seem to make others as ready and forward at that time, as
Luther. And indeed, whether Luther set Zuinglius, or Zuinglius Luther first
a-work, or whether the Spirit of God stird up both their spirits at the same
instant, to set to that noble work of repairing and reforming Gods Temple, I
hold it needless to define. Let Luther and Zuinglius, and many other their
contemporaries and fellow-workmen in that great work, shine as so many precious
stones in the foundation of the reformed Churches: Ne sit primus, nec vel imus
quispiam. Will it follow, that because Luther was (...), and did not tind his
candle at another man's light, therefore there was no visible Protestant at that
time, but he? It will follow, say you, because Morgenst adds, that. It is
manifest to the whole world, that before Luther's time, all Churches were
overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness. And you add also to Morgenst,
five other corroboratory testimonies, of Calvin, Bucer, Beza, Jewel and
Perkins: whereunto after I have given a direct and particular answer, I will
dismiss you.

Master FISHER.
And lest this may be thought to have been only the conceit of Luther and
Lutherans (who yet could better tell, then D. Featly, D. White, and such other
new Masters) I will add heereunto what is said, first, by Calvin in l. Epist.
ep. 141.
Calvin, who does acknowledge, that in this Lutheran reformation, there was
made a discession or departure from all the world. Secondly, by Bucer Ep. ad
Epis. Hereford.
Bucer, who calls Luther the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine. Thirdly,
by Beza Beza in Theol. Ep. Epist. 5.
a principal Caluinist, who teaches, that at this time, ordinary vocation of
the Churchmen was no where extant; and consequently teaches, that there was
at that time no visible Church, and so if any Church at all, it was only
invisible, as is affirmed even by our own English Protestant Divines, namely
Jewel, in his Apology of the Church, cap. 4. diuis. 2. and in his defense 40.
Master Jewel, who says, The truth was unknown and unheard of, when Martin
Luther and Viderick Zuinglius first came to the knowledge and preaching of the
Gospel; and M. Perkins, Perkins in his Expos. of the Creed,
who says, We say, that before the days of Luther, for the space of many
hundred years, an universal Apostasy ouer-spred the whole face of the earth,
and that our (Protestant) Church was not visible to the world.

Doctor FEATLY.
When Calvin says, There was a departure made from all the world; and
Morgenst, That all Churches were overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness;
and Perkins, that An universal Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the
earth; and Jewel; that Luther and Zuinglius were most excellent men sent from
God, to give light to the whole world: their meaning is not, that there was no
light in those times in Goshen, or that there were no Abdiases, with many other
Prophets lying in secret; or that there were not many thousands that never
bowed the knee to the Romish Baal: for they all affirm the contrary in sundry
places of their writings. But they take the word World, as it is usually taken
both in sacred and profane Writers, for the greater part of the world, or at
least, that part that bears the greatest sway, and is in a manner only in
voage. Their words sound according to the Tenor of those in S. John; The whole
world is set on wickedness; and the like in S. Jerome, Totus mundus ingemuit
se factum Arrianum; the whole world sighed, that it became Arrian. As Luther,
so Calvin also acknowledges, that Christ has always had his floor on earth,
sometimes more, sometimes less purged: And further, they deny not, but that
before the public and general purging of the floor of the visible Church,
from the chafe of Romish superstitions in our days, there were many that in
sundry corners of the earth, severed diverse heaps of wheat from the chafe, and
cleansed it from darnell and tares. Among whom, were Fratres Pigardi, a
remainder of the Waldenses; between whom, and Calvin, many kind offices
passed, as their mutual Letters testify, extant in Caluins works. Inter
Epist. Calu. Ep. 250. Quomam, vir venerande, ante annos circiter triginta,
inter humanit atem tuam, tum Argentina agentem, and fratres qui falso Pigardi
vel Waldenses dicuntur, charis^imos in Domino Patres nostros sancta intercessit
no^itna and familiaritas, etc.
Thus one of the Preachers of the Waldenses writes to Calvin:

Reverend in the Lord: because above 30 years ago, when you remained at
Argentine, there was an holy league of love and entire friendship and
familiarity between you and the brethren, who are falsely termed Pigards or
Waldenses, our dearest Fathers in the Lord; We, who now hold the place of
those our Fathers, (whom God has called, almost all of them, out of this
mortal life) thought fit to renew that knowledge, or rather band of Christian
love, wherewith all the servants of God, especially the Ministers of the
Gospel, ought to be most strictly and firmly knit together.

To the former letter, Calvin returns this courteous answer, Gratias agimus
non vulgares, quod Fratres qui vestrierga nos amoris fraternaque coniuncti^nis
testes essent, et qu ^si Sponsores mittere grauati non estis: eoque libentius
offici^^m hoc vest rum s^^nus amplexi, qu^a ex sinceran pietatis studio
manabat. Cupimus idem vicissem v^bis de propenso nostro ad fouendam sanctam
vnitatem affectu persu ^sum esse, etc.
Epist. 251. We render you more then ordinary thanks, for sending the
brethren unto us, who may remain as witnesses and pledges of your love toward
us, and brotherly conjunction; which kind office of yours, we the more
willingly embrace, because it flowed from a sincere love of true Religion. We
desire that you will be likewise persuaded of the like affection in us toward
you, and the great desire we have to cherish this holy unity among us. For,
being so far removed one from another, and compassed round about with
enemies, who take up the greater part of the world, it is a great delight unto
us to enjoy yet this comfort of our dispersion, etc.

Again, the same Calvin in his Epistles, Epist. 179. to Stanist. Carninsk,
thus writes of the Waldenses: De vestro cum Waldensibus consensu optima
quaeque spero, non modo quia sanctam vnitatem, in quam coalescunt Christi
membra, Deus semper benedicere solitus est, sed quod inter haec rudimenta,
fratrum Waldensium peritiam, quam longo vsu Dominus exercuit, non vulgari
adiumento vobis fore spero. Quare vobis omnibus danda est opera, vt haec pia
conspiratio magis ac magis sanciatur, etc.
I hope the best of your agreement with the Waldenses; not only, because God
always uses to bless the holy unity, in which the members of Christ grow up
together, but also, because in these your rudiments and beginnings, I conceive,
that the skill and long experience of the Waldenses, will be an extraordinary
help unto you: wherefore all of you must do the uttermost of your endeavors,
that this holy agreement and consent between you, may more and more be
established, etc.

Martin Bucer (whom you allege in the next place) held the like correspondence
with the Waldenses, as may be gathered from that Letter of his which he wrote
unto them.

Blessed be the Lord God our loving Father, who has preserved you to this
present time, in so great knowledge of his truth, and who has now inspired you
in the search thereof, having made you capable and fit to do it. Behold now,
what the nature of true faith is, which is, that so soon as it knows in part
any spark of the divine light, it preserves carefully the things that are
given unto it of God. Saint Paul is an example to us, who in all his epistles,
shows the great care that he has had to procure the glory of God. And
doubtless, if we pray with a good heart, that the name of God be sanctified,
and his Kingdom may come, we shall prosecute nothing with such diligence, as
the establishment of the truth where it is not, and the advancement thereof
where it is already planted. One only thing does especially grieve me, that
our employments at this time are such, about other affairs, that we have no
leisure to answer you at large, as we desire, etc.

By the contents of this Letter, and many other passages in Bucers Works, which
for breuities sake I omit, it appears that Bucer, in calling Luther the first
Apostle of the reformed Doctrine, did not thereby intend, that Luther was the
first that ever preached the Doctrine of the reformed Churches; for, he could
not be ignorant, that after Christ and his Apostles, and the Fathers for 6 or
700 years, Bertram, and Elfrick, and Berengarius, and Petrus Brus, and Henry of
Tolous, and Dulcinus, and Arnoldus, and Lollardus, and Wicklef, and Hus, and
Jerome of Prague, and many other Stars, fought in their courses against the
Romish Sisera. But Bucers meaning is, that Luther was the first, who in our Age
and memory, publicly and success-fully set on foot a general Reformation of
the Church in these Western parts: when the corrupt matter of Popish errors
and superstitions long in gathering, grew now to a ripe coare, Luther was the
first who openly lanced it. Luther formed no new Church, but reformed the
Church he found; and therefore cannot be termed, The first Apostle of
Protestant Doctrine; although, in a tolerable sense, he may be styled, The
first Apostle of the happy Reformation in our days. Luther burnisht and
refined the gold of the Sanctuary, obscured with rust: he made not new gold.

In your allegation out of Beza, by suppressing the Aduerb (pene, almost), you
show your self, non pene, not almost, sed penitus, altogether a falsificator.
Beza's words, Epist. 5. are, Huic tum demum locum esse dicimus, cum vel nulla,
vel pene nulla est ordinaria vocatio, sicut nostris temporibus accidit in
Papatu. We say, that then extraordinary calling takes place, when there is
either no, or almost no ordinary vocation ( of Pastors), as in our time fell
out in the Papacy. This ( almost) you omit altogether. For Beza's opinion,
touching extraordinary calling, as I do not here oppugn, so much less do I
undertake to maintain. We can, and have proved lawful and ordinary calling
in our Church of England, as you may see in M. Masons most accomplished
Treatise of this Subject, lately reuised by him before his death, and
translated into Latin, at this instant sweating under the Press. Admit, there
had been no ordinary calling of right-beleeuing Churchmen, Bishops, or
Priests, when Luther did first sound his silver Trumpet: what will you infer
thereupon? that at that time there was no visible Church? There Beza leaves
you, who professes both a visible Church in general, consisting of members,
sound and unsound, and these more or less; and in particular, In his book of
worthy men.
he calls the Waldenses, The seed of the most pure, ancient, Christian
Church, which was miraculously preserved in the midst of the darkness and
errors, which have been hatched by Satan in these latter times. And as Beza
leaves you, in this your inference, so also does the Truth: For, although the
Ship of Christ is in great danger, when erroneous Pastors, like false lights,
are set up in the Watch-Towers of Sion, yet, since our chief Pilot has
forewarned us hereof, and bid us take heed of false prophets and teachers,
and has left us a most certain direction in his Word, which is the true
Light, (...) conduct us to those pulchri portus, the fair Havens in Heaven;
the people of God may keep the right way, and through Gods grace escape the
quicksands of heresy. As God bestows diverse gifts of the Spirit ordinarily
upon the Clergy, so he bestows also where he pleases, Spiritum
discretionis, in the Laytie, a Spirit whereby they may discern spirits,
whether they are of God or no; a Spirit, by which, trying all things, they may
hold fast that is good. And if their ghostly Fathers offer them a stone for
bread, Mat. 7. 9, 10.
or a Serpent for fish, they will cast it away: Or if more cunningly they shall
mingle error and heresy with truth, and offer them, as your Teachers did and
do, an apple with a worm in it, or a cup of wine with a dead Fly, they will
take out the worm and Fly, and then eat of the one, and drink of the other.
This is that which Baltasar Praefat. in Waldens.
Lydius truly observes, Oft-times the ears of the Auditors are purer then the
tongue of the Preacher. He delivers vngarbled spices, they garble it; vnsifted
meal, they sift and boult it; impure milk, they strain it. In the days of
Jeremy, and much more after the death of the Prophet Malachy, until the birth
of Christ, there were few (I would see a Catalogue of true Teachers of the
infallible faith in those times.)
Doctors in Israel, that rightly expounded the Law, and taught Gods people as
they ought: yet no man doubts that God had then a visible Church; as also
afterward in the time of the Arrian and Eutychian persecution, in which there
were very few Bishops or Pastors untainted with those heresies: Therefore,
although we should grant you your antecedent out of Beza, that there was no
ordinary vocation at that time, of pure and sincere Teachers, yet we will
bar you of your conclusion, that at that time there was no visible Church.
Our English Divines, alleged by you, affirm no such thing. Perkins says not,
that our Church was simply invisible, but that it was not visible to the world;
adding in the same place, that it lay hid under the chafe of Popery. And the
truth of this, says he, the Records of all Ages manifest. The same Perkins,
in his Reformed Catholic, more fully explaineth his meaning, thus: Though
Popery reigned and ouerspred the face of the earth, for many hundred years:
yet in the midst thereof, God reserved a people to himself, that truly
worshipped him; The woman fled into the wilderness, etc. And she still
retains a remnant of her seed, which keep the commandment of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ. See here how far he is from denying a
Protestant Church extant^ that he affirms it to have grown up and thriued,
even in the Thicket of Popery, though much ouer-shadowed and ouer-topped.
Neither can you find any flaw or cloud in that orient Ge^^^^ of our Church,
Apolog. part. 4. cap. 4. Diuis. 2.
Bishop Jewel, whose words are these: When in the midst of the darkness of
that Age, first began to spring and shine some glimmering beam of truth,
unknown at that time, and (...) of; When also Martin Luther, and H^lderick
Zuinglius, being most excellent men, even seek from God, to give light to the
whole world, first came to the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel, etc. A
Diamond cannot be cut or polished but by a Diamond: Let therefore this Jewel
brighten and clear himself. In the same part of the Apology, Chap. 5. Diuis.
1. he calls Martin Luther, the publisher and setter forward of this doctrine
(not the Author); And Chap. 14. Diuis. 1. he fully cleeres the point in
difference between us, touching visible Protestants before Luther: Many (...)
many learned and godly men, have often and carefully complained, how all these
things have cleared (...) time: For, even in the midst of that (...)
darkness God would yet there should be some, who though they gave not a
clear and bright light; yet should kindle, were it but some sparks, which men
being in darkness, might epsy. And he particularly (...) Hillary, Gregory,
Bernard, Pauperes de Lugd^^^, (...) Bishops of Greece and Asia as also (...)
Petrach, Sauanarolla, and others. And Chapter 15. he preuenteth a c^uill, that
might have bin made against these witnesses of the truth, by some ignorant
persons. Neither (says he) can any man allege, that these Authors were
Luthers or Zuinglius Scholars: for they lived not only certain years, but
also certain Ages, ^re ever Luther or Zuinglius names were heard of.

Now, I pray see, M. Fisher, what a goodly dish of fish you have served in, to
furnish your Table, and let the indifferent: Reader judge, whether you may
safely trust M. Brer^ly, or we you, in allegations, especially out of
Protestant Writers; whose words either you corrupt, or adulterate their
meaning, or both, as evidently appears in all the places aboue-cited.

And thus have I now at length spung'd out all the spots, which your pen has
cast on the Conference. As for personal aspersions upon me, especialy, of
want of gravity and patience, I hold it fittest to refell these and the like
slanders by silent and patient enduring them. As you herein take Petilian the
Donatist, for your precedent of impudent railing, so I will take Saint Austen
for my pattern of silent patience, and cloze up all further Answer in his
words: Lib 3. cont. ^iteras Petil. cap. 11.
Quid mirum, si cum grana de area Domini excussa, simul and paleam intror sum
trabo, iniuriam resilientis pulueris suffero? What marvel, if in sweeping the
Lords floor, and seeking to gather-in grains that are flowne out, I endure a
little dust? Homo sum enim de area Christi; palea* si malus; granum, si bonus;
non est h^ius area v^ni^labrum lingus Petiliani: I am a man, and I know I am of
Christ's floor, that is, in his true visible Church; all the Papists in the
world shall never disprooue it: If I am evil; I am chafe; if good, I am
wheat: and whether I be the one or the other, this is my comfort, I am sure,
the Jesuits tongue is not the fan of this floor. What I have written
touching the visibility of Christ's true Church, I (in all humility) submit to
the judgment of the true visible Church. I hope, the Truth shall suffer
nothing, because of me: and if I suffer any thing, by loose tongues or pens,
because of the Truth, I will account it my Joy and Crown in the Day of our
Lord Jesus Christ: To whose saving grace, and boundless mercy, I commend all
those who love Truth in sincerity.

(...).

