THE MANNER TO DYE WELL.

An Introduction most compendiouslie shewinge the fruytfill remembrance of the
last four things: That is to say, Death, Hell, Judgment, and The joys of
Heaven.

Gathered out of many good Authors, both comfortable and profitable to the
diligent Reader.

Learnedly instructing how to provide for Death.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones. 1578.

To the Reader.
TO stir up a more diligence of the inwarden^a^ in us, our Lord Jesus
puts forth this similitud: know you that if the household Father knew at
what time the Thief would invade his house, he would surely watch, and would
not suffer his house to be broken. By this Household is understood the
thoughts of man, and also the inward and outward motions and deeds. Which
household vvoulde be to lascivious and vvanton, if by the diligence of the
Father they were not corrected and repressed. For if the father be vvearie of
his care, who could be able to shevve how proud and insolent the
thoughts, eyes, tongue, ears, and other members vvoulde become. This house is
the conscience, wherein this Father dwells, and gathers together the
treasure of virtues, for which he does watch diligently, least the house
should be broken up* And it is not one, but many Thieves that would commit
this buglary and robbery. For every ver^^e has a ^ice incident unto it. The
chief Thief is taken to be the Deuell, against whom and all his atmie the
said father (if he be not negligent) does watch and ward his house:
appointing Prudence in the first ward, who understands what is to be
admitted, and what is to be kept out. Next unto her is placed Fortitude, to
withstand such enemies as by her warning he sees to come near. And Justice
sits in the midst, to give to every one his own. And every hour is to
be feared, for it is not known in what hour the thief will come. We ought
alvvaies to watch, least the sleep of sin do unawares creep upon us. Now
these things being thus ordered, the Memory of death desires to come, in
and is suffered to enter, who being demanded to say what he was, and from
whence he comes. He answered that he would say nothing except all were
commanded to silence. Who obteyning his request, began in this order: My name
(says he) is Memory of death, and I foretell you that death is coming.
Prudence speaking for all, puts the question, saying, VVher is death? Memory
answers, I know where he is, for he draws very nere, but the hour of his
coming I know not. Prud. Who comes with him? Mem. A number of Deuilles
bringing with them great books, in which are written the offenses of man, and
they claim those whose sins are written therein, and they will violently
draw with them both their souls and bodies to hell. Prudence. What thing is
hell? Mem. Hell is a place of unmeasurable sorrows, misery, and darkness, there
is eternal horror, there is no hope of goodness nor separation from evil. Every
man that is there hates himself and al others. There is weping and gnashing
of teeth. There is no voice there heard but Alas, Alas, Alas, they have no
word but Alas. The deuelishe tormentors do tormente and are tormented, and of
them there shall never be end nor remedy. Such a place is Hell, and a
thousand times worse. Prudence. O God what shall we do? My brethren, hear
mine advise, and give me yours. Be ye faithful, watch and pray, do good, not
only in the sight of men, but in the sight of God. Temperaunce. Let us goo
before his face with hearty repentance, and let us praise him in Psalms. Be
you sober and watch. Fortitud. Upon whom do you stay? Be strong in faith,
Comfort your selves in our Lord, Arm your selves with the armor of God, Take
upon you the harneys of Justice, the target of Faith, and the sword of the
holy Ghost, which is the word of God. Justice. Let us live sober, just, and
godly. Sober to our selves, just to our neighbors, and godly to God. Let us
not do that to others, which we would not have done unto our selves. Prud.
Behold another Messenger very comely and pleasant, who seems to bring
some good news. Justice. Let him come in, peradventure he will make us merry:
for this first messenger has terrified us. Prudence. I will admit him. Come
in. Who art thour Messenger. I am called, The love of eternal life. Keep
silence, for I can not be heard where tumult is. Justice. If we did keep
silence whilst the Memory of death spoke, of justice we ought to be silent
when thou speak. Desire of eternal life. I have seen such things as no man
is worthy to speak of. I saw God, the majesty of the undivided Trinity,
but yet as it were through a glass: that brightness was so clear, that mine
eyes dasled to behold that clearenes which passes all understanding. Yet
notwithstanding I beheld a little while our Lord Jesus sitting on the right
hand of his father, who did so far excel all creaturs, that the Angels
themselves desire to behold and look upon him. And I saw upon his body the
wounds of his passion, wherewith he redeemed us. But not being able any long
time to look upon this brightness of the son of God, I turned mine eyes upon
the orders of Angels, that stand before God. I beheld also the Prophets, the
Apostles, and Martirs, and an innumerable company of blessed Souls, from
whose eyes God has washed away all tears: they do see the king in his
Majesty, and were all appareled in long white garments, living a life without
end.

W. B.

Of the fall of man, and the punishment by death for the same, and of the
uncertain hour of death.
BY shine against the lyning Lord,
old Adam our first Sire,
Death to him self and al his seed
has gained for his hyre.
Mortality and temporal death
this gift our Parents won,
In Paradise the fruit forbid,
to eat when they begone.
First sin began, and after death
in haste dydit ensue:
By whom each man must pass herehence,
as sure as God is true.
Lest some men would them selves extol,
too far above the rest,
If that they should in freedom quite,
escape this fearful blast.
Then Death nothing more certain is,
no doubt thereof we see,
But no man knows the hour ne place,
nor what his end shall be.
Whether by dint of edged sword,
or heat of flaming fire,
Or roaring wanes of raging seas,
pale Death shall pay his byre.
No place nor time there is, but Death
in watch and wait does lie,
Man to intrappe, if that he can
unarmed him epsy.
No shadow dark on massy corpse,
more duly does attend,
Then lurking death, who always seeks,
Man to confound and end.
What man is he that stands sure,
till night to draw his breath?
Our life being the open way
that straight does lead to death.
The wise therefore remembering often,
that once he needs must dye,
His life at every hour to yield
prepares wyllingly.
Death at the gates of old men is,
and pressed to youth also:
But neither knows the certain hour,
when they away must go.
Let us therefore, not knowing when
God shall upon us call,
Prepare our selves in readiness,
both soul, mind, heart and all:
Yielding our selves unto the Lord,
whylst we our health enjoy,
Not wasting time by posting off,
least we our selves annoy.
Even like as death does find the man,
so man the death shall find,
For perfect men in safety
do dye with joyful mind.
With hope of bliss the just does end
their life in quiet rest,
And wicked men full desperate,
do end in cares oppressed.
Therefore to avoid these dangers all,
keep thou these verses in mind,
Which I amongst the learned works,
of godly men do find.
Of Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven.
Each thing returns to massy earth,
and ends where it begun:
Fresh flowers and all that bears breath,
as shades away does run.
Nothing for long accounted is,
that must in time decay:
To morrow next perhaps shall be
my death and dying day.
This present day may likewise be,
the last day of my days,
Wherein appointed is that I.
must dye without delays.
No hope of doing well is left,
after that deadful day:
That day in joy without al grief,
To pass God send I may,
It is great folly to account,
long time here to endure,
Seeing that none one day to live,
himself can well assure.
Often to account or mention make,
of days, it is but vain,
Since restful day, or quiet hour,
none has, without great pain.
Have thou as long a time and race,
as thou does lust to run,
As ought of naught was made in fine,
so ought to naught must turn.
A thousand thousand men have been,
and thousand of thousands eke.
Whose bones in earth consumed are,
whose fame is now to seek,
A just reward for their deserts,
does only now remain,
And for their deeds by judgment just,
they suffer joy or pain.
Behold that fearful judgment just,
for one shall give the dome,
Who does appoynte that trembling day,
when he thereto will come.
Dread, fear, and cast thy count therefore,
prepare thy heart, I say:
Live thou as though death present were,
thy due preparde to pay.
Of the hour of death worthy of often repetition.
REmember often, O mortal man,
consider in thy mind,
What soden fear and terror great,
thy soul is like to find:
What pinching worms begin to fret,
the heart on every side,
When soul from flesh, and life from man,
begins away to slide.
Ten thousand griefs begins to pain,
the wicked soul with woe,
When from the prison of the flesh,
away it needs must go,
It does bewail with streams of tears,
the vain bestowed time,
Wherein it might full leasurely,
repent each sinful crime:
And bitterly with scryching cries,
it makes a rufull moan:
To see the time of strict revenge,
that draws so hardly on.
It seeks a while then to remain,
in hope some mendes to make:
No suit may then prevail, but that
the flesh it must forsake.
Full feign it would recover again
the joy which it has lost,
All is in vain, it will not be,
away the soul must post.
But looking back it sees again,
when it was wald with bones,
The whole full course of passed life
all presently at once.
And taking yet more earnest view,
it sees, not far beside,
The infinite Eternity,
that never away will slide:
Then trikling tears by watered leares,
in floudes for grief does run,
For losing all the heavenly joys,
that easly might been won:
Intisementes foul of filthy flesh
just cause of grief then brings,
For that by them the sweet delight
of heaven and heavenly things:
From sinful soul for ever, alas,
remediles is reft,
And endless pains by just desert,
by God to it is left.
It blusheth for that the sinful flesh
it did so much set by,
The food of greedy scrauling worms
in grave when it does lie:
Forgetting quite it self, alas,
which if it had done well,
To Angels might compared be,
that in the heavens do dwell.
O how the soul confounded is,
when it does see with eyes,
The perfect glee that was and is
above the starrie Skies:
With fleeting stoudes of cares, I say,
the doleful soul is tossed,
When it does see the heavenly health,
that it has vainly lost.
For vading glory of the world
in this poor mortal life,
Wherein we see nothing is had
without debate and strife.
When the black vale of misery
it does from far behold,
It wondreth at the shyning light
of heaven, more pure then gold:
It does then see the wavering world
that seemde to it most bright.
To be none other but a cloud
more dark then drowpy night.
How godly, hard, and strict a life,
the soul would undertake,
What fastings great, what promise large
what holy vows would make:
To get by grace some space of time,
wherein it might repent
The vain surpassed course of life,
that erst in sin was spent.
But when the dasled eyes begins
to loose their wonted sight,
And holo we chest yet feeble pants,
and loosing near his might.
The rattling throat does faintly breath
the teeth wax black and rust,
The lips becomes pale and wan,
the tongue is thick and thurst,
And every lym near styffe and cold:
when these do play their part,
As very signs and tokens true
of Death his pearsing darte.
Then al his wicked works and thoughts,
as witness forth are brought,
And strongest evidence they give
against him that them have wrought,
He no where then can fire his eyes,
but there they present are,
And as his strongest enemies,
they work his greatest care.
Huge routes of ugly dreadful douyls
on those side stands n^^re,
The virtues all on the other side,
with Angels passing clear:
And in the midst betwixt them both
by just and upright dome,
Its clearly judged to whether side
the wand^ing soul shall come.
If in the pathe of virtue true,
the soul did run her race,
Then do the Angels every one
crave that it may have grace.
With pleasant heavenly harmony,
full sweet they do allure,
The soul with them in heaven to go,
they earnestly procure,
But if the soul all blurred be,
with blottes of filthy sin,
Then war like troops of hateful devils,
against the soul do ^iune:
And suddenly in boy^^rous wise,
alheadlong down does cast,
The guyltie soul eternally,
to he^ they pull at last.
In ambushe they in privy wise
the way do al beset,
Thereby the soul to stop and stay,
and it from heaven to let.
By calling these and such like things,
to mind with inward thought,
Al raging fleshly lust we shall
despise and set at naught:
And weigh as things of little weight
al worldly pleasures vain.
Forsaking quite thentisements sweet,
of hoores and hoorishe train.
Applying our studies by steadfast faith
to God in godliness,
We shall (I trust) by Christ at last
be plast with Saints in bliffe.
Praise be to God our Savior,
and to his name also,
Who grant that to his glory we,
all things by him may do.
A ready Instruction, and godly exercise for an happy death, spoken as it were
in the person of Christ unto the Soul. Translated out of the Book called,
Pharetra diuini amoris.
O Thou soul, as nothing makes the love of the world to seem more folishe,
and sooner provoke unto thee, the happy contempt of al things which are
created, then the true consideration of this short life, and due regard of
temporal death, by which death al worldly endeavors, all earthly honor, all
vading pleasures, all vain thoughts, al hurtful desires, and transitory joy
does perish: So nothing does more rejoice the loving soul, then that it
believes and hops to be associated unto me, and to be altogether drowned in
me. Where henceforward there shall be no evil, no sin, no separation, no danger,
no fear, nor grief, where in perfect charity the soul shall continually
praise, always magnify, steadfastly obey, and perfectly please me. And
likewise it shall continually be with me, where it shall neither require, love,
or affect any thing besides me, but I shall be the sole possessor of it. And
for so much as these things cannot perfeetlie happen unto thee in this life,
till such time as thou shall be plast with me in my kingdom, where al thy
desire shall be satisfied in loving and praising me, where I shall be al in all:
Therefore thou do justly require, and with all thy heart may lawfully desire,
yt which is contained in ye prayer which I have left with thee, which peticion
is, Let thy kingdom come. Therefore (my Daughter) if thou do entirely love
me, if stro^glie thou affectest to come to heaven, if ferue^tlie thou requyrest
to see thy kingdom, which is this estate whereof I do speak: then in this
manner with signs pray thou, that my kingdom may come. Wherein thou shall be
united unto me in perfect charity, and altogether drowned in me. And for that
(as I have said) this can not be, but after death, which caused my Saints in
patience of life, to wyshe for death, which is the very port or entry unto
life. Whereby thou may see that the soul which perfectly loves me, fears
not death. For what does the soul loose by departing out of this unhappy
life? surely nothing but the way to offend, snares of sin, occasions of
ruin, deceiptes of enemies, her own proper fragilitie and fear* and such
like innumerable dangers, which do blind, weake^, and chafe the soul
(passing over the labors of the body) which are always changeable and unstable.

The soul in this world wishes for many things that should not be obtained,
not knowing that which it would have. It coueteth and desires many things
which can not be. The soul being ignorant and blind in many things, walks
in danger and darkness, not knowing how it may be rid from them. Why then
should not the soul willingly wish, and hartelie rejoice, to see it self
delivered from these innumerable sorrows and heaps of dangers?

O thou soul, what do thou fear? Why wyshest not thou for death? Seeing
thou art not hurt by death, nor yet can loose any thing by death, if thou
have forsaken ye love of al worldly things. Wherefore I tell thee, it is
dangerous to love any earthly thing. For to tell thee truly, I say that by
loving them, thou imbracest very danger it self. Therefore I as one that
tedreth thy wealth, do admonish thee, that thou before thy death wilt quite
forget al earthly love, and fear not death if I be he whom thou do only
love in this life. Rejoice then that thou do die, for that is the only
mean whereby thou may come to me. But peradventure thou fear somewhat else,
as ye loss of worldly goods, or some other like thing: Know thou then, that
there is nothing in this world, whatsoever it be that thou do possess (be
it never so grievous unto thee) but needs thou must forgo the same. Thou art
likewise in extreme fear, and stand in great doubt, whether thou art
worthy to be beloved or hated of me. Thou know not how I will accept thee,
neither whether I shall receive thee to peace or pain. O my daughter, the
knowl^dge of these things belongs not unto thee. Wherefore stay and hold thy
self contented for a while. For although thou do all thy life time and at
the very hour of thy death continue in my faith, and fear^st, and hopest in
me: yet can thou not for all this of thee self either live a perfect life, or
dye a godly death. For only by me thou do attain and come to either of
these. How think thou then, if I give thee grace to live well, am I not
likewise able to grant that thou shall dye a happy death? Seeing then that
thou haste and gettest al things by me, why do thou assure thee self of
the one doubting and dispairing in the other? for thou canste not of thee self,
neither live nor dye well. Trust therefore in me, cast al thy care upon me,
turn al thy grief upon me, for as in thy life time, so neither at ye hour
of thy death can thou of thee self withstand any temptation, nor escape
any offense. If in thy life time I did not forsake thee. If in time of
temptation I did strongly assist thee, and strengthened and enabled thee against
thine adversaries: I will likewise do the same for thee at the very last hour.

Thou do never go armed with thine own armor into the feelde, but always
presumest upon me. If thou will lean and stay thee self upon me, I will
fight for thee, and I being thy champyon and defendour, what should thou
then need to fear, which (in respect of thy self) art of no value? And for
the manner and order of thy death take thou no care, for no kind of temporal
death can hinder the Just. Care thou not therefore after what sort thou
dyest, whether in thy bed, or in the feelde, for that ought not to be feared.
After what sort soever thy life is bereft iro^ thee, either by violence or
otherwise, care thou not seeing it is natural to dye. If there be one kind of
temporal death happier then another, then were my Saints unhappy, of whom,
the greatest number (in the sight of the world, and to the judgment of men)
ended their lives with most vylest death. Which of my holy Martyrs has past
over his full course, and ended his life by natural death? Which of the Martyrs
is there yt has been done to death, either upon the painful cross or by
force of wild beasts, or by rage of flaming fire, or by dint of cruel
Tirauntes sword? Not one truly. It hinders not therefore any whit, whether
thou die, either by the raging pestylence, or by the senseless disease of
Apoplexa, or any other death, either in thy bed at home or in the feelde
abroad. Beware and watch thou only, that thou may be found in perfect
faith, hope, and charity, and then no kind of death nor funeral can hinder
thee.

Although I speak to thee (O beloved soul) I do mean and speak these
things also to those which are as yet imperfect, aduising and counsayling you
al to love innoce^cie, and hate evil. What soul soever thou be that offendest,
be sorry and repent, and so repent (if thou do mean to reap the fruits of
true repentance) that thou do not return to thine old sins, nor to ye
occasions thereof. Look always for death, and so prepare thee self for it, as
though every hour should be the instaunt thereof. And lest weak souls should
lack any kind of godly instruction, whereby they might the better provide
them selves to dye; I will add more to this which I have said: Mark well the
words of mine Apostle (which thing the matter it self does plainly show.)
You have no steadfast dwelling, nor permanent city, says he, in this
tra^sitory world: for such a city is only to be looked for in the world to
come, unto the which this world is naught but the way and pilgrimage, which
journey and pilgrimage is ended when your life is determined. Death is the end
of al men, that boundeth and leads directly from ye pilgrimage wherein you
now are, unto the region whereunto you cast your course, in such dyrect sort,
that there is none other way or gate, through which you ca^ enter or depart
out of this Pylgrimage into your country, but only by death.

As there is no assurance of life, so there is an assured certenty of death:
but this indyfferent between the good and the evil, that being mixed in this
perigrination, they be al but strangers, and they al do long to come to ye
blessed kingdom, although they al walk not in the right path. Al you so long
as you are in this journey, although you stray, you may return to the right
way again. And when you come to the end of your journey, eue^ at the very
gates thereof, and at the extreme instant of death, some go from eryle to life,
and other some go to miserable and eternal death.

You ought not therefore lightly to esteem, nor forcelesse with a neglygent
conscience to consider in what sort you should come to death. For then must
you forgo and leave behind you al things, whatsoever you put any trust or
confidence in, whether it be riches, honor, friends, or any other vanity
whatsoever, for at the hour of death they shall profit nothing but must be al
left behind, and you fellowlesse without company shall go alone before the
tribunal seat of almighty God, thereto receive according to your works.

What greater blindness and madness may there be, then to take pleasure or
rejoice in any thing yt may happen unto you whylst you travail in this
journey, or to love any transitory thing yt neither avails or profits the
soul. And as it were cast into a certain sudden madness, with a dry
wythered conscience (without God) to seek for such things as are altogether
fleshly, and rashly to rush and thrust forth after external things only,
neglecting slouthfully time and godly occasions, whereby they might amend their
lives, taking no regard nor heed to the spiritual estate, of their inward
man. And in this manner you do run headlong unto death. O how many are in
this very point deceived. Lo here how they are intraped, wrapped up, and taken
in the deceytful nets and privy snares of this transitory and miserable
world. See how unhappily they are taken captives, and compelled to draw:
the yoke of the devil, that thus unadvisedly come to death, with blind and
hard hearts. O how unhappy be their lives, that neglecting death, prepare
not for their own health. They which hinder the soul, and with pleasure
pamper their flesh, forgoing althinges behouefull and necessary for their
salvation, are worthy to be cut of an cast away.

Every man ought so to live at every hour, as though ye same were the last
hour of his life, wherein he should go to hear the judgment of God. And
right now (if not oftener and always) he ought to call present before his eyes
ye dreadful hour of his departure from ye flesh: for the soul shall be judged
for every word, work and thought. Always and presently thou ought so to
rule thy self, that by thy now doing thou should be found in such a
readiness, as in time to come thou would wyshe thou should be found in,
when undoubted death shall appear. It is therefore the part of a foolish and
mad heart, to defer the correction of life unto that time wherein the end
of life appears, and when there is no further hope of life: At what time we
ought not need to be amended, but rather being amended, we ought to meet our
God. Departing out of this life, thy soul forgoeth not only al offenses, but
also leaves al other things behind it. And yet art thou not said then to
forsake sin, when thou can sin no more. Therefore whilst thou have power
to sin, forsake it, seeing that true repentance can never be to late:
notwithstanding that such repentance as is deferred to ye last hour, is much
doubted whether it may be called true repentance, or not. If ye fear of
damnation do so much trouble thee at ye hour of thy death, take heed then yt
thou prepare what remedy thou can to prevent the same. I fear me, thy fear
grows not by charity (for that thou did offense me thy Lord God) but that
it comes only of the proper love thou bear to thee self. Thy only cause
of grief is, for that by thine own offenses thou have gained death and
eternal damnation: whereas if thou had truly repented, thy chiefest cause
of sorrow should be, in that thou wast vnobedient, stubborn, unthankful,
reprocheful, and that thou yeeldedst not due honor unto me. This over great
lame^ting of thine own cause, does justly argue, yt if there had been no
danger, or if sin should freely escape unpunished, thou would never
bewail thy sinful estate, although you had continued therein a thousand
years. The true repentance, whereby the soul is reconciled unto me, is
grounded only upon charity, and does continually lament and repent, that it
has so often despised me, the best, the greatest, and faithfullest Lord God,
Creator and redemer: And that it has exalted it self so hyely, so proudly, so
arrogantlie and vnobedientlie against me, it being but dust and of no value.

Whosoever he be that means to dye well, let him (as mine Apostle teaches)
live soberlie, justly, and godly. For after a good and just life, follows an
happy death. For the death of my Saints are precious in my sight, by what death
soever they do depart out of this life, whether it be by water, or by fire, or
in their beds, And for a preparation thereunto (in the meditation whereof a
wise man spe^deth the whole course of his natural life) take here this short
exercise, whereby every Christian may in such sort admonish and direct
himself in such order, as he needs not to fear death, so as he be found
according to this instruction, it shall suffice.

Wholesome admonitions to dye.
WHatsoener things at the hour of thy death thou would have to be done,
do thou the same presently: and whatsoever thou art by duty bound to do,
commit not the charge thereof unto others. For if thou thy self wast negligent
and careless of thine own wealth and business, how think thou that others
will take any heed or regard to thy health? Believe not uncertain things and
vain promises, neither commit thyselfe to doubtful chances. Live and so
behave thee self, that thou may be so quieted in thy conscience, as though
this were thy dying day. Never go unto thy bed, before thou have accoumpted
with thy self the manner and state of thy life. Examine thy self, calling thy
heart with all thy senses to judgment, and know whether thou be the better or
the worse for this day. Never go thou to bed with such a conscience, wherein
thou fear to dye. If thou do find thee self in such state as thou do
fear to die, search out the cause thereof: for peradventure there be some
sins, of the which as yet thou have not perfectly repented thy self, or else
thou forsakest to acknowledge and confess them, or peradventure thou do
refuse to abstain from the occasions thereof: or thou live under the danger
or obedience of some man: or as a perverse man thou do continue in malice, or
in the unjust withholding of other men's goods: or thou art too much addicted
and bent to the covetous desire of worldly wealth and carnal sensuality: or
ravished with the unlawful lust of some creature: or being so deeply drowned
in ye greedy desire of earthly and visible things, in such sort as you can
by no means be withdrawn from them, coveting for nothing of that which
belongs to the Soul, foolishly looking and lyking in all external things,
lothing and vomiting out al heavenly things. The cause that moves thee to
fear death, is, that thy guyltie conscience foretells thy fearful mind the
torments which are provided for thy sinful soul after thy death. Which
soever of these rests and raygneth in thee, cut them off, persecute them,
and with all thine endeavor do what lies in thee to deliver thy self from
them. Embrace my cross, and follow my footesteppes, and they shall be a great
furtheraunce to thee in this thine attempt, and with rigor of mind and holy
hatred against thy self, proclayme thou open war against al vices, with a
determinate will not to sin, renewing oftentimes this holy battle without
ceassing: And least thou should be overthrown for weakness and want of
courage, contemplate and earnestly behold the examples of me and of my Saints
commending thy self to the prayers and exhortations of good me^, reposing thy
self with inward and wholesome inspiration, be occupied in prayer and godly
reading, be never idle, love solitariness and silence. These and such like
drive away evil thoughts from the heart, and banish the fear of death. When
thou co^mest to ye end of every day, say unto thy self, Now my life is
shortened by one day. And when thou rysest in ye morning, say: O God I am by
one night nearer to death then I was.

An Exercise to be used in the Morning, or at other times when you think
convenient.
Almighty and eternal God, my Creator and lover, I praise, adore and bless
thee, for that in mine offenses and ungratefulness thou have so mercifully
and leysurelie forborne and suffered me to live even to this hour, whereunto by
thy benefits thou have brought me, giving to me thine unworthy and reprocheful
servant, both life and necessaries thereunto belonging, appointing Angels to
be my keepers. O good God, who knows whether till evening my life shall be
prolonged, or what death is appointed form. O merciful Lord God and heavenly
father, grant that I may with hearty repentance truly repent ^^y sins, and
inwardly bewail that ^^et I offended thy godly majesty. Suffer not my soul
to depart this body, before it be (through thy mercy perfectly reconciled
and adopted unto thee by thy grace) bedeckt with thy merits and virtues,
inflamed with perfect charity, and acceptable unto thee, according unto thy
will.

O merciful Lord Jesus Christ, if those things which I desire do stand
with thy pleasure, grant them I beseech thee. although I be not worthy to be
heard: yield and give I beseech thee, of thine infinite mercy, that by the
merits of thy passion I may be purged from al my sins. And that at the hour
of my death I may be stricken with true and vehement contrition, and being
knitte with thee in perfect charity, I may immediately flit unto thee my sweet
Redeemer safely and freely from al dampnation. Nevertheless in all these my
requests, O best beloved Jesus, I do fully and wholly offer and resign my self
unto thee, to be altogether disposed and ordered according to thy will, and to
suffer for thy glorious sake: desyring this one thing at thy hands, that thou will remember my fragilitie, unworthiness, unstableness, and miseries,
together with thine own goodness and most charitable mercy, praying thee
never to forsake or leave me, but yt thou wylt always possess and govern me,
according to thy will, Amen.

An oblation of Christ, and of his merits, unto his Father.
OMnipotent and benign Father, all the pains, dolours, checkes, punishments,
rebukes and labors of thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, lamb
immaculate, which he upon his own body has suffered for my sake: his travels,
with the afflietion of al his members for me: his bloodshed, and feet nailed
for me: his most noble and godly soul severed from his delicate body for me:
his infinite virtues and merits, the strength also of his body and soul, and
al things ye hare life in him yielded to death for my redemption: inseperately
notwithstanding united with ye Deity. Christ also thy blessed son, God and
man omnipotent, both weakened looking down, and glorious working miracles, and
hanging upon the Cross: I do here offer unto thee in exaction and satisfaction
of my sins and all the worlds, and in mortifying and extinguishing of al my
passions, evil affections, and sinful vices, in steed and supply of al my
negligence, and in the laud and praise of al thy graces and benefits. O
heavenly father, have compassion upon me for his sake, have thou mercy upon me
for the love of thy beloved son Jesus Christ.

THere be^ which do prefixe a certain kind of exercise unto them selves, as
death were present, preparing themselves every five days continually, in
such sort as though they should dye presently.

The first day, they do remember death, the presidentes and horror thereof, to
whom they do wyllingly yield.

The second day, they do think upon their sins, and them so busy and
diligently they do confess, as though presently after their confession they
should die, passing over that day in sobbes and tears.

The third day, with the greatest devotion they can, they do prepare
themselves, coming to the holy Eucharist, and vittayle themselves therewith,
for their relief in their journey.

The fowrth day, they do continually pray unto God for ye inspiration of the
holy ghost, whereby they may lighten and soften the hardness of their hearts: and
thus they do continue all that day.

The fifth day, with fervent devotion they make their humble supplications unto
God, for a spyrituall death, whereby they may perfectly mortify them selves,
and yet continually live to God.

To each of these days a man may apply fyt Psalms and Prayers.

And lastly they do give hearty thanks to almighty God for his innumerable
benefits bestowed upon them at al times during their lives.

Spiritual counsayles at the hour of death.
MY Daughter, you being brought to infyrmitie, prepare thy soul to God, taking
such order for thy temporal goods, that there be no strife nor complaint for
them after thy death. Nothing profits the soul more then to lead a just and
innocent life, and to do good to every man in thine own life time, and
whatsoever thou would that others should do for thee, be thou careful and
diligent to do ye same thy self. If after death thou do go to everlasting
pain, what does the fulfylling of thy Testament, the pomp of thy Funeral,
alms, or sacrifice avail thee after thy death? Do these things thy self in
thine own life days, that thou may be delivered not only from sin, but
also increased in my grace, thou may escape damnation: and I preserving thee
from thine offenses, thou may continue and perceuer in good works unto the
end. When death approaches see thou do rid thy self from al cares and
worldly labors, that with fervent desire thou may affect to come to me
without spotte, being full of faith, not trusting any thing to thine own
works, but let the hope of thy relief be only planted in mine ineffable
mercy. In this faith altogether betaking thy self, and al other things which
thou have in this world, unto my provident will, humbly and devoutly receive
thou the Sacraments of my body and blood, which have their virtue only by my
merits, and were by me given unto the Church as a treasure. Although that many
men have often times abused them, as they have done many other good things:
never thelesse, receive thou them with a fervent zeal and a sure faith, unto
thy everlasting joy.

An Exercise, wherein the weak man may resign himself. to God.
O My saythful lover, O merciful Lord Jesus Christ, grant that with all my
heart and mind I may perfectly understand that which I say. As the Heart
desires to come to the fountaynes of fresh waters, so does my soul desire
to come to thee, O Lord. I have chosen rather to be an abject and an
underling in the house of my god, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners.
Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shall praise thee for
ever. By soul does thirse to come to thee (O Lord) when shall I appear
before thy face. O my soul why art thou heavy, why troublest thou me? Hope in
the Lord, for I will trust in him, the health of my countenance, and my God.
Turn thy face upon me thy servant, save me in thy mercy, O Lord, that I be
not confounded forever. I call upon thee, linger not from me my God. Look back
and assist me, a poor man left unto thee, for thou art the releeuer of
Orphantes, thou art the refuge of al my trouble that compasses me. O my
triumph, deliver me from them that assault me. O thou Lord God of my health,
come and help me, for thou art my strength, my helper and refuge, do not
forsake me, nor despise me. O God salute me with welcome, behold I come unto
thee my God, whom I have neglected and despised, for all the earth is full of
thy mercy. I do therefore fly unto thee most merciful God, receive me
according to thy word, (by which thou saydest, I will not the death of a
sinner) and I shall live, do not consounde me contrary to mine expectation. My
God, I crave not for this temporal life, but I do only invoke and call upon
thee with all my heart, which art the eternal life. Alas my best beloved. Alas
my only Lord and God, that ever I offended thee, that ever I neglected thy
inspirations and counsayles, that ever I loved any thing besides thee, my Lord
God, this is it that repents me. I beseech thee therefore to grant unto me,
that during my life I may with all my heart truly and faithful lie repent and
bewail these mine offenses. I would I could power forth and up before thee,
all the drops of my blood and tears, in true repentance. Lord Jesus I crave
and look neither for death nor life, but only for thy good will. Let al
things be done according to thy good will and pleasure. Seeing it pleases thee
that I must dye, O Jesus receive my soul, grant that I may have eternal rest
with thee. If it be thy pleasure, O Jesus, that my life shall be prolonged, I
have determined with all my heart to beseech and ask, that thou wylt most
graciously grant it me, through the help of thy mercy and grace, and so to
offer my self unto thee as an offering to thy glory and will. O best beloved
Jesus, for that I have past over my life in contempt of thy glorious name,
living out of thine obedience, grant now, I beseech thee, that henceforward
I may wyllingly spe^de al ye strength of my soul and body, and all the rest of
my time granted by thee, unto thy glory and will.

O Mercyful Jesus, be present with me, and mercifullye help me in these my
pains and miseries, and if greeuouser pains shall happen to oppress me
(which for mine offenses I know I have deserved far greuouser and greater
then these) grant that I may suffer and bear them patiently. Osweete Jesus,
although I had never offended, nor deserved punishment in thy sight, yet to
thy glory and will, in these pains, as in every other, I do offer and resign
my self unto thy Majesty, not trusting in mine own virtue, but only in the
multitude of thy merits, upon which I do presume, and do invoke and call
upon thee, that thou may by thy virtue erect and strengthen the weakness and
unsteadfastness of my soul, and that thou will comfort it with strength, and
strengthen it with patience, that I do not fall down, being vanquished with
adversity and temptation, nor weried with weakness of mind: but being
altogether consumed in the flame of thy sweet fire and love, I may only
long for thee, and that with a thirsty appetite I may cool my thirst in
thee, that I may think upon thee, and altogether long for thee, and that I may
forsake, disdain, and contemn the world and al things therein, and that I may
give thee like thanks, both in joy and sorrow.

O Most loving Jesus, I have chosen thee, I wish and look for thee, I run to
meet thee, and I do renounce all things that are not of thee. Whatsoever thou will I will: and whatsoever thou wylt not, the same I will forsake. Whatsoever
thou do detest, I do refuse it: and whatsoever shall hereafter happen unto
me contrary to this my present mind, I beseech thee my God, not to impute
the same unto me, neither according unto that, but according to this present
choice of my soul judge me. For all things which I ought not to do, I do
here utterly forsake them. And if at any time hereafter I shall chance by any
sinister occasion to agree to any thing that may be a cause to withdraw thy n^^
did from me, I do (...) this (...) utterly (...) and d^t^^^tlys satile.

O Lord I^^^, if it please three, or if if may stand (...) thy gl^^y, ^^au^t
I be^^eche thee, in this my present life, that I (...) and (...), wherein I
have o^^^nded, ^^om all the p^ines (...) ^^^^^uedlie I ^^ght to (...). And that
th^^ (...) of thy (...) ^^^ned farry afte^ (...) (...). Lord Jesus (...) my
(...).

(...) or l^st (...) thereto be say, (...) to be ^^ought (...) up on at the
hour (...) (...) seath. (...) IN the name of the Father, and of the Some, and
of the holy Ghost. I H^ a wretched sinner, ^^deemed with the precious blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, through his great merry and love, and not by my
merits do confess and ^^knowledge openly, either by this writing, or by these
my words, before God omnipotent, and before you that are here as witnesses (if
there needs any) that I a^^^^^d do dyethe true ser^^unt of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as it becom^eth a true Christian. I do believe and confess generally
all and every part and Article of the Christian faith, wherein every
Christian believer is ^^^^^de is beleeue^. And chi^s^ie the v^iuersall (...)
^o^teyned in the twelve Articles of the Christian faith, either openly
expressed, or by reason excluded. According as through the holy Ghost by the
twelve Apostles, and by the true gospel they were delivered unto us. And to be
short, I believe so much as a true Christian ought. And I do with all my
heart rejoice to dye in this immovable and fyrme Faith, holding this scripture
in my hands, and offering it up, as a most defensible and inuinsible shield
against all the invasions and deceiptes of the devil. And if (which God
forbid, it come to pass, that by the temptation of the devil, or by the
violence of my disease, I shall happen to think, speak, or do any thing
contrary to this pretestation: Or that I shall fall into any error, misbelefe,
or despair: If any of these do chance unto me I do here in the presence of
you al reuobe, and utterly renounce the same, in such sort as I would do if I
had my perfect senses. For this I call you al which are here present, and thee
my good Angel unto whose custody I am committed, that you as witnesses may
testify this my protestation and confession, before the omnipotent and
righteous Judge.

As much as in me lies, I do here clearly forgive and remit al injuries
iuries whatsoever have been done unto me: And the like I do ask (...) their
hands, who^^eit her by word or dee de I have at any time ^^le^ded. And
cheessie I do request to be partaker of the bitter Passion, and innocent death
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that my natural and voluntary death may, through
thy grace, stand for all my sins.

I do also intitely reque^^ and desire you all that be here present, to say the
Lords prayer with me, and for me. Our Father which art in Heaven, h^^o (...)
be thy (...). Thy kingdom thing. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
^eue us this day out ^^yl^e bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation. But
deliver us from al evil. For thine is ye kingdom, the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever, Amen.

Would to God I had never sinned nor offended against my God, nor my (...)
periors (...) against my neighbors, nor my self:

Lastly I ge^^^ th^^bes (...) tha^^^^ghty God, for all his (...) ^^s^^wed upon
west. And I comm^^de my body and soul into thy (...), that my soul may he
saved through the bitter passion of our Lord (...) Christ, to whom be praise
(...), and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

How fearful and bitter corporal death is of it self, and the mu^^^ causes
thereof,
AS man naturally desires to be in this world, to live, and to rejoice: So
is it also natural for him to fear death, and the pains and presydents
thereof. Virtuous and perfect men (not withstanding) are accustomed to wysh for
death, wr^o^^^ch as it is the end of the myseties and offenses of this present
life, and the entry like wise into the felicity and joy to come. They do
therefore covet death, which love no vn^^w^all thing in this life, and
despises and settethat naught all the vanities, pleasutes, tiches, homours, and
prosperities of this world, with a most ^^dent affection aspyring to the most
blessed sight of their God, whom above al other things they do with all their
hearts entirely love, and inwardly burn with the hearty desire of heavenly
pleasures and eternal wealth, saying with the prophet David, As ye Heart
desires to come to the fountains of fresh waters, so does my soul desire
thee, O Lord. My soul has thirsted to come unto God the living fountain.
When shall I come and appear before the face of God? And to ye same effect
says Paul, I unhappy man, who will deliver me from the body of this death?
That is to say, from this mortal and miserable body. Also, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Nevertheless, though ye consideration of
death of it self be a most bitter pain, and that the loss of life to a
human (...) is natura^le fearful and hor^^^^, insomuch that our Lord Jesus
Christ (death approch^ig) by natural ^ea^e of death, which he took willingly
upon him, began to fear, to ware weerie, and to be heavy. Such w^^e^a^e (...)
of death is pro^^^able, for it withdraws man from cau^^ detectatio^, and from
the vanities of this world. He that will wisely consider how pawful an end,
how bitter a death, and how grievous a sorrow does daily approach unto him
(and peradventure is presently at hand) he will refrain him self from
dyssolute and vain secutitie, from sportes, games, and laughters: Saying with
Solomon, I have accounted laughing for error: And to myrthe I have said, Why
do thou deceyne in vain? And that they be so in deed, the wise Solomon
does in another place witness the same. Better it is (says he) to g^e into a
sorrowful house: then into a ho^^ueting house. I^^thoue (that is the sorrowful
house) man is admonished of the^de of all men, and living he thinks upon that
which shall happen, and is to come. As the Scripture says: Blessed is he that
is always fearful. And by this the old Doctors Hier^ome and Augustine
(...) write that Plato (that excellent and most noble Philosopher) did forgo
the delicate and beautiful City of Athens* with ^^^tayne of his Scholars,
choosing rather to dwell in an old thinous Vyllage, being often with
Earthquakes and Tempests well near ouerturned so that by the frace of dangers
and death, they might in themselves mortify the vicas of the flesh, and
withdraw themselves from concupiscence and all other vices.

For so much as the Gentyles have done this, how much more (I pray you)
ought Christians to withdraw themselves from delectations, by remembering the
dangers of death? And that by this (the preme ditation of death) there might
grow in us such an healthful fear. The disposition of him that dies is to be
considered, and to behold the present hour of the separation of the soul from
ye flesh, whereof man has a natural fear, for then man altogether waxes
pale, his feet waxes cold, his weak hands becomes black, his
countenance changes color, his eyes becomes dim, and sinketh in, and
for intolerable pangues of pains they are turned upward. See how his heart
waxes faint, his forehead shrinketh, all his members waxes flyffe, his chinne
falls, his pulses changes their course, and his breath gathering it self
from the innermost bowels do altogether forsake the body. The pains of death
do then appear, and deadly pangues, stinging with the mortal stinges the very
heart, which first of al begins to live, and last of al does dye. And last
of al there comes and breaks forth a dead sweat, showing that Nature is
overcome. And thus being vanquished by grief the soul is cast out from her
dwelling place. If we will consider this disposition of them that dye, and do
dilygentlie imagine, that the like will short: lie happen unto our selves, there
is no doubt but we will consider the healthful fear of death.

THE MANNER how to dye well.
Written in Latin by Petrus de Soto.
AL men must needs dye, a punishment assigned unto us for that sin of our
first parents. Mortality (that is ^euitable death) is test and cast upon us,
for that Adam and Eua did eat of the forbidden fruit, whereby they sinned
against the Lord. And as sin was first committed, so death presently followed.
By syn they lost life, and gained death. For as by doing well they should have
obtained immortality to themselves and their posterity: so by doing the
contrary they have gained death and mortality to them and us for ever, from
the general sentence whereof none shall escape, lest that any one should have
cause to exalt himself above another, if he might freely escape the same.

The certentie of death, and the uncertain hour thereof.
NOthing is more certain then death, but the hour, the place, and manner
thereof, none knows. For who is he that knows when, where, and after what
sort he must dye? whether he shall dye a good, or a shameful death? whether
he shall end his life by sword, fire, or water, or by any other kind of
death? No not one truly. For death (more diligent then our shadows) at al
times and places continuallye gives his attendance, laying for us his trappe,
thinking at every hour unawarely to entrap us therein. Who is then so foolish,
as to assure himself to live but till night, of what age soever he be of? For
what other thing is our life, but the very beaten pathe, and straight way to
death? He therefore that is wise, looks, and prepares him self for death,
and at al times and in all places is continually ready to dye. For death is at
the gates of old men, and lies in a readiness to oppress and overtake young
men: the hour when the Lord reserueth and keeps to himself, to the end
that we being uncertain when to dye, should the rather prepare our selves to
die. And whylst we have our perfect health and memory, we ought to acknowledge
our redeemer, to call upon him, betaking our selves altogether unto his
clemency and great mercy. And in no wise to detract the time to the last
hour and extreme instant of death. For death most commonly assaulteth and
oppresses those whom he seethe most unwilling and the worst provided. And as
death finds the man, so man shall find death. The perfect man dies in
security and gladness, the just manful of hope, faith, and assured confidence,
and the unjust dies in stare and desperation.

Why Just men do wish for death.
WE do continually walk amongst innumerable dangers, that is the dangerous
snares of our aunciente enemy the devil, the bloody swords of the wicked, the
intolerable greefes, pains, and labors of the body: The habitation or
dwelling place of the body wherein we dwell is ruinous, the worldely sea wherein
we fail is full of storms and dangerous wrackes, no earthly thing wherein we
can delight our selves lacks great perils, and that wherein we think we
find great felicity, therein always consists our most misery and
calamities. But yet our benign Savior does not without heavenly providence
appoynte and suffer, that this our mortal life should be so replenished and
filled with those so great calamities, pains and perils: And also does
(according to his profounde wisdom) prouidentlye ordeyne and appoynte them (I
mean those temporal pains which we do abide (to the end that we should
repent us of our former sins, and amend our present life, and diligently to
care for the life to come, and that we should willingly contemn the world,
and set at naught this transitory life, erecting and lifting up our minds,
souls, and hearts unto the almighty God* earnestlye affecting the glorious
and everlasting life, with fervent desire from the bottom of our hearts. Our
forefathers which in times past tasted but very little of this glorious and
heavenly sweetness, did yet abandon al earthly vanities, abhorred the delight
of the world, despised and quite forgot this transitory life, most painfully
laboring with all diligence to obtain the unspeakable pleasures of heaven,
greedely thirsting for ye eternal bliss, saying with the Apostle* O wretched
man, who shall deliver me from this mortal body. My desire is to be dissolved,
and to be with thee, O christ. for as the Heart desires to come to the
fou^tains of fresh water^, so does my soul, O Lord, desire to come to ^hee.
Although death brings unto us such and so many plea^^res, and that through
it the soul is carried thither where it shall e^^^auy live: y^^ we ought not to
d^^^^te nor argue of ye rest of our life, which is pres^^lbed by God, neither
ought were be the cause^s or proc^re^ of our own death. For as we (...) not
hither by (...) own appoyn^ment: so ought we not to be ^h^ ^^^^rs of ou^ end,
before the ^ime appointed unto v^ by god. Hereby I judge him to be altogether
forgetful of himself, and little to regard his own state, that thinks his
time in this world to be but short, seeing it is su^^^fent to live a short time
and small age, so that we spend the same in doing well. For what matter is it
wheth^^ one dye young or old, for so much as the number of years, nor length
of time, do make neither blessed nor unblessed, happy nor unhappy. And that by
coming to death (the end of al humain kind) we shall aryue in a safe port
and quiet harborowe, free and safe from all the dangerous storms and
troublesome broils of this world.

The death of the just man.
NOthing ought to be more wished for, then to be in the hands of God* wherein
the Souls of the just quietly rest. Their death is acceptable to the Lord, if
a man may ca^ that death, which is the greatest pleasure yt can happen to good
men, for it is to them the end of labor and care, the winning of victory, the
way of life, the entry into perfect security, and joining of the soul to God
ye thiefest goodness, which is of al other the greatest reward that men can
have. The departing of the just man from this life, is the vyage and passage
from trouble to rest, from pains to glory, from poverty to a kingdom, from
fear to security, from grief to joy, and from death to that life, which
only ought to be called life. And to conclude, death is naught else unto him
but an escape from prisonment, a return from banishment, a finishing of
labors, an arriual to the port of rest, an ending of pylgrimage, a lyghtning
of his burden, a delyueraunce from a ruinous house, an ending of euylles, an
escape from dangers, and paying to nature her duty, and entrye into his
country of everlasting joy and glory: By means where of that day wherein
the Saints depart hence, and are received into Heaven, is commonly called
their natall day, for that when they depart hence, then do they begin to
life, and by dying in this world, they enter into a better.

The death of the evil.
THe death of a sinner is most wretched of al euyls, for there by he loses the
world, the greatest aspect and familyer fellowship of his best beloved: also by
it ye soul is severed from the body, and is condemned to abide ye affliction
of Hell fire. For the pains of one co^demened soul is far worse and
greeuouser then al ye torments of all the holy Martirs, yea though they were al
gathered in one. For ye sinner has horror and fear at his departing, grief
and sorrow in his journey, shame and confusion in the sight of God the upright
judge, and incredible terror, and dread in departing from this life, and
entering into an unknown Region, wherein fearful spyrites and wicked Angels
meet the soul, and pull it to eternal pains.

The goods of the wicked are divided into three: First, his soul to the
devil: his body to the worms: and his temporal goods to his heirs, which are
commonly ungrateful, and too prodigal.

The dangers of death.
THe devil does with all his engines and snares seek to entrap man's Soul at
the very hour of death (if God of his special goodness assyste him not)
tempting him first of the verity of his faith, and persuading him to forgo the
same, putting him in remembrance of his committed offenses, thinking with the
greatness of them to drive him into despair. And at ye same instaunt, commonly
a pang more painful then tongue can tell assayleth him, which is, the separation
of the soul from the body. That pain is so great, that as then he can
remember naught else but the deadly pa^ges of death only. Therefore it is
written, In death (O Lord) none remembers thee. And Saint Augustine says,
The sinner is stricken with such animaduersity, that dying he forgets him
self, who whylst he lived remembered not God. Saint Barnarde also treating of
the ho^^e of death, Cursed spyrites (s^^th he) watches at my doors, and
^^rrible devils attend my coming, so that I dare not go forth. S^^^^ lie I
am not able to escape their haudes, unless the Lord defend me. But he who
tedeemed me will defend and faue me.

How we should comfort those* that be in danger of death.
To the end that every man^night learn the right way how to dye, I have
gathered together these. sewe lines following out of diverse good Authors.

Three exhortations to the sick.
1. Consider good Brother that all men, of what condition or degree soever they
be, must once dye, some sooner, and some later, according to the time
appointed them by God, to whom we are al subject (to pay unto Nature her fees)
whenever his omnipotency shall think good, who has appointed this world
unto us as a bayting Inn, and not to be our continual dwelling place. There is
no cause therefore why you should so much affect this transitory life, for by
how much the longer your life is prolonged, by so much y^ more your syns are
increased. And y^ elder you grow in age, the more your offenses are multiplied
for every day vice increases, and virtue decays. We ought therefore to be
the more wylling to dye, for ye by flytting from this poor mortal life, we
shall come to the everlasting and blessed life.

2. Acknowledge good brother most thankfully* Gods bountiful goodness toward
thee, in that that hitherto of his unspeakable mercy he has permitted thee
to live, yea and for that at this present extremity of death, his highness
has granted thee thy perfect senses, reason, and understanding, whereby thou
may acknowledge thy bounden duty unto his heavenly Majesty. And in that he
has not oppressed, not prevented thee with sudden death: and for that also he
has of his merciful goodness called thee unto his true and unfeigned faith,
through which by his help thou shall be brought to his everlasting kingdom and
eternal inheritance. For this and al other his innumerable benefits, give
unto his highness most hearty thanks, and altogether betake thy self unto
his endless mercy, humbly craving pardon of him for thine offenses.

3. Consider that God the Father has given and yielded his well-beloved son,
in whom he took great delyght, to be crucified and tormented with innumerable
tribulations, tortures, and pains, and to suffer most vile and bitter death
for us most wretched sinners. Seeing therefore thou have in this transitory
life committed and done innumerable sins and heinous offenses, which
deserves far greeuouser and greater pains and punishments then be
assigned unto thee. Thou ought therefore patiently to bear ye pains and
panges of this thy deserved disease and death.

Christ for thine offenses most willynglie and patiently suffered death, and
the holy Martyrs and Apostles with all their mind most wyllingly embraced
death for his names sake. Know thou therefore, that what manner of death soever
thou suffrest, is much less painful then theyrs, for will thou, nyl thou,
die thou must, therefore in the name of Christ good brother take it patiently.

Questions to be asked of him that lies sick, by the Minister or any other
godly person.
1 Will thou live and dye in the true faith of Jesus Christ, as a true
Christian?

I will.

2 Wylt thou ask forgeuenes of him for all thine offenses committed against
his holy majesty, and for that thou have not worthily honored him?

I do ask.

3 Have thou not determined with thy self to alter thy trade of life into a
better, if it shall please Gods goodness yt thou shall escape this disease?

I have determined.

4 Do thou not humbly crave and beseech him to grant thee grace not to
decline from this thy good intent, that thou may repentauntlye bewail thy
former faults, and that thou may henceforwarde continue in all goodness?

I do require.

5 Do thou not heartily forgive all offenses committed against thee?

I do forgive.

6 Wylt thou not earnestly ask forgeuenes of al them whom thou have in any
wise offended?

I do ask.

7 Doste thou not clearly cast out of thy heart al envy, malice, and hatred,
whatsoever thou bear to any creature, and willingly be reconciled in perfect
charity to every man?

I am willing.

8 Will thou willingly restore what soever thou have wrongfully taken or
withholden from any man?

I will.

9 Do thou not patiently take in good worth these pains for the name of God?

I do.

Prayers to be said at the hour of death.
INto thy hands (O Lord) I commend my soul, thou haste redeemed me, O Lord
God of truth.

Jesus Christ the Father of mercy, make me one of thy servants, help me
in my extreme necessity, Succor my needeful and desolate soul, O Lord my
god, that it be not devoured by helhoundes.

For the honor and virtue of thy bitter Passion, most mighty Lord Jesus
Christ, command that my name may be registered among the number of thine
elect.

O my Creator and redeemer Jesus Christ, I yield my self unto thee, forsake
me not, be hold I fly unto thee, succor me, and reprove me not.

O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living God, put thy Passion, Cross and
death, betwixt my soul and thy judgment.

Now, O Lord, according unto thy will have mercy upon me, and command that
my soul be received into thy peace.

Let that sweet voice, O Lord, sound in the ears of my soul, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise.

The manner how How to foresee that things go rightly with any when he
dies.
IF the sick man do waver, stray, or doubt any thing of the verity of his
faith, put him in remembrance of the Apostles and holy Martyrs, which for the
defense of this true faith have suffered all kinds of torments and pains.

If he be in despair, then tell him, that although his offenses be never so
great and many, yet the goodness of our mercyful Lord is much more, for his
mercies do exceed the quantity of all our effences, which he of his goodness
offers in common to every man, lest he himself do wylfully refuse the
same: for his mercy is infinite and without number. All the offenses that ever
were committed since the beginning of the world may be numbered, al which are
clerly washed away with the least drop of the blood of our lord Jesus Christ,
which he shed at the time of his bitter passion. Our Lord God of his great
clemency was ready to call unto his mercy Judas, the wickedst man that ever
lived, when he said unto him, My freende. Yet for that he did despair, he was
condemned, and so sinned more by falling into despair, then by betraying of
his master our Savior Jesus Christ, the immaculate Lamb, and only begotten
son of God the Father. And lastly put in thy mind, that the forgiveness of
sins is an Article of our faith, by which is signified unto us, that how
often and how grievous soever our offenses are, ye by true repentance of our
sins yet shall obtain true remission for them: whereof, whosoever doubts, he
is no true Christian.

If you see that he do not presently yield up the Ghost, then read to him the
history of the Passion, or some other good and Godly history (wherein he
delighted most when he was in health (or the commandments of God, to the
end that he may with more perfectnes repent him self, if he have ought
committed against them,

If for lack of speech he be not able to answer with words, then let
him answer in mind, and with outward signs express his conscience, for
they are (through Gods mercy) sufficient to obtain grace.

Put him no wise in remembrance of his wife, children, friends, or temporal
wealth, unless it be necessary for his spiritual health:

Put him not in ouermuche hope of bodyly health, lest by that means he might
withdraw his mind from the spiritual care that he has of his soul: For by
the health of the soul he should seek for the health of the body, only
requiringe it at Gods hand, if his goodness shall think it most meet and
best for his soul. For God is a furtherer of the pacient and well disposed,
and corporal diseases bring for the most part langour and grefe to the soul.
We should therefore first provide for our soul, and repent us of our sins,
before we take any care of our bodily health.

Hereafter follows a brief Dialogue touching the day of Judgment. Between
Raymundus, and Dominicus.
I Have (my Raymundus) all this long time since our last communication been
very desirous to know how our mercyful Savior Christ will in the end reward
every man. Wherefore I pray you of your courtesy show me somewhat touching
this point. Raym: My freende Dominicus, I grant to thy request, for it is
not conueniente that we leave man (of whom hitherto we have conferred)
unfinished. Seeing we have treated of his creation, and seeing we have spoken
of his reparation: we will now talk somewhat touching his final judgment.
God works three ways concerning man, that is to say, in creation,
reformation, and in judging him most iustlye according to his works. Seeing
then man is the lively and magnificente work of God, and above al creatures
most like unto his Maker, he ought not therefore to be lest unfinished and
vnpertected. And for that he can not come to the very last end of perfection
before his life be examined and judged, that according to the quality of it
he may receive reward at the last retribution, either to eternal pain, or
to everlasting glory. Therefore it is necessary to confer in few words, of
this last and general judgment, and by certain natural reasons to show taa^
is to come. Domi. I beseech you so to do, for I am determined with all my heart
to hear you. Raym. We will prove that the judgment is to come, by the very
nature of joy and gladness them selves. It must needs be, that the just manne
for his justice shall so magnifycently rejoice, that he cannot rejoice more
perfectly. And that the wickedman for his iniquity be cast into heaviness, as
there may be no^^reater. And that this may be do^^, the general judgment must
of (...) sh^^ be pronounced, wherein good men may receive al gladness and be
praised of all men: and Reprobates condemned of all men, may receive eternal
heaviness. There are but two things iudicable, that is, a good life, and an
evil life. And for that contrary things being put together, each of them
gives better light to the other. Therefore the general subment is to come,
wherein the good in comparison of the evil, shall most glocrously shine. And the
evil in comparison of the good, shall be contaminated with utter confusion.
Domi. This which you say is terrible, and ought to move the hearts of wicked
men. But is this the last retribution of al, or shall this be done to the soul
of man only, or unto it altoge alther with the flesh.

The general judgment of the dead requires an universal resurrection.
RAym. I have said in the fo^mer Chapter, that the general judgment
appertains to mankind, and to human nature belongs both a body and soul.
For as there is a corporal nature and a spiritual nature distinetly: so there
is a corporal and a spiritual nature united. And for that this nature is both
iuditable and rewardable: it is therefore necessary that it be judged both in
body and soul. And yt this may be done, there must be a resurrection of al
bodies, ye as the foul with ye body, and in the body, has either sinned or
done justly: so it may like wise with the body receive that that is adjoined
unto it. And because that this last judgment is the fynal retribution of all
bodies, there must therefore be a general resurrection of all the dead, and
the universal judgment and the resurrection of ye dead are inseperably linked
together in one chain. Moreover, the resurrection of the dead is necessary
for the accomplishment of al. The very children which of them selves have not
offended, for the accomplyshment of all, must needs rise with others.

Furthermore, either none, or all shall rise again: But Christ very man
already from death has risen: Therefore all men shall rise again. For
resurrection is incident to human nature. Neither is it impossible to do that
thing which is once done. As a grain of come falling into the earth, being
dead and growing again, brings fruicte manyfolde: So Christ being dead and
risen again, works an in^^merable resurrection of bodies.

As that resurrection was not wrought in Christ by virtue of humanity: so
neither shall it be wrought in us, out by power divine. The unfaithful men
think that God is not able to raise up living flesh out of dead consumed
ashes. As God was able to bring forth innumerable kinds of things out of the
earth at one: so may he now easilye raise again the same bodies which already
has been, out of their own ashes. As the justice of God requires the same, so
the majesty of his virtue is able to do the same. Moreover, seeing God was able
to make so many bodies which were not at all, is he not like wise able to
repair the bodies which are perished? Furthermore, if God has with his
mightys hand made some incorruptible: bodies whe^fore then should he not be
able to repair our corporal bodies, and to make the^^ i^^^ortal?

I think I shall greatly further thee, if I can by reason of the power and
honor of God, prove the geuerall judgment to come. For seeing that God of his
own free will, without the request or compulsio^ of any has created human
nature, when there was none: and seeing the final retribution is a work to ye
honor only of God, proceeding from himself, and whatsoever God works of
himself: he works the same to his ^^on honor, and (...) use the judgment of
this small retribution is the last and perfect work of God touching mankind:
God will openly w^^ke therein, by manifesting the great power and honor of his
wisdom, and of his justice. His power shall appear in ye raising of many
bodies, his wisdom in examining of consciences, and his justice in bestowing
rewards. This judgment requires an vprightnes to be showed in the Judge,
authority of excellent majesty in his irreuocable sentences, and fullness of
justice and goodness in bestowing of gifts, or of punishments. Seeing also
this Judgment is of great honor and majesty, it is requisite that it be done
with great solemnity and magnifycence, ye Thrones and powers ge^ing their
attendaunce. It becomes such a Judge to use in^y^^^e majesty: and it behooves
this Iudical power, that God do appear and show him self to al (...), a
dreadful threatening, (...) fearful Judge, and that h^^^^ ^^orth this terror
according to his e^^erent Majesty. All safety wylbe th^^^for the just, and yet
they will receive him with great veneration and reverence, in beholding his
most excellent Mansty, his wisdom, virtue, and dignity. As this work of
judgment is the last of all works: so likewise the same will he above all his
handye, works, most pure, most excellent, most solemn, and most honorable.

Domi. But who is he that shall be the Judge of all? I know it is God, but is
it God very man, that shall be both Judge and rewarder, which first was the
repayrer of all? Raym. Even the same Jesus Christ the only Son of God, to
whom the Father has given all Judgment, for that he is the Son of man, he
shall judge man, seeing he is man, the repayrer and redemer of man.

Of the excellency of this day above all other days.
I Will say some what of the magnificency of the last day. In this day the
works of all the days before shall be gathered together, and shall receive
their reward. In this day God will work more magneficiently then he has
wrought in other days, as in ^aysing the be dead, and ^a^ing them ^inor^an,
and in rewarding ther^ ^^^h eternal rewards. In this day God works, and in
the other days men have wrought al their works: In this day God will show the
works of his power, will do^^e, i^^ice, ^eritie and goodness, compleeting all
his works in most hiest renown^e glory and honor. This day will be the day of
fear, (...) r^bu^^^ions, and dread unto the wicked, but a day of joy and glory
unto the just and goodman. This day ought to be always in our remembrance.
And we ought to direct the works of all our days unto this day, and to give
our selves so far forth as we may unto justice and virtue, least at ye day
before so great a Judge, and in the light and meeting of all men and Angels,
we be confounded. Where as there is no memory of this day, there remains
inco^stancie, malice, and al wicked and perverse works.

And because that this most magnificent Judge cannot err, neither be corrupted
nor deceived, for that he searches the reins and hearts of all men, who sees
althinges and neglects nothing Therefore remembering these things always, and
putting this day before our eyes, we ought to do that which is good. Raim. We
have gathered out of yt which you have said, that there shall be a perpetual
separation of the good and the evil, the one from the other. Those which have taken
themselves to Lucifer. his wicked will, makings themselves his members, shall be
with him condemned to everlasting fire. And those which have followed Christ our
lord, shall be with him taken up to everlasting glory.

The reprobates shall be plunged in a most deep bottomless pit: and the
chosen shall be lifted up to ye highest heaven. They shall be given to the fire,
and those to pleasures. They shall have devils to their fellows, and these
shall be accompanied with Angels. They for extreme tribulation shall ^^ace, and
these for the greatness of their joys shall give hearty thanks. A most thick and
eternal darkness shall be always cast upon them, and to these God shall be an
everlasting light, and the lamb shall be their light.

Now you have that which you required. Gather therefore by these the full and
last finishing of man: for if he be adjudged good, the best of all shall be
allotted unto him, that is, to be with Angels in ye kingdom of heaven: But if
he be adjudged evil: then shall he continually possess the worst place of all
with the devils in Hell.

Dom. Now, seeing that I am come to the end of all these things which I sought
for, and to the very last retribution, I give you most hartye thanks, for
that you have vouchedsafe to grant to my request, and for your labor and
industry, whereby you have most effectually instructed me, duringe my life, I
will always remember this most wholesome instructions, remembringe my self to
be made by my redeemer, and far exalted above other creatures. And I being
through mine own pride and disobedience, slidden and fallen down and with a
thousand other calamities intercepted, am redeemed and restored again by
Christ having compassion upon me, and by him reserved to receive eternal
reward.

FINIS.
The third thing worthy to be remembered is, the payns of hell.
Christ has his fan in his hand, and he v^^^le^^^ his barn flower, and gather
his wheat corn into the same: and (...) burn the chafe with unquenchable
fire.

By the fan of our Lord Jesus Christ, is understood his judicial power and
just judgment. And by this Barn flower is understood the Church, or human
kind: By the Wheat is signified his ele^te: By the Cha^^e the reprobates: and
by the Ba^^e is understood the kings dome relestiall. The sense of these
words is, that as by the Fame the corn is made clean, and as the chaste, is
women away, and the corn left? so the son of God will purge his church, wherein
(amongst the chosen and the just) the reprobates, and wickedare mingled: but
in the day of judgment they shall be severed one from another, in place and
rewards, as now they differ in conversation. The ungodly are rightly called the
chaff, because they are vain and light and follow the contions of their
minds. The virtuous are compared to the wheat, for they are ye fruit of
Christ, borne in ye field of ye Church, yt is, regenerate of water and the holy
ghost spiritually, living in charity, b^de^t with divine grace and heavenly
gifts. They are transferred from ye barn flower of ye Church militant unto ye
barn of the triumphant church. And the wicked being the children of Babylon
(which is of confusion) they are hurled headlong into a furnace of burning
fire, and eternal damnation.

And for yt hitherto we have treated of death and judgment, I mean to set
forth a s^^dowe of the pains of hell, whereby the heavenly Jerusalem may
appence the excellenter.

Of Hell.
Who is able to express the torments appointed for the ungodly and evil
livers, in that deadly place called Hell? What other thing can be there but
continual flames of fire, eternal tribulation, and infinite calamities of al
evils? Burning floods that run from stinking fens fill up all places therein.
There dwells wicked and vglye Angels, headed and winged like dragons, with
flaming eyes, casting of fierye darts, whose teeth are more long and sharp
the^ the Elephants, wherwithal they pinch, gnaw, and torment, more grievous
the^ does the Dragons tail, whose looks brings sudden fear, grievous
pains, and fearful death.

Oh, I would to God that death might end these painful extremities. But
alas, se yet another torture greuouser then this: The soul shall still live, and
he always under the rule and governance of cruel tormentors: And further,
being gnawen with Serpents, changinge their holds, they do with new bitinges
a fresh from time to time torment and tears ye soul in pieces. Dragons shall
there devour the lips of the blasphemers, and the Cockatrice with greedy teeth
shall sunder and tear in pieces ye bowels of the wicked. Al kind of horrible
beasts will there torment without ceassing, the souls of ye misbeleues. Howling
and be wailing, lamentation and rearing do there continually sound, fearful
scriches, and confused cries are there in all places suddenly raised. Which cry
is procured by the cruel force of tortures, and is thruste forth by the
strength of burninge flames. The same tribulations whereunto ye souls are
receued be without al end and measure. For the souls are continually consumed
with the broiling heat of fierye flames, and being thoroughly burned, are
again and again tormented in new kindled fyres. There are worms that never
dye, fire that never quenches, and continual gnashing of teeth.

There is in hell deadly cold, continual Ise, cruel hunger, vnme asurable
thirste, perpetual sorrow, raging pestilence, vnceassable punishments,
continual darkness, and nights of horrible obscurenes. The miserable soul
finds there no rest, but is tormented with all kind of torments. There is
mortal death, defective lack, and endless end. What faithful man can then
but tremble to hear and know of such pains.

Deliver us we beseech thee good Lord from that lake of misery. obscure
place, and dark world covered with the deadlye cloud of death, where no order
is observed, but an everlasting horronre, Stir up our hearts, most merciful
God, unto ye true fruits of repentance. We humblye beseech thy Majesty, to
deliver us from these eternal pains.

See here, how great, how in comparable, how unmeasurable, and how perpetual,
the miseries, pains and infelicities of the condemned are. He which will not be
terrified by these descriptions is blind and hard hearted, neither has he any
spiritual sense, but is rather altogether dead: Let him notwithstanding look
about him, and rise from the depth of his sin, lifting up the eyes of his
heart, to consider these things.

And every man which as yet delights in sin, let him impresse the
consideration of these things in his mind, that at the least, by the horror
of them, he may be withdrawn from vice, and directed to virtue.

He also which already has begun to enter into the way of virtue, let him by
the due consideration of these things cast off all unstableness and
unbelief. And let al true believe us cast out and vomit forth with horror
and hatefulnes, all the delectations of the flesh, and van^ties of the world,
through which they come to so great calamities in hell.

FINIS.
Hereafter follows certain meditations of the Heavenly kingdom or the
joys of Heaven.
WE ought so to live in this world, that when our bodies begin to become
subjects to worms in the Sepulture, then our souls should begin to be glad
with Saints in heaven, directing of spyrites thither whither it continually
aspyreth. We ought to hasten our selves thither, where we shall always live,
and where we shall are death no more. If we do any thing at al affect this
v^ding and transitory life, which at no time is void of cares and labors: and
that by eating, drinking, sleeping, or any other recreation, scarce can we at
any time satisly the necessity of the flesh.

By how much the more ought we to desire and wish for eternal life, wherein we
shall abide nor suffer no lobor or pain, where there is continual health,
eternal felicity, happy lyberty and perfect bliss, where men shall be like unto
the Angels of God, and just men shall shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their
father.

How think thou then? of what brightness will the soul be, when the body shall
possess the light of ye Sun? In that place there is no heaviness, no sorrow,
no grief, no fear no labor, no death, but a perpetual health and everlasting
bliss.

In which eternal kingdom, there is no malice nor misery of the flesh, no
disease, no lack, no hunger, no thrist no cold nor heat, no weri^es of
fasting nor temptation of the enemy, no will to sin, nor power to do evil,
but a quiet harborough of pleasur and crumph, where men in the society of
Angels shall continually dwell without any infyrmity of the flesh.

There is infinite joy, eternal bliss, from whence none shall be removed that
once can enter therein. There is the rest from labors, peace from the enemy, a
new kind of pleasure, a security of eternity, taking a meruaildus delight and
exceeding pleasure, in the beholding of God. Who is he the^ that will not seek
and desire by all means possible to be a dweller there both for the desire of
peace, joy, and eternity, and for ye perfect sight of god?

The desire the soul has to the Heavenly judgment.
O Spiritual Jerusalem the holy city of God, happy were my soul, if I might
obtain to behold thy glory, thy gates, thy wale thy streets, thy innumerable
habitations, thy most noble citizens, and thy omnipotent king, in his majesty
and glory.

For thy walls are made of precious stones, thy gates of excellent margarites,
thy streets of most pure gold, wherein that sweet song Alleluy a is
incessantly song. Thy manifold mansions are founded upon square stones, and
builded with S^phyres, covered with golden Tiles, wherein no wicked man enters,
nor sinner dwells. O heavenly Jerusalem, thou art sweet and bewtiful in all
thy peasures and delights. There are no such miseries in thee, as we feel,
abid and suffer in this poor and miserable life. There is in thee no darkness,
no night, nor change of time.

The shining of ye Moon, the twinkling brightness of the stars gives not
light in thee, but only the God of God, the light of light, and the Sun of
justice gives light in thee. The white and inunaculate Lamb, a most beutiful
light is thy light: thy ^rightnes and goodness is an endless contemplation and
beholding of thy most ^ewtiful king? The king of ^^ngs is in the midst of
thee, in^u^^^^ on each (...) with his beloved ^h^^^^. In thee are legions of
Angels s^^ging of sweet ^i^^es, in thee are ye fellowship of heavenly Citizens,
there rests the sweet sole^nity of al such as return from this miserable
pilgrimage unto thy glory, ye provident company of the prophets dwell in thee,
there are ye whole nu^bet of ye twelve Apostles, and there is the victorious
army of innumerable martirs, there are true, perfect and holy men and women,
which have vanquished ye pleasures of ye world, and the infirmity of the flesh.
There are young children and maide^s which have passed over their years in
holiness of life, there are they that have escaped ye snares and nets of pleasure
and sensuality: Every one reioiceth in his degree, though not equal in glory,
yet like in joys and gladness: For there reigns perfect charity; and God is
al in all, whom without ^^d they (...) continually, and still in (...) ^olding
him their love increseth, they love and pr^ise him al their wor^^^^ to the
praise of God without end intermission, or labor.

Happy were I, yea, most happy, if I could obtain after my departure from
this life, to bear ye song of heavenly melody, which is song by these heavenly
Citizens, and happy companies of blessed spirits in the laud and praise of the
eternal king. Most fortunate and blessed were I, if I my self could come to
sing that sweet song, and to stand near my king, my God and captain, and to
behold him in his glory and majesty, as he himself has vouchedsafe to promise,
saying: father I will that those which thou have given me, be with me, ye they
may see that excellent pureness yt I have with thee, before the constitution of
the world. Let him who ministers unto me, follow me, and where I am ^he^
sh^l^^y servant be. And again: ^e that loves me, is beloved of my father, and
I^^^il love him, and show my self unto him.

How plentiful of al goodness, and how spare of all evil, the heavenly
Jerusalem is.
O My soul, let us return unto the heavenly city, wherein we are registered
and appointed to be dwellers, as the fellows of Saints, and household seruances
of our Lord, heirs of God, and coheires with Christ our Savior. Let us
consider so far as possible we can, of these licitye of that holy City, saying
with the prophet, O what glorious things are said of thee (O thou City of
God) for thou art the habitacle of al those that rejoice and be glad. For ye
art filled with joy. There is no old age, nor miserye of age in thee. There
is none maimed, lame, crookebact, nor deformed in thee, for in thee al men grow
to full strength and perfectnes, yea, unto the very years of our Saui or Christ.
What life is happier then that life, where there is no fear of poverty, nor
weakness by desease. There is no anger, hurt nor envy, no covetousness nor
ambitious aspiring to honor, nor power, pricketh ye mind of any that dwell in
that holy City. The fear of the devil and his dangers, and the terror of hell
is far absent from thee. The death neither of body nor soul is feared in thee:
but a pleasant life rewarded with in^^ortalitye. There will be then no evil;
peace shall be there proclaimed in every place, and al discord shall be quyte
forgotten: for the concord of the holy Saints is one. Althinges shall be repie
at with peace and gladness, tra^quilitie, rest, and a continual excellent
brightness, far unlike to this which now we see: Adn by how much the better
each one lived in this world, he shall in that world be by so much the more the
cleerer. For it is read, that that City needs not the light of the Sun nor
of the Moon, for there the Lamb is their lamp, and the omnipotent Lord
gives them light. There Saints dosh me like Stars in perpetual eternity,
as the pureness of the heavens that gives light to many.

Wherefore, there is no night nor darkness, there is no contracy meeting of
clouds, no extremity of could nor heat, but a wonderful temperatenes of al
things, which no eye can see, no ear ca^ hear, nor heart imagine, saving only
those who enjoy the same, whose names are written in ye book of life. And yt
which excels this, is the fellowship of Angels, Archa^gels, and all the
virtues of heaven. To behold the Apostles, Martirs and prophets, and to see
our forefathers, al these are glorious. But, to behold ye perfect countenance
of God and to see his incomprehensible light, is a far excellenter glory. For
when we shall see God in himself, then shall we see and have in our selves that
which continuallye without end we shall contemplate and behold.

A supposed description of the heavenly Jerusalem.
O Beloved country, O heavenly city, what can be sufficiently written or
believed of thee, for that in the^e is that goodness, joy and solace, that eyes
see not, that ears here not, nor mind of man can so-muche as once conjecture,
for which so many Legions of Martirs have most willingly suffered death. Thy
gates do glister with chose^ stones most precious, thy streets are paued with
burnished gold, thy walls are made of most precious stones, in thee are
inestimable pleasant gardens, always greener then the fields of Thessalie,
wherein fresh flowers, and dainty violet^ do continually bud and grow. In thee
unspeakable sweet odours of Cinnamon and Balm do always plesantly breath and
smell. The beauty of althings do increase in thee without la^ke, remain
without fading, abide without corruption, and without change do eternally
continue. In thee is al temperatenes and pureness of air, far exceeding the
capacity of man. In thee ^^peace and rest surpass^ng measure. In thee is
everlasting day, and one spirit of althings. In thee is certain assurance,
assured eternity eternal quietness quiet happiness, happy pleasure, and pleasant
mirth. Just men do shine in thee as the sun. Nothing can be wished, loved or
sought for, but it is in thee to be found, and in thee one lie is contained yt
which no where else can be had. O what gladness without offense, what floods of
sincere pleasure, with bottomless pleasure of sweet delectatio^ is it, to behold
the God of Gods in Sion, to look upon the inco^prehensible glory of the holy
trinity, and to taste of ye perfect sweecenes, from which comes al goodness to
human kind? What a pleasure is it to behold the maiestly of God, to be in ye
perpetual company of ye blessed troops of Angels, with ye sanctified Apostles
and Martirs, with holy and blessed virgins, to know all the Citizens of heaven,
and always to rejoice in eternal felicity? O my soul, love this blessed
palace, and inwardly affect the same, which with fleshly eyes cannot be seen,
but only with the eyes of thy faith. Believe that which thou see not, to the
end that thou may sometime obtain that which thou beleeuest.

Of the perfect and absolute joy of eternal life.
MY God, my Lord, my hearts delyght, tell unto my soul, if this be the joy
that thou have spoken of unto us by thy son. For you saidest: Ask, and you
shall have, to the end that your ioies may be perfect. I have found a certain
kind of joy, yea, more then perfect: and yet, although man has a perfect
heart, a perfect mind, a perfect soul, and that man is al replenished with joy.
There rests yet another joy, that above measure passes this, for all joys:
cannot be contemed in him that reioyseth, but al those that rejoice, shall emer
in the joy of our Lord. (But truly that joy, wherein thine elect rejoice,
cannot be seen, heard, nor be compassed within the capacity of man.)
Therefore, O Lord, in all these my sayings, I have not so much as once thought
upon any part of the joys of thine elect. They shall in all places so much
rejoice as they loved thee: and so much love thee, as they acknowledge thee
their Lord. No eye ca^ see, no tongue ca^ tell, no ear can hear, nor heart can
think (in this life) how much they acknowledge and love thee in the life to
come. I beseech thee O Lord, yt I may love thee and rejoice in thee. And though
I cannot come to that perfectne^ in this life, yet grant, that I may from day
to day so increase therein, that I may after this life, come to the full
perfectnes thereof. Let me so profit in this knowledge, that in time to come I
may be perfectly instructed therein. Let thy love good Lord, so increase and
grow in me that I may be therein perfectly grounded in the life to come. Grant,
I beseech thee, yt I may so rejoice in hope, as that I may perfectly rejoice
in joy after this world. O true and everliving God, grant, I beseech thee, yt
I may receive that which thou have promise dme, that is that my joy may be
perfect in the world of worlds, and that in the mean time, my mind may
remember ye same my tongue may speak thereof, my heart may love it, and yt my
mouth may talk thereof. Let my soul hunger for it, my flesh desire it, and all
my bodilye substance feruentlye require it, till such time as I do enter into
the ioies of my Lord my God, where I shall remain for ever.

A prayer whereby thou may be stirred up unto the desire of heavenly things.
O My God, O the sweet life of my soul, O my true health, O my salvation, O
my only, eternal, unchangeable, and chiefest goodness, what other thing besides
thee ought I to look or ask fore What, have I not al things, if I do
possess thee, who have created al things? There is nothing of any estimation,
but only such things as thou have made. Behold the bewty of the Angels, of
blessed souls, of mortal bodies, of brutish beasts, the brightness of the
heavens, Statees, Sun, Fire, and Air, the Sea, Earth, Planets, the flowers,
precious stones, metals and colors, sweetenes of al soundes and odours, and
the delicate taste of al sweet things proceeds only from thee, O Lord.
Whatsoever grace of comlines, plesa^tnes, sinenes, sweetness, virtue, dignity,
or riches, consists in any creature, the same proceeds from thee, O God,
and al things abundantly flow in thee without any lack.

Thou art the chiefest bewty, ye chiefest pleasure, and chiefest desire. Thou
most abu^dantly do contain in thee al bewty, goodness and pleasure always
green and flourishing, and al goodness is far more excellent in thee, the^ me^
may see or prove in any of thy creatures. O Creator most excellent, you art ye
pleasure of althings, thou art the abundantfulnes of perfect joy, and the
unmeasurable sea of holy delights and pleasures, thou art yt light of incredible
cleerenes and passing brightness, O be wtiful, eternal, and incomprehenlible
light. That which they do see, hear, taste, smell, or feel, which are
inwardly joined unto thee, through exceeding pucenesse of hear^ (wh^^^st they
yet remain in this present (...)) can with no ^ouing be expressed. The loving
imbracementes, the daintye kisses of the moth^^, wherewith she appeaseth the
weep^^g of her ton^^t child, no, nor the ^we^^^ words (...) pleasant
counten^nce of the h^sba^^^ towar^es hi^ loui^^ wise, are (...) shadows and
(...) va^ue in respe^t and con^^de (...) ^f the sweet imbra^em^^tes, wherewith
thou, O Lord, do a^^^^e^^ (...) of th^se that ^oue thee. But if poor
banished men can be so blessed and happy, and that they can see such
inexplicable and incomparable goodness, who see thee but in a dark, had owed
glass: how much more happyer then ought we to judge of thy holy citizens who
see thee face to face, from whom flows rivers of pleasure more sweeter then
honey, who are perfectly united unto thee, drowned in a bottomless of ^ternal
delights. Those thy ^^^lbelo^ed d^ldren do now most n^^ifestly know and in
the ^^se lues di^^a^isest lyefe ele how much (O me^ciful father) thou do
fau^ur and ^^u^ them: and from the be giuning haste lo^^d them. Thou, O Lord,
^rofie willingly, sinner^^est and belpest ^^ema^ T^^ud^^^ighten al men most
pleasaun^lye with the light of thy brigh t^es^. Thou do comi^^ally most
sam^^^e ^^y and offe^^ ally, talk in thefeoreete ho we^^ of every man.
Th^^ddest draw the ^e^^tes and (...) of al men unto thee with an
in^^^morehensible sweet mes and feruert affe^tion of charity.

Thou do qualify, gladden; refreshe, and fatissye, with a delicate desyr^^f
enjoying thy company, the he arts and wills of all men. And to say al, O
eternal God, thou art all in all, in that most holy City of new Jerusalem.
That is the happy day, and the singular day, the only true day, whereof thou,
O Lord Jesus, haste thus spoken unto thy disciples. (In that day you shall
know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you.) O day so much
wished for, with most hearty desire, wherein the holy souls shall be united unto
thee, O God, and shall be inspyred with a marvelous light of wisdom, and
transformed into the brightness of eternal glory. O Jesus, grant, I beseech
thee, that so long as I am in the darkness of this perigrination, that the
eyes of my mind may behold and contemplate the most shining light and
brightness of thee, O God, and that I may always please thee my Lord and God.

Man wishes for tribulations of this world, to the end, that he may the more
earnestly desire the kingdom of heaven.
O My soul, if we must every day suffer torments, yea, and a long time
abide the vexations of this world, to the end that we might see Christ in
his glory, and be joined in the fellowship of his Saints? Is it not convenient
that we should patiently suffer al kind of pains, to the end that we might be
partakers of so great goodness and glory? Let wicked spirits prepare their
snares and temptations, let sickness weaken the body, let apparel trouble
the flesh, let labors oppress it, let long wakinges fore watch it,
let this manne exclaim against me, let that manne disturb me, let cold
benumme me, let heat burn me, let my conscience prycke me, let the head ache,
let the heart broyle, let the stomach be overcome with superfluous humors, let
the visage wax pale and wanne, let all the body be weakened, let my life be
ended in sorrow, let my years be consumed in sighs, let corruption enter into
my bones, and let my bowels gushe out under me: What care I though al these
come to pass, so that I may in the end and day of trybulation, come to rest,
and ascend into the fellowship of those that are already preferred unto
glory. How great will the glory of the just be, what exceeding gladuesse will be
amongst them, when their faces shall shine as the Sun, and the Lord in the
kingdom of his father begins to place his people, each one in his degree,
and rewards every one according to his merytes, geuyng them in steed of
carthly things, heavenly goodness: for temporal things, eternal rewards: and
for small things, great and ample gifts. Truly, it will be a heap of felicity,
when the Lord shall lead his Saints into the glory of his father, and cause them
to sit in celestial seats, where God is al in all. O what a pleasant happiness
is it to see the Saints, to be with Saints, and to be Saints our selves, to
see God, and to enjoy God him self for ever and ever. Let us therefore think
upon these things with all our hearts, affecte them with fervent desire, that
we may be the better able with speed to come to them. If thou my soul
peradventure wilt ask, by what help, or by whose merits may this be done?
Christ yielded himself to death, to the end to win thee unto the kingdom of
God his father, Yield thy self therefore unto him, that thereby thou may be
of his kingdom. And let not sin have dominion, nor reign over thy mortal
body, but let the soul be occupied in searching for everlasting life.

A prayer that we should repose our selves in God above all things.
O Jesus, grant, I beseech thee, that I may rest and repose my self in thee
before any creature, before al glory, honor, power, dignity, and consolation,
over and above al hope and promise, yea, and above all the Angels, Archangels,
and about all the host of heaven, above al things visible and invisible, and
chief^^y, for that thou art my God, yea, thou a^t n^^e onely^ God, excelling al
other things. For thou a^t the highest, the most mighty, thou only art the
fullest and p^^^ectest. O when shall it be fullye g^^^ted unto me, that I shall
forsake my self, and see how sweet and pleasantly thou art, O Lord my God. O
Jesus, the brightness of eternal glory, the comfort of the wanderinge soul, my
mouth is bent toward thee without speaking, and silence speaks unto thee.
How long will my Lord my God withdraw himself from commings unto thee^ come
unto me thy servant, comfort me O Lord: thrust forth (...) ^^^pinge hand, O
God, and del^^^^ me thy servant from these troubles. Come, come, for without
thee there can be ^o restful day, nor quiet hour, Thou art my joy, and
without thee I am unfurnished. Behold a poor wretch how. I am imprisoned,
and my self laden with Gyues, till thou deliver me, and refresh me with the
light of thy presence. Though others search thee at leisure whenever it
shall please them: Yet continuallye nothing shall please me but thou my Lord
and GOD, my hope and eternal health. Blessed he thou, O Lords, which haste done
this goodness unto thy servant according to the multitude of thy mercy. What
can thy servant say more unto thee, O Lord, but humble himself in thy sight,
and be always mindful of his iniquitye and vnwoorthynes? For in all the
wonderful things of heaven and earth, there is none like unto thee. Thy works
are excellent, thy judgments are upright, and by thy providence al things
are governed. O father of wisdom, laud and praise be unto thee. My mouth, my
soul, and al my powers shall praise thee without ceassing.

The soul fervently wishes to be in the house of the Lord.
O Most bright and bewtifull house of the Lord, I am delyghted with thy
comeliness, the habitation of the glory of my Lord, ye owner and builder of
thee. Al my wandering perigrination tends toward thee, both night and day,
my heart coueteth to come unto thee, my mind is fullye bent toward thee, my
soul does fervently desire to come into thy blessed company. I speak this
unto him who made me, and possesses me in thee: for he created both thee and
me. I do not ask thy company and the sight of thy wonderful pureness,
through mine own merits, but thorough the blood of him that has redeemed me,
whereof. I do not despair. I have erred (I confess) like a straied sheep,
and my dwelling is prolonged. I am cast from the face of thee, O Lord, in
blyndnes of exile, wherein I am expulsed from the ioies of Paradise. I do with
sorrowful verse and unmeasurable lamentations, daily bewail the miseries of ^y
captivity, when I do call thee to remembrance, O spiritual Jerusalem, and
whilst my feet stand in the excellent and beautiful Sion, not yet able
openly to see the innermost parts of thee: but yet I hope to be carried into
thee upon the shoulders of my Redeemer, the very builder of thee, that I may
rejoice with thee in that venerable glory, wherein they delight that are with
thee in the presence of God him self our redeemer, who has dissolved al
enmitye that was between God and man with his own flesh, and has with his
precious blood pacifyed al things in heaven and earth. He is our peace, who
has made al things alone, who joining two walls in one in him self which
before were disagreeing, everlastingly to continue in the felicity of his
blessedness. The same thing has he promised unto us, saying. They shall be
equal with the Angels of God in Heaven. Let me rejoice and be glad in thee,
Let the sweet memory of thy blessed name be a releeuing of my sorrow and
weariness.

An earnest prayer, that thou, being assisted by the grace of God, may be
always bent to heavenly things.
I Would to God, that that day might once shine, in the which I might see my
redeemer, and al these temporal days would end. In thee (O heavenly kingdom)
the saints do shine in perpetual and clear charity, which we can not see
whilst we wander here on earth. The heavenly Citizens know how much they
them selves rejoice: and the banished sons of the Eua lament and feel how
bitter, werie, and tedious this world is. The days of this world are few,
short, full of evil and sorrow, where man is defiled with many sins, oppressed
with grefes, troubled with cares, disturbed with thoughts, wrapped in vanities,
compassed with erroures molested with temptation, drowned in sensuality, and
crucified with poverty. O when shall there be an end of these manifold and
miserable labors? when shall I be delivered from the miserable bondage of
wickedness? When shall I only remember thee O Lord? When shall I fullye and
perfectly rejoice in thee? When shall I be out of al danger, delivered from al
grief of body and soul, and come to true liberty? When shall I rest in that
quiet, secure and undisturbed peace? When shall I come thither, where peace is
both within and without in althinges. O Lord Jesus, when shall I stand up to
see thee, when shall I behold the glory of thy kingdom which thou have
prepared for thine elect from the beginning? A^ poor wretch, I am left
banished in the land of mine enemies, where there is daily wars, and
continual misfortune. Comfort me in my banishment, mitigate my sorrows, I do
most feruentlye with all my heart require to come unto thee: For whersoeuer
pleasure is offered unto me in this world, I think it noisome. I do inwardly
require thy company, but I cannot obtain it. I do wish to be joined to
heavenly things, but temporal pleasures and mortal passions keeps me back
from them. In mind I would feign vanquishe al wickedness and vice, but yet I
am constrained to be subject to the froward flesh. And I unhappy man am at
controversy with my self, and am become odious unto my self: for whilst my
soul aspireth upward, my flesh draws down ward. O what passions do I
inwardlye suffer: For when my soul begins to contemplate of heavenly
things, the^ presently heaps of carnal thoughts withdraws me from prayers.
O my God, do not linger from me, depart not in anger from thy servant.
Thunder forth thy lightning bolts, and ^isperse my worldly thoughts abrod,
shoot thine arowes amongst them, and drive away all the temptations of mine
enemies. Turn my senses unto the make me forget al earthly things grant, I
beseech thee, that I may cast off all sinful thoughts and fantasies. O
eternal verity, succor me, to thend that no vanity, do tempt or remove me
from thee. O heavenly father help me, for all vanity and impurenes melts
before thy face.

An ardent desire of the soul to the blessed and immortal life.
AS the Heart desires to come to the fountains of fresh waters, so does my
soul desire to come to thee, O Lord. When shall I come and appear before thy
face, O well spryng of loving water? When shall I come to the water of thy
sweetenes, from this desert, pathlesse and barraine land: that I may see thy
virtue and glory, and cool my thirst with ye water of thy mercy. O Lord the
well of life, satisfye me, I thirste for thee, O Lord God of life. When shall I
come, O Lord, and appear before thy face? O most clear and excellent day
without night, without end, wherein I shall hear these words: Enter into the
joys of the Lord thy God. Enter in eternal glory into the house of
thomnipotent God, where there is great and wonderful joys without number.
Enter into the glory, which is without sorrow, containing eternal gladness,
where all goodness and no evil is, where the sweet amiable way of life is,
where is no controversy, neither flickering intisements, where there is a
perfect and certain assurance, an assured quietness, a quiet pleasantnes, a
plesaunt happiness, a happy eternity, an eternal blessedness, the blessed
Trinity, and unity of Trinity, deity of unity, and a blessed sight of the
deity, which is the joys of thy Lord God. O joy upon joy, and joy above
joy, without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee, that I may
see my God, who dwells in thee? I will go thither, and I will see this most
excellent sight. What is it that stays me? Woe be unto me, for my days are
prolonged: woe be unto me, how long shall it be said unto me, where is the
Lord thy God? O my soul, attend a while, and expect that which I look for.
Shall not we attend the coming of our redeemer, our Lord Jesus Christ who
has brought our bodies to their ancient humility and obedience, configuted and
formed unto the brightness of his own body? Let us abide the return of our
Lord from the marriage feast, to the end he may lead us unto his marriage.
Come, O Lord, and stay not, come, O Lord Jesus Christ, come and visit us in
pear, come and deliver us that he fettered out of prison, that we may rejoice
before thee in perfectness of heart. Come, our savior, the wished hope of al
people, show thy face, and we shall be saved. Come my light, my rede^^^er,
deliver my foul out of this prison, that it may confess and glorifye thy holy
name. How long shall I be toste in the surging waves of this my mortal life,
crying unto thee and thou will not hear me. Hear me, O Lord, calling unto
thee from this large, troublesome and daungetous Sea, and bring me unto thy
safe port of eternal felicities. O happy are they that have through thy
goodness arrived from all the dangers of this Sea, in that most safe port and
harborough of rest. O most happy are they which have escaped this surging Seas,
and are safely landed upon the shores, escaped this prison, and come to thy
Palace, returned from exile, and entered into thy kingdom. The blessed do
most quickly enjoy that they wished for. Happy are they that have obtained
the rewar^e of eternal glory, and that which here they have won in tribulation
they do now joyfully broo^e in happy mirth and perpetual glory. Most blessed
and thrice fouretimes blessed are they which have obtained through his
aboundante glory to come to his gracious kingdom. O eternal kingdom, and
kingdom of all worlds, where there is contynual light, and where the peace of
God is, which does far exceed at understanding, wherein the souls of the
elect do rest, replete with eternal gladness. Oglorious is thy kingdom,
wherein all the saints do reign appareled with white garments, having crowns
upon their heads. O kingdom of eternal bliss. O happy kingdom, where thou,
O Lord, the Diadem of glory shall be seen face to face, rejoicing them in thy
peace, which passes al capacitye. Happy are they therefore that have escaped
from the shipwreck of this life, and have obtained to come into so great joy
and gladness. Unhappy (alas) are we poor wretches, that do row our ship
through the devouring waves of this large raging seanot knowing when we shall
come to that haven of health. Unhappy (I say) are they who lead their lives in
exile and danger, whose end is doubtful. For we know not what shall become of
us, for all thing^s which are to come, are unknown unto us. We as yet sailing
in the waves of the Sea, do hope and look to come to the happy port and
haue^ of ourcountrey. O safe country, we see thee a far off, we salute thee
from the Seas, we do sigh and wish to come to thee out of this vale, and we
do endenour our selves, yea, with tears, to see, if by any means we may
come unto thee. O Christ, the God of Gods, and hope of human kind, our
refuge and strength, whose light our eyes do behold through the thick clouds
above, through the boisterous storms of this troublesome Seas (as the bright
beams of the careful shipmans star) end ouring out selves thereby to direct
our course unto thy haven and safe harborough, O Lord, govern our ship in thy
right hand with the nails of thy cross, that we do not perish in the
roaring waves, nor tempest drown us, nor be sunk down in the deep: but
fasten the anchor of thy cross unto our ship, and draw us out of this sea unto
thy self, our only comfort and consolation. He hold us whom thou have
redeemed with thy precious blood, and now banished from thee, we do call upon
thee, hear us O God our Savior, the only hope of al those that dwell in all
the corners of the earth, we are toste in the troublesome seas, and thou on the
shore do see our danger. Save us for thy names sake, and grant unto us O
Lord, I beseech thee, that we which sail between Silla and Charibdin, may so
stern and govern our Sip unto thee, that escaping both the dangers, we may
be preserved both Sippe and wares, safely ariuing unto thy Port and haven of
rest.

FJNJS.
A brief Table of the things contained in this Book, wishing the Reader to
peruse it thoroughly.
OF the fall of man, and the punishment by death for the same, and of the
uncertain hour of death. Fol. 1 Of Death. Judgment, Hell, and Heaven. Fol. 2
Of the hour of Death worthy of often repetition. Fol. 3 A ready instruction
and godly exercise for an happy death, spoken as it were in the person of
Christ to the soul. Fol. 6 Wholesome admonitions to dye. Fol. 13 An exercise to
be used in the morning, or al other times when you think good. Fol. 15
Counsels at the hour of death. Fol. 18 An exercise wherein the weak man may
restane him self unto God Fol. 19 A Christian protestation or last testament
not unprofitable to be said or to be thought upon. Fol. 22 How fearful and
bitter corporal death is of it self, and the natural causes thereof. Fol. 24
The manner to dye well. Fol. 17 The certentye of Death, and the uncertain
hour thereof. Fol. 27 Why the just men do wish for death. Fol. 28 The death of
the just man Fol. 30 The death of the evil. Fol. 31 The dangers of death.
Fol. 31 How we should comfort those that be in danger of death. Fol. 32 Three
exhortations to the sick. Fol. 33 Questions to be asked him that lies sick,
by ye minister, or some other godly person. Fol. 33 Prayers to be said at ye
hour of death. Fol. 34 How to foresee that things go rightlye with any when
be dies. Fol. 35 A brief Dialogue touthing the day of judgment. Fol. 37 A
general judgment of the dead* requires an universal resurrection. Fol. 38 Of
the excellency of the judgment days above al other days. Fol. 41 Of the
pains of hell. Fol. 43 Of hell. Fol. 44 Meditations of the heavenly kingdom.
Fol. 46 The defyre the soul has to the heavenly Jerusalem. Fol. 47 How
plentiful of all goodness, and how spare of al evil the heavenly Jerusalem
is. Fol. 49 A supposed description of the heavenly Jerusalem. Fol. 50 Of the
perfect and absolute joy of eternal life. Fol. 51 A prayer whereby thou may
be fryred up unto the desire of heavenly things. Fol. 53 Man wishes for the
trybulations of this world, to the end that he may the more earnestly desire
the kingdom of heaven. Fol. 55 A prayer that we should depose our selves in
God above al things. Fol. 56 The soul fervently wishes to be in the house of
the Lord. Fol. 58 An earnest prayer, that being assisted by the grace of God,
we may be always bent to heavenly things. Fol. 59 An ardent desire of the
soul to the blessed and immortal life. Fol. 60
FINIS.

