THE Voyage and Travail: OF M. CAESAR FREDERICK, MERCHANT OF VENICE, INTO the
East India, the Indies, and beyond the Indies. Wherein are contained very
pleasant and rare matters, with the customs and rites of those Countries.
ALSO, HEREIN ARE DISCOVERED the Merchandises and commodities of those
Countries, as well the abundance of Goulde and Silver, as Spices, Drugges,
Pearls, and other Iewelles. Written at Sea in the HERCULES of London: coming
from Turkey, the 25. of March 1588. For the profitable instruction of Merchants
and all other travelers, for their better direction and knowledge of those
Countries.

Out of Jtalian, by T H.

AT LONDON, Printed by RICHARD JONES and EDWARD WHITE, 18. Iunij. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, CHARLES, Lord Howard, Baron of Effingham, Knight of
the most Noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admiral of England, and one of
her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel: Thomas Hickock, wishes long
life in good health, with much increase of Honor, and all happy success.
Having (Right Honorable) long time purposed, to put somewhat in practice that
I might present to your honorable view, the weakness of my ability has
hitherto holden me in doubt, whither I were best, by writing to show my good
will, or by staying my pen to conceal the same. But being at Sea in March
last in the Hercules of London, I resolved to take in hand the translating of
this little work out of Italian into English, as well in regard of the
newness thereof, being never printed before that time: as also for the
rareness of the subject and matter it treats off, and the commodity thar
Merchants and other my Cuntrimen may reap by it. And having finished the same,
presuming more upon your honorable courtesy, then upon the worthiness of so
small a work, and hoping of your honorable favor for the defense thereof, I
am bold in all humble and dutiful sort to present the same to your honorable
view and protection, not as a thing worthy the patronage of so honorable a
personage as your honor is, but as a token of my dutiful affection and
bounden duty to your Lordship: beseechiug you therefore to vouchsafe of the same
with so good a will as I present it unto you. And so most humbly I take my
leave, beseeching the almighty to bless and prosper you in all your
honorable enterprises, to the good liking of her Majesty, and profit of the
Commonweal.

Your Honors most humble and ready at command, Thomas Hickock.

Caesar Frederick to the Reader.
I Having (Gentle Reader) for the space of eighteen years continually coasted
and travailed as it were, all the East Indies, and many other countries
beyond the Indies, wherein I have had both good and ill success, in my
trauells: I have seen and understood many things worthy the noting, and to be
known to all the world: the which were never as yet written of any, I thought
it good (seeing the almighty had given me grace, after so long perilles in
passing such a long voyage,) to return into my own Country, the noble City
of Venice, I say, I thought it good, as breefely as I could, to write and set
forth this voyage made by me, with the meruellous things I have seen in my
travels in the Indies. The mighty Princes that govern those Countries, Their
Religion, and faith that they have, the rytes and customs which they use, and
live by, of the diverse success that happened unto me, and how many of these
conntreys are a bounding with spices, drugs, and Jewels, giving also profitable
advertisement, to all those that have a desire to make such a voyage. And
because that the whole world may more commodiously rejoice at this my travel:
I have caused it to be printed in this order, and now I present it unto you
(Gentle and Jouing Readers). to whom for the varieties of things herein
contained, I hope that it shall be with great delight received, and thus God
of his goodness keep you.

To the courteous Reader.
BEing at Sea (Gentle and friendly Reader) in this my last voyage to Tripoly,
in Anno. 1587. This little Book of M. Caesar Fredericks (Merchant of Venice)
coming into my hands: which when I had read it over, I was desirous to
translate the same out of Italian into our vulgar tongue. In which Book
(Gentle Reader) thou must not look for a garden of sweet English Roses,
(meaning pleasant English terms,) but thou shall find bancks full of Sauory,
for I have not been a Scholar (brought up to write fine Schoole-termes,) but
have simply followed the Authors sense in that phraze of speech that we
commonly use: In which Book, (if thou read it through), thou shall find
good savor to thy self, and profit to thy Country. And as the author was in
traualing these Countries eighteen years, and got great benefit in them with
a small stock: so may thou if thou will travel those Countries, and get
great gain as he did. For why? the way is laid open before thee, and as thou
read, consider with thy self, that he which looks on a Jewel, perceives
not at once all the faults in it: but when many eyes have the same, some
finds one fault, and some another, so that the blemishes cannot be hid. So
(Gentle Reader) thou may see that in this work which I could not see:
wherein, if thou find a blemish in this my simple work, I pray thee heartily
cover the same with the shadow of Patience, or else friendly correct the same:
and not rashly to judge or contemn the pains of a willing mind, so shall I
be encouraged to take the like pains in annother. Thus I refer to the Epistle
of the author, wherein thou shall understand the effect of this book, and all
the trauails that he took in those Countries: read (I say) and then judge of
the matter, according to thy good discretion. Thus I leave thee to the tuition
of the almighty: who ever keep thee in health, and give thee in the Lord thy
own hearts desire.

T. Hickock.

A voyage to the East Indies, and beyond the Indies. etc.
IN the year of our Lord God. 1563. I Caesar Frederick, being in Venice, and
very desirous to see the East parts of the world, I Shipped my self in a
ship called the Gradaige The Authors going from Venice to Cipris and Tripolye.
of Venice with certain merchandise, governed by M. Iacamo Vatica, which was
bound to Cypris with his ship, with whom I went, and when we were arrived in
Cipris, I left that ship and went in a lesser to Tripoly in Soria, where I
stayde a while. Afterward I I took my journey to Alexo, and there I acquainted
my self with merchantes of Armenia and Moors: that were Merchants, and
consorted to go with them to Ornus, and we departed from Alepo, and in two
days iourny and a half, we came to a City called Bir.

Of the City of BIR.
BIR is a small city very scarce of all manner of victuals, and near unto the
walls of the city runs the river of Euphrates, in this city the merchants
divide themselves into companies, according to their merchandice y^ they The
River Euphrates.
have, and there either they buy or make a boat to carry them and their goods
to Babylon, down the river Euphrates, with charge of a merchant and mariners
to conduct the boat in the voyage: these boats are in a manner flat bottomed,
yet they be very strong: and for all that they are so strong, they will serve
but for one voyage. They are made according to the sholdnes of the river,
because that the river is in many places full of great stones, which does
greatly hinder and trouble those that go down the river. These boats serve but
for one voyage down the river unto a village called Feluchia, Feluchia a small
City in Euphrates.
because it is impossible to bring them up the river back again. At Feluchia
the merchants pluck their boats in pieces, or else sell them for a small
price, For that at Bir they cost the merchants forty or fifty chickens apeece,
and they sell them at Feluchia for 7 or 8 chickens a piece, because that when
the merchants return from Babylon back again if they have merchandice or goods
that owes custom: then they make their return in forty days through the
wilderness, passing that way with a great deal lesser charges then the other
way. And if they have not merchandise that Mosule.
owes custom, then they go by the way of Mosule, where it costeth them great
charges both the Carauan and company, from Bir where the merchantes imbarke
them selves to Feluchia over against Babylon, if the river have good store of
Water, they shall make their voyage in fifteen or eighteen days down the
River, and if the Water be low, and it have not rained, then it is much
trouble, and it will be forty or fifty days iourny down, because that when
the barks strike on the stones that be in the River, then they must unlade
them, which is great trouble, and then lade them again, when they have mended
their boat: therefore it is not necessary, neither do the merchants go with
one boat alone, but two or three, that if one boat split and be lost with
striking on the sholdes, they may have another ready to take in their goods,
until such time as they have me^ded the broken boat, and if they draw the
broken boat a land to mend her, it is hard to defend her in the night, from
the great multitude of Arabians yt will come down there to rob you and in the
rivers every night, when you make fast your boat to the banckside, you must
keep good watch against the The Arabian thieves are in number like to Antes.
Arabians which are thieves in number like to ants, yet when, they come to rob,
they will not kill, but steal and run away, hargubushes is a very good weapen
against the^, for y^ they stand greatly in fear of the shot, and as you pass
the river Euphrates, from Bir to Feluchia there is certain places which you
must pass by, where you pay custom certain madines upon a bale, which custom
is belonging to the son of Aborise king of the Arabians and desert, and has
certain Cities and villages, on the river Euphrates.

Feluchia and Babylon.
FEluchia is a village where they that come from Bir do vnbarke themselves and
unlade their goods, and it is distant from Babylon a days journey and a half
by land: Babylon is no great City, but it is very populous, and The old
Babylon has great trade with Merchants still.
of great trade of Strangers because it is a great through fare, for Persia,
Turkia, and Arabia: and very oftentimes there goes out from thence Carauans
into diverse countries: and the city is very copious of victuals, which comes
out of Armenia down the river of Tigris, on certain Zattares or Raffes made
of blown hides or skins called Vtrij. Raffes made of blown hides, to carry
victuals to Babylon.
This river Tigris does wash the walls of the city, these Raffes are bound
fast together, and then they lay boards on the aforesaid blown skins, and on
the boards they lade the commodities, and so come they to Babylon where they
unlade A pretty device.
the^, and being unladen, they let out the wind out of the skins, and lade
them on Cammels to make another voyage. This City of Babylon is situate in
the kingdom of Persia, but now governed by the Turks: On the other side of
the river toward Arabia, over against the city, there is a fair place or
town, and in it a fair Bazarro for Merchants, with very many lodges, where
the greatest part of the Merchants Strangers which come to Babylon doolye with
their merchandise. The passing over Tigris from Babylon to this Borough A
bridge made of boats.
is over a long bridge made of boats chained together with great chains:
provided, that when the river waxes great with the abundance of rain y^
falls, then they open the bridge in the middle, where the on half of the
bridge falls to the walls of Babylon, and the other to the brinkes of this
borough, on the other side of the river: and as long as the bridge is open,
they pass y^ river in small boats, with great danger because of the smalnes
of the boats, and the over lading of them, that with the fiercenes of the
stream they be overthrown, or else the stream does carry them away, so
that by this means, many people are lost and drowned: this way by proof I
have many times seen.

Of the Tower of Babylon.
THe Tower of Nembroth or Babel is situate on y^ side The Tower of Babell of
ancient memory.
of Tigris that Arabia is, and in a very great plain distant from Babylon 7.
or 8. miles: which town is ruinated on every side, and with the falling of it
there is made a great Mountain: so that it has no form at all, yet there is
a great part of it standing, which is compassed and almost covered with the
aforsaid fallings: this Tower was builded and made of four square Brickes,
which Brickes These bricks be in thicknes 6 or 7, inches and a foot and a
half square, seen by our own countrymen whom I know.
were made of earth, and dried in the Sun in manner and form following: first
they laid a lay of Bricks, the^ a Mat made of Canes, square as the Bricks, and
in stead of lime, they daubed it with earth: these Mattes of Canes are at this
time so strong, that it is a thing wonderful to behold, being of such
antiquity as it is, I have gone round about it, and have not found any place
where there has bin any door or entrance: it may be in my judgment in
circuit about a mile, and rather less then more.

This Tower in effect, is contrary to al other things which A thing wonderful,
are seen a far off, for they seem small, and the more near a man comes to
them the bigger they be: but this Tower a far off seems a very great thing,
and the nearer you come to it the l^sser. My judgment and reason of this is,
that because the Tower is set in a very great plain, and has nothing more
about to make any show saving the ruins of it which it has made round about,
and for this respect that discrying it a far off, that piece of the Tower which
yet stands with the mountain that is made of the substance that has fallen
from it, makes a greater show then you shall find coming near to it.

Babylon and Basora.
FRom Babylon I departed for Basora, shipping my self in one of the barks that
use to go in the river Tigris from Babylon to Basora, and from Basora to
Babylon: which barks are made after the manner of Fusts or Galliots with a
Speron and a covered poope: they have no pumpe in the^ because of the great
abundance of pitch which they have to pitch them withal: which pitch they
have in abundance two days journey from Babylon: near unto the river
Euphrates, This hole whereout comes this pitch is most true, for that I know
of our own countrymen which have seen it* and they say that out of the hole
there comes as it were puffing with bellows both water and pitch, and the
water and pitch runs into the valey or Island where the pitch rests, and the
water runs into the river Euphrates, and it makes all the river to be as it
were brackish with the smell of pitch and Brimstone.
there is a city called Ayit, near unto which city, there is a great plain
full of pitch, very marvelous to behold, and a thing almost incredible, that
out of a hole in the earth, which continually throws out pitch into the air
with continual smoke, which pitch is thrown with such force, that being hot
it falls like as it were sprinkled over all the plain, in such abundance
that the plain is always full of pitch: the Mores and the Arabians of that
place say, that, that hole is the mouth of hell: and in truth, it is a thing
very notable to be marked: and by this pitch, the people have great benefit,
to pitch their barks, which barks they call Daneck and Saffin: When the river
of Tigris is well replenished with water, you may pass from Babylon to Basora
in 8. or 9. days, and sometimes more and sometimes less: we were half so much
more which is 14 or 15. days, because the waters were low: they may sail day
and night, and there is some places in this way where you pay so many Madiens
on a ba^le: if the waters be low, it is 18. days journey.

Basora.
BAsora is a City of the Arabians, which of osde time was governed by those
Arabians called Zizarii, but now it is governed by Zizarii, an ancient people.
the great Turk where he keeps an army to his great charges.

The Arabians called Zizarii have the possession of a great Country, and
cannot be overcome of the Turk, because that the sea ^ath divided their
country into an Island by channels with the ebbing and flowing of the (...) and
for that cause the Turk cannot bring an army ag(...), neither by sea nor by
land, and another reason is, the inhabitants of that Island are very strong and
warlike men: a days journey before you come to Basora, you shall have a little
At the castle of Corna the river Euphrates and Tigris do meet.
castle or fort, which is set on that point of the land where the Rivers
Euphrates and Tigris meet together, and the castle is called Corna: at this
point, the two rivers makes a monsirous great river and runs into the sea,
which is called the gulf of Persia, which is toward the South: Basora is
distant from the sea fifteen miles, and it is a city of great trade of
Spices and drugges which come from Ormus. Ormus is the barennest Island in all
the world.
Also there is great store of corn, Rice, and Dates, which the country does
yield. I shipped my self in Basora to go for Ormus, and so we sailed through
the Persian sea 600 miles, which is the distance from Basora to Ormus, and we
sailed in small Ships made of boards, bound together with small cords or ropes,
and in steed of calking they lay between every board certain straw which
they have, and so they sow board and board together, with the straw between,
where through there comes much water, and they are very dangerous. Departing
from Basora we passed 200 miles with the sea on our right hand, along the
gulf, until at length Carichii an Island in the gulf of Persia.
we arrived at an Island called Carichii, from whence we sailed to Ormus in
sight of the Persian shore, on the left side, and on the right side toward
Arabia we discovered infinite Islands.

Ormus.
ORmus is an Island in circuit 25 or 30 miles, Ormus is always replenished with
abundance of victual, and yet there is none that grows in the Island.
and it is the most barrenest and most dry Island in all the world, because
that in it there is nothing to be had, but salt water, and wood, all other
things necessary for man's life is brought out of Persia 12 miles of and out of
other Islands near thereunto adioining, in such abundance and quantity, that
the city is always replenished with all manner of store: there is standing
near unto the waters side a very fair castle, in the which the captain of
the king of Portingale is always resident with a good band of Portingales, and
before this castle is a very fair prospect: in the city dwells the
married men, Soldiers and Merchants of every nation, amongst whom there is
Mores and Gentiles. In this City there is very great trade Great trade of
merchandise in Ormus.
for all sorts of Spices, drugs, Silk, cloth of Silk, Brocardo, and diverse
other sorts of merchandise which come out of Persia: and amongst all other
trades and Merchandise, the trade of Horses is very great there, which they
carry from thence into the Indies. This Island has a More king, of the race of
the Persians, who is created and made king by the captain of the castle, in
the name of the king of Portingale. At the creation of this king I was there,
and saw the ceremonies that they use in it, which are as follows. The old The
election of the king of Ormus.
King being dead, the Captain of the Portingales chooses another of the blood
Royal, and makes this election in the Castle with great ceremonies, and when
he is elected, the Captain swears him to be true and faithful to the king
of Portingale, as his Lord and Governor, and then he gives him the Scepter
Regal: after this with great feasting and pomp, with great company, he is
brought into the Royal palace in the city. This king keeps a good train,
and has sufficient revenues to maintain himself without troubling of any,
because the Captain of the Castle does maintain and defend his right, and
when that the Captain and he ride together, he is honored as a King, yet he
cannot ride abroad with his train, without the consent of the captain first
had: it behooves them to do this, and it is necessary, because of the great
trade that is in the city: their proper language is the Persian tongue. There I
shipped my self to go for Goa, a City in the Indies in a Ship that had four
score horses in her: this is to advertise those Merchants that go from Ormus
to Goa, to ship themselves in those Ships that carry Horses, because every
Ship that carries twenty Horses or upwards are priueleged, that all the
Merchandise A priuelege for Mercha^ts.
whatsoever they carry, that they owe no custom, whereas the Ships that
carries not Horses, are bound to pa^^ eight per cento of all the goods they
bring.

Goa, Dui, and Cambaia.
GOa, is the principallest Cittye that the Portingales Goa is the cheifest
city that the Portingals have in the Indies.
have in the Indies, where is resident the Viceroy with his court and ministers
of the king of Portingale, from Ormus to Goa, is 990 miles distance, in which
passage, the first City that you come to in the Indies, is called Dui, and is
situate in a little Island in the kingdom of Dui.
Cambaia, which is the greatest strength that the Portingals have in all the
Indies, yet a small City, but of great trade, Cambaya a country abounding
with all plentic.
because there they lade very many great Ships for the straight of Meca and
Ormus with merchandise, and these Ships belong to the Mores and Christians, but
the Mores cannot trade neither sail into those seas without the license of the
Viceroye of the king of Portingale, otherwise they are taken and made good
prises. The merchandise that they lade these Ships withal, comes from
Cambaietta a port in Cambaietta.
the kingdom of Cambaia, which they bring from thence in small barks, because
there can no great ships come thither, by reason of the sholdnes of the water
thereabouts, and these sholds are 100 or 80 miles about in a straight or golfe,
Macareo is a ^ide or curant as we term it.
which they call Macareo, which is as much to say, as a race of a tide, because
the waters there ran out of that place without measure, so that there is no
place like to it, unless it be in the kingdom of Pegu, where there is another
Macareo, where the waters run out with more force then these do. The
principalest City in Cambaia is called Amadauar, it Amadauar a city in
Cambaia.
is a days journey and a half from Cambietta, it is a very great City and
very populous, and for a City of the Gentiles it is very well made and builded
with fair houses and large streats. with a fair place in it with many ships,
and at sight like to Cayro but not so great: also Cambaietta is situate on the
Seas side, and a very fair City, the time that A thing most lamentable.
I was there, the city was in great calamity and scarcenes, so that I have
seen the men of the country that were Gentiles, take their children, their
sons, and their daughters, and have desired the Portingales to buie them, and
I have seen them sold for eight or ten La^ines a piece, which may be of our
money x. s. or ^iii. s. iiii. d.: for all this, if I had not seen it I could
not have believed, that there should be A merueilous great trade in Gambyette.
such a trade at Cambaietta as there is: for in the time of every new Moon and
every full Moon, the small barks (innumerable) come in and out, for at those
times of the Moon the tides and waters are higher than at other times they be.
These barks be lade in with all sorts of spices, with silk of China, with
Sandole, with Elephants teeth, Veluets of Verzini, great quantity of Pannina,
which comes from Meca, Chickenoes which be pieces of gold worth seven
shillings a pee^e sterling, with money, with diverse sorts of other merchandise*
also these barks lade out as it were an infinite quantitye of cloth made of
Bumbast of all sorts, as white stamped and painted, with great quantity of
Indico, dried Ginger, and conserved, Myrabilony dry and condyt, Boraso in
paste, great store of Sugar, great quantitye of Gottone, abundance of Opioum,
Assa Fetida, Puchio, with many other sorts of drugs. The Torbants are made in
Dui, great stones, like to Corneolaes, Granats, Agats, Diaspry, Calcidonij,
Amatisti, and some kind of natural Diama^ts. There A very good order for
merchant strangers if they will.
is in the City of Cambaietta an order, but no m^n bound to keep it, but they
that will: but all the Portingale merchants keep it, the which is this: There
is in this Cittye certain Brokers, which are Gentiles and of great authority,
and have every one of them fifteen or twenty servants, and the Merchants that
use that country have their Brokers, with the which they be served: and they
that have not been there are informed by their friends of the order, and of
what Broker they shall be served: now every fifteen days (as abouesaid) that
the fleet of small Ships enter into the port, the Brokers come to the water
side, and these merchants as soon as they are come a land, do give the
cargason of all their goods to that Broker that they will have to do their
business for them, with the marks of all the faroles and packs they have and the
Merchant having taken a land all his furniture for his house, because it is
needful that the Merchants that trade the Indies carry provision of household
with them, because Merchants that travel to the Indies must carry their
provision of how should with them.
that in every place where he comes, he must have a new house. The Broker
that has received his Cargason, commands his servants to carry the
Marchaunts furniture for his house home, and load it on some cart, and carry
it into the city, where the Brokers have diverse empty houses, and meet for
the lodging of Marcha^ts, furnished only with bedsteads, tables, chayres, and
empty Jares for water: then the Broker says to the Merchant go and repose your
self, and take your rest in the city: the Broker tarrieth at y^ water side,
with the Cargason, and causes all his goods to be discharged out of the Ship,
and pays the custom, and causes it to be brought into the house where the
merchant lies, the Merchant not knowing any thing thereof, neither custom,
nor charges. These goods being brought to this pass into the house of the
Merchant, the broker demands of the Merchant if he have any desire to sell
his goods or merchandise, at the prizes as such wares are worth at that present
time? and if he have a desire to sell his goods presently, then at that instant
the Broker sells it away: After this, the Broker says to the Merchant, you
have so much of every sort of merchandise, neat and clear of every charge,
and so much ready money, and if the Merchant will employ his money in other
commodities, then the broker tells him that such and such commodities will
cost so much, put a board without any manner of charges: the Merchant
understanding the proposed, makes his account, and if he think to buy or
sell at the prizes current, he gives order to make it away, and if he have
commodity for 20 thousand Ducats, all shall be bartred or sold away in 15
days without any care or trouble, and when as the Merchant thinks that he
cannot sell his goods at the price current, he may tarry as long as he will,
but they cannot be soulde by no man, but by that Broker that has taken them a
land and paid the custom: and perchance tarrying sometimes for sale of their
commoditye, they make good profit and sometimes loss: but those merchandise
that come not ordinarily every fifteen days, in taring for the sale of them
there is great profit. The barks that lade in Cambaietta, they go for Dui to
lade the Ships Chiawle two Cities.
that go for the straights of Meca and Ormus, and some go for Chiaull and Goa,
and these Ships be very well appointed, or else are guarded, with the Armods of
the Portingales and is for this respect, for that there is so many Corsaries
Great store of men of war and rouers on the coast of Cambaya.
which go coursing along that coast, and robbing and spoiling, and for fear
of those thieves, there is no safe sailing in those Seas, but with ships very
well appointed and armed, or else with the fleet of the Portingales as
aforesaid: in fine, the kingdom of Cambaia is a place of great trade, and has
much doings and tratique with all men, although hitherto it has bin in the
hands of tyrants, because that at 75 years of age the true king being at the
assault of Dui, was there slain, whose name was Sultan Badu: at that time
four or five Captains of the army divided the kingdom amongst themselves,
and every one of them showed in his conntrey what tyranny he could: but twelve
years ago the great Magoll a More king of Agray and Delay, forty days
journey The grear Magoll was king of Agray and Delay.
within the land of Amadauar, became the governor of all the kingdom of
Cambaia without any resistance, because he being of great power and force with
people, devising which way to enter the land, there was not any man that would
make him any resistance, although they were tirants and a beastly people, they
were soon brought under obedience, that in that time I owelled in Cambaietta I
saw very marvelous things: there were such an infinite number of Artisicers,
that made Bracelets called Mannij, or Bracelets A marvelous fond delight in
women.
of Elephants teeth, of diverse colors, for the women of the Gentiles which
have their arms full decked with them. and in this order there is spent every
year many thousands of Crowns, the reason whereof is this, that when there
dies any whatsoever of the kindred, then in sign and token of moorning and
sorrow, they break all their bracelets from their arms, and presentlye they
go and buie new again, because that they had rather to be without their meat
then without their bracelets.

Daman. Basan. Tana.
Having passed Dui, I came to the second city that (...) Portingales have,
called Daman, situate in the territory of Cambaya, distant from Dui 120.
miles: it is no town of merchandise, save of Rice and Corn, and has many
villages under it, which in time of peace, the Portingale have their pleasure
in them, but in time of wars, the enemies have the spoil of them in such wise
that the Portingales have little benefit by them. Next unto Daman you shall
have Basan, which is a filthy place in respect of Daman in condition: in this
place is Rice, corn, timber to make ships and galleys: and a small distance
beyond Basan is a small Island called Tana, a country very populous Tana, a
country inhabited with Portingales. Armesine, a kind of silk like taffitie.
with Portingales, Mores, and Gentiles: these have nothing but Rice, there are
many makers of Armesine, and weauers of Gerdles of wool and bumbast black and
red like to Moocharies.

Chiawle and the Palmer tree.
BEyond this Island you shall find Chiawle in the Firm land, and they are two
cities, one of the Portingales, and Chiawle two Cities.
the other of the Mores: that City that the Portingales have, is situate
^ower then the other, and governs the mouth of the harbor and is very
strongly walled: and as it Note the policy of the Portingales.
were a mile and a (...)l^^ distant from this is the City of the Mores,
governed by their king Zamalluco. In the time of wars there cannot any great
ship come to the city of the Mores, because the Portingales with their
Ordinance will sink them, for that they must perforce pass by the Castles
Creat trafique with merchandise.
of the Portingales: both the Cities are ports of the sea, and are great
cities, and have unto them great traffic and trade of merchandise, of all
sorts of spices, Drugges, Silk cloth of silk, Sandolo, Marfine, Versiue,
Procelane of China: Ueluets and Scarlets y^ come from Portingale, and from
Meca: with many other sorts of merchandise: There comes every year from
Cochin, and from Canenor 10. or 15. great shipe, laden with great Nuts cured,
and with sugar made of the self same Nuts called Giagra: the tree whereon these
nuts do grow is called the Palmer tree: and throughout all the Indies, and
especially from this place to Goa, there is great abou^dance The Palmer Tree is
the most commodious tree in the world.
of them, and it is like to the Date tree: in the whole world there is not a
tree more profitable and of more goodness then this tree is, neither do men
reap so much benefit of any other tree as they do of this, there is not any
part of it but serves for some use, and none of it is worthy to be burnt: Note
the commodities of the Tree.
with the timber of this tree they make ships wthout the mixture of any other
tree, and with the leaves thereof they make sails, and with the fruict thereof
which be Nuts whereof they make wine, and of the wine they make Sugar and
Placetto, which wine they gather in the spring of the year, out of the middle
of the tree where continually there goes ^ A very fruitful tree;
runs out whit liquor like unto water, in that time of the year they put a
vessel under every tree, and every evening and morning they take it away full
and then distilling it with fire it makes a very strong liquor: and then they
put it into Buts, with a quantity of Zibibbo, white or black and in short time
it is made a perfect wine: after this they make of the nuts great store of
oil: of the tree they make great quantity of Boordes and quarters for
buildings. Of the bark of this Tree, they make Cables, Ropes, and other
furniture for Scauasches are as onr great Mawudes. A thing almost incredible
but I have seen of their Mattes.
Ships, and as they say, these Ropes be better then they that are made of
Hemp: they make of the bows, Beadsteds, after the Indies fashion, and
Scauasches for Marchandyze, the leaves, they cut the as very small and weaue
them, and so make sails of them, for all manner of shipping, or else very fine
Mats: and then of the first rynde of the Nutte they stamp, and make thereof
perfect Ockom to talk Ships, great and small: and of the hard Bark
thereof they make spoones and other vessels for meat, in such wise that there
is no part thereof thrown away or cast to the fire: when these Mats be green
they are full of an excellent sweet water to drink, and if a man be thirsty
with the liquor of one of the mats, he may satisfy himself: and as this Nut
ripeth, the liquor thereof turns all to ^ernell. There goes out of Chiawle
for Mallaca, for the Indies, for Maca, for Portingale, for the coasts of
Mallendy, for Ormus, as it were an infinite number and quantity of goods and
merchandise that come out of the kingdom of Cambaia, The commodities that come
out of Cambaya.
as cloth of Bumbast white, painted, printed, great quantity of Indico,
Opinione, Gotone, Silk of every sort, great store of boraso in Pasta, great
store of Fetida, great store of Iron, Corn, and other merchandise. The More
king Zamalaco is of great power, as one that at need may command and has in
his camp two hundred thousand men of war, Great Ordinance made in pieces,
and yet serviceable.
and has great store of Artillery, some of them made in pieces which for
their greatness they cannot be carried too and fro: yet although they be made in
pieces, they are so commodious that they work with them marvelous well, whose
shot is of stone, and there has been of that shot sent unto the king of
Portingale for the rariety of the thing. The city where the king Zamallaco
has his being, is within the land of Chiawle, 7. or 8. days journey, which
city is called Abneger. 70. miles from Chiawle, toward the Indies is the
port of Dabull, a Haven of the king Zamallaco, from thence to Goa is 150.
miles.

Goa.
GOa is the principallest city that the portingales have in the Indies, where
in the Vizeroye with his royal The cheifest place the Portingales have in the
Indies.
court is resident, and is in an Island which may be in circuit 25. or 30.
miles: and the city with his boroughs is reasonable big, and for a city of
the Indies it is reasonable fair, but the Island is far more fayrer: for it is
as it were full of goodly gardens, replenished with diverse trees and with the
Palmer trees as is aforesaid. This city is of great trafique for all sorts of
merchandise which they trade withal in those parts: and the fleet which
comes every year from Portingale which are 5. or 6. great ships that come
directly for Goa, and they arrive there ordinarily the 6. or 10 of September,
Note the ariuall of the Portingall ships in the Indies.
and there they remain 40. or 50. days, and from thence they go to Cochin,
where they lade for Portingale, and often times they lade one ship at Goa and
the other at Cochin for portingale, Cochin is distante from Goa 300. miles, the
city Goa is sciuate in the kingdom of Dialcam a king of the Mores, whose
chief city is op in the country 8. days journey and is called Bisapor: this
king is of great power, for when I was in Goa in the year of our Lord 1570.
this king came to give assault to Goa, being encamped near unto it by a River
side with an army of 2 hundredth thousand men of war, and he lay at this seige
14. months: in which time there was peace concluded, and as report went
amongst his people, there was great calamity and mortality which bred amongst
them in the time of winter and also killed very many Elephants. Then in the
year of our Lord 1567. I went from Goa to Bezeneger, the chief city of the
kingdom of Marsinga 8. days journey from Goa, within the land in the company
of two other Merchants which carried with them 300 Arabian Horses to that king:
because the Horses of that country are of a small stature, and they pay well
for the Arabian Horses: and it is requisite that the Merchants sell them well,
for that they stand them in great charges to bring them out of Persia to Ormus,
and from Ormus to Goa, where the ship that brings 20 Horses and vpwardes,
pays no custom neither ship nor goods whatsoever, whereas if they bring no
Horses, they pay 8. per cento of all their goods: and at the going out of Goa
the Horses pay custom, 42. Pagodies for every Horse which Pagody may be of
starling A very good sale for Horses.
money 6 shillings 8 pence: they be pieces of gold ^f that value: so that the
Arabian Horses are of great value in those countries as 300. 400. 500. Ducats
a horse, and to a thousand Ducats a horse.

Bezeneger.
THe city of Bezeneger was sacked in the year 1565, by 4 kings of the
Mores, which were of great power and might, the names of these four kings were
these following. The first was called Dialcan, the second Zamaluc, the third
Cotamaluc, and the fourth Viridy: and yet these four kings were not able to
ouercom this city and the A most unkind and wicked treason against their
prince: this they have for giving credit to strrngers, rather then their own
native people.
king of Bezeneger, but by treason. This king of Bezeneger was a Gentile, and
having amongst all other of his Captains, two which were notable, and they
were Mores, and these two Captains had either of them in charge 70 or 80
thousand men. These two Captains being of one Religion with the four kings
which were Mores, wrought means with them to betray their own king into their
hands. The king of Bezeneger esteemed not the force of the four kings his
enemies, but went out of his City to wage battle with them in the fields,
which when the armies were joined, the battle lasted but a while not the space
of four hours, because the two traytorous Captains, in the cheifest of the
fight, with their companies turn their faces against their king, and made such
disorder in his army, that as astonished they set themselves to flight: thirty
years was this kingdom governed by three brethren which were tyrants, the
which keeping the rightful king in prison, it was their use every year once,
to show him to the people, and they at their pleasures ruled as they listed.
These brethren were three Captains belonging to the father of the king they
kept in prison, which when he died, left his son very young, and then they
took the government to themselves: the cheifest of these three was called
Ramaragio, and he sat in the royal throne, and was called king: the second was
called Temiragio, and he took the government on him: the third was called
Bengatre, and he was captain general of the army. These three brethren were
in this battle, in the which the cheifest and the last were never heard of
quick nor dead. Only Temeragio fled in the battle, having lost one of his
eyes: when the news came to the city of the overthrow in the battle, the
wives and children of these three tyrants, with their lawful king (kept
prisoner) fled away, spoiled as The sacking of the city.
they were, and the four kings of the Mores entered the city Bezeneger with
great triumph, and there they remained sirmoneths, searching under houses and
in all places for money and other things that were hidden, and the^ they
departed to their own kingdoms, because they were not able to maintain such
a kindome as that was, so far distant from their own country.

When the kings were departed from Bezeneger, this Temiragio returned to the
City, and then began for to repopulate it, and sent word to Goa to the
Merchants, that if they had any Horses to bring them to him, and he would pay
well for them, and for this cause the aforesaid two merchants that I went in
company withal, carried those Horses that they had to Bezeneger. Also this
Tyrant made an An excellent good pollici^ to entrap me^.
order or law, that if any Merchant had any of the Horses that were taken
in the aforesaid battle or wars, although they were of his own mark, that
he would give as much for them as they would: and beside he gave general safe
conduct to all that should bring them: when by this means he saw that there
were great store of Horses brought thither unto him, he gave the Merchaunts
fair words, until such time as he saw they could bring no more. Then he
licensed the Merchants to depart, without giving them any thing for their
Horses, which when the poor men saw, they were desperate, and as it were
mad with sorrow and grief.

I rested in Bezeneger seven months, although in one month I might have
discharged all my business, for it was necessary to rest there until the ways
were clear of thieves which at that time ranged up and down: and in the time
I rested there, I saw many strange and beastlye deeds done of the Gentiles.
First when there is any noble man or woman dead, they burn their bodies: and
if a married man die. his wife must burn her self alive, for the love of her
husband, and with the body of her husband: so that when any Mark this
detestable order of the Gentiles.
man dies, their wives will take a months leave, two or three, or as they
will, to burn themselves in, and that day being come, wherein she ought to be
burnt, that morning, she goes out of her house very earlye, either on
Horssebacke or one an Eliphant, or else is borne by eight men on a small stage:
in one of these orders she goes, being apparrelled like to a Bride, carried
round about the Cittye, with her hair down about her shoulders, garnished
with Jewels and flowers, according to the estate of the party, and they go
with as great joy as Brides do in Venis to the nuptials: she carries in her
left hand a looking Glass, and in her right hand an arrow, and sings through
the city as she passes, and says, that she goes to sleep with her dear
spowse and husband. She is accompanied with her kindred and friends until it
be one or two of the clock in the after noone, then they go out of the city,
and going along the Rivers side called Nigondin, which runs under the walls
of the cittye, A description of the burning place*
until they come to a place where they use to make this burning of women,
being widows, there is prepared in this place a great square cave, with a
little pinnacle hard by it, four or five steps up: the aforesaid cave is full
of dried wood, the woman being come thither, accompanied with a number of
people which come to see the thing, then they make ready a great banquet, and
she that shall be burned, Feasting and dancing when they should moorne.
eats with great joy and gladness, as though it were her marriage day: and
the feast being ended, then they go to dancing and singing a certain time,
according as she will: after this the woman of her own accord, commands
then* to make the fire in the square Cave where the dry wood is, and when it
is kindled, they come and certify her thereof, then presently she leaves the
feast, and takes the nearest kinsman of her husband by the hand, and they both
go together to the bank of the aforesaid river, where she puts off all her
Jewels and all her clothes, and gives them to her parents or kinsfolk, and
covering her self with a cloth, because she will not be seen of the people
being naked: she throws her
self into the river, saying: Oh wretches that ye wash your sins. Coming
out of the water, she rowleth her self into a yellow cloth of 14 braces long,
and again she takes her husbands kinsman by the hand, and they go both
together up to the pinnacle of the square cave wherein the fire is made: when she
is on the pinnacle, she talks and reasons with the people, recommending unto
them her children and kindred: Before the pinnacle they use to set a Mat,
because they shall not see the fiercenes of the fire, yet there is many that
will have them plucked away, showing therein a heart not An adaman^ heart*
fearful, and that they are not afraid of that sight. When this sillye woman
has reasoned with the people a good while to her content, there is another
woman that takes a pot with oil and sprinckleth it over her head, and with
the same she annoynteth all her body, and afterward throws the pot into the
Furnace, and both the woman and the pot goes together into the fire, and
presentlye the people that are round about the furnace, throw after her into
the cave great pieces of wood, so by this means, with the fire and with the
blows that she has with the wood thrown after her, she Moorning when they
should rejoice
is quickly dead, and after this there grows such sorrow and such lamentation
amongst the people, that all their mirth is turned into howling and weeping, in
such wise, that a man could scarce bear the hearing of it. I have seen many
burnt in this manner, because my house was near to the gate where they go out
to the place of burning: and when there dies any great man, his wife with all
his slaves with whom he has had carnal copulation, burn themselves
together with him, Also in this kingdom I have seen amongst the base sort of
people this use and order, that A worse order* then the first.
the man being dead* he is is carried to the place where they will make his
sepulcher, and setting him as it were upright sitting, then comes his wife
before him on her knees, casting her arms about his neck, with embracing and
clasping him, until such time as the Masons have made a wall round about them,
and when the wall is as high as their necks, there comes a man behind the
woman and strangleth Ungodly deeds to murder the people.
her, then when she is dead, the workmen finish the wall over their heads, and
so they lie buried both together. Beside these, there is an infinite number of
beastlye qualities amongst the which I have no desire to write of them: I was
very desirous to know the cause, why these women would so wilfullye burn
themselves against nature and law, and it was told me that this law was of
an ancient time, to make provision against the slaughters which women made The
cause why the women do ^o burn themselves.
of their husbands. For in those days before this law was made, the women for
every little displeasure that their husbands had done unto them, they would
presentlye poison their husbands, and take other men, and now by reason of this
law they are more faithful to their husbands, and count their lives as dear
as their own, because that after his death, her own follows presently.

In the year 1567. the people of Bezeneger, for the ill success that they
had, in that their City was sacked by the four kings. The king with his court
went to dwell in a castle eight days iorneye up in the land from Bezeneger,
called Penegonde: Also six days journey from Bezeneger, is Penegonde.
^he place where they get Diamants, I was not there, but it was told me, that
it is a great place, compassed with a wall, The getting of Diamants.
and that they sell the earth within the wall, for so much a Squadro, and the
limits is set, how deep, or how low they shall dig, those Diamants that are
of a certain sise and bigger then that sise, all those be for the king, it is
many years agone, since they got any there, for the troubles that has been
in that kingdom: the first cause of this trouble was, because the son of
this Temeragio had put to death the lawful king which he had in prison, for
which cause the Barons and Noblemen in that kingdom would not acknowledge him
to be their king, and by this means there is many kings, and great division
in that kingdom, and the City of Bezeneger is not altogether destroyed, yet
the houses stand still, but empty, and there is dwelling in them nothing as is
reported, but Tigers and other wild beasts. The circuit of this City is four
and twenty miles about, and within the walls certain mountains: the houses
stand walled with earth, and plain, all saving the three palaces of the three
tyrant brethren, and the Pagodies which are Idol houses, these are made with
lime and fine marble: I have seen many kings Courts, and yet have I seen none
in greatness like to this of Bezeneger, I say for the order of his Palace, for
it has nine gates or ports. First when you Mark the description of this
palace.
go into the place where the king did lodge, there is five great ports or
gates: these are kept with Captains and Soldiers: then within these, there
are four lesser gates, which are kept with Porters, without the first gate
there is a little porche, where there is a Captain with five and twenty
Soldiers that keeps watch and ward night and day, and within that,
another with the like guard, where through they come to a very fair Court,
and at the end of that Court, there is another porche as the first, with the
like guarde, and within that another Court, and in this wise are the first
five gates guarded and kept with those Captains: and then the lesser gates
within are kept with a guard of Porters, which gates stand open the greatest
part of the night, because the custom of the Gentiles is to do their business,
and make their feasts in the night, rather then by day: the City is very safe
from thieves, for the Portingall Merchants sleep in the streets, or under
porches for the A thing rare to be found in England.
great heat that is there, and yet they never had any harm in the night. At
the end of two months* I determined to go for Goa in the company of two other
Portingale Merchants, Palanchine is a small litter borne of four men*
which were making ready to depart, with two Palanchines or little Litters,
which are very commodious for the way, with eight Falchines which are men
hired, to carry the palanchines, eight for a palanchine, four at a time: they
carry them as we use to carry barrowes, and I bought Men ride on Bullocks: and
travel with them on the way.
me two Bullocks, one of them to ride on, and the other to carry my victuals
and provision, for in that country they ride on Bullockes with Pannels as we
term them, girths and Bridles, and they have a very good commodious pace.
from Bezeneger to Goa, in summer it is 8 days journey, but we went in the midst
of winter, in the month of July, and were 15 days coming to Ancole on the
sea coast, so in 8. days, I had lost my two bullocks: for he that carried my
victuales, was weak and could not go, the other when I came A pretty jest.
to a river where was a little Bridge to pass over, I put my Bullock to
swimming, and in the midst of the river there was a little Island, unto the
which my Bullock went, and finding pasture, there he remained still, and in no
wise we could come to him, and so perforce, I was forced to leave him, and at
that time there was much rain, and I was forced to go 7. days A hard matter
for traueilers,
a foot with great pains: and by great chance I met with Falchines by the
way, that I hired to carry my clothes and victuales: we had great trouble in
our journey, for y^ every day, we were taken prisoners, by reason the great
dissension in that kingdom, and every morning at our departure we must This is
strange that every nobleman may coin what money he would.
pay rescat 4. or 5. Pagies a man: and another trouble we had as bad as this,
that when as we came into a new governors country, as every day we did, yet for
that thy were all tributorie to the king Bezeneger yet every one of them
stamped a several coin of Copper, so that the money that we took this day,
would not serve the next: at length hy the help of God we came safe to Ancola,
which is a country of ye queens of Gargo pam, tributary to ye king of
Bezeneger. The merchandise The marcha^dize that come in and out to Bezeneger
every year.
that went every year from Goa to Bezeneger, was Arabian Horses, Veluets,
Damasks, Sattens, Armesine of Portingale, and pieces of China, Saffron, and
Scarlets: and from Bezeneger, they had in Turkey for their commodities, Jewels,
and Pagodies which be Ducats of gold: the apparel that they use in
Bezeneger, is Velvet, Satin, Dammaske Scarlet, or white bumbast cloth,
acording to the estate of the The apparel of those people.
person, with long hats on their heads, called Colae, made of Velvet, Satin,
Dammask, or Scarlet, girding themselves in stead of girdels with some fine
white bumbast cloth: they have breeches after the order of the Turks: they
wear on their feet, plain high things called of them aspergh, and at their
ears they have hanging great plenty of Gold. Returning to my voyage when we
were together in Ancola, one of my companions that had nothing to loose, took
a guide and went to Goa, whether they go in 4. days, the other portingale not
being disposed to go, tarried in Ancola Their winter is our su^mer.
for that winter: the winter in those parts of the Indies begins the 15. of
May, and lasts unto the end of October: and as we were in Ancola, there came
another Merchant of horses in a planchine, and two portingale Soldiers which
came from Zeland, and two carriers of letters, which were Christians borne in
the Indies: all these consorted to go to Goa together, and I determined to go
with them, and caused a pallanchine to be made for me very poorly of Canes:
and in one of them Canes I hid privily all the Jewels I had, and according to
the order, I took eight Falchines to carry me, and one day about eluen of
the clock, we set forwards on our journey, and about two of the clock in the
afternoon, as we passed a mountain which deuideth the territory of Ancola
and Dyalcan, I being a little behind my company, was assaulted of by eight
thieves, four of them had Swords and Targats, and the other four had Bows
and Arrows, when the Falchines that carried me understood the noise of the
assault, they let the palanchine and me fall to the ground, and ran away and
left me alone, with my clothes wrapped about me: presently the thieves were on
my neck, and riseling me, they stripped me stark naked, and I fained my self
sick, because I would not leave the Palanchine, and I had made me a little bed
of my clothes, the thieves sought it very narowly and subtly, and found two
pursses that I had, well bound up together, wherein I had put my Copper money
which I had changed for four pagodies in Ancola, the thieves thinking it had
been so many Ducats of Gold, searched no further, then they threw all my
clothes in a bush and hied them away, and as God would have it, at their
departure, there fell from them a handkercher, and when I saw it, I rose from
my Palanchine or Couche, and took it up, and wrapped it together within my
Palanchine. Then these my Falchines were of so good condition, that they
returned to seek me, whereas I thought I should not have found so much goodness
in them because they were paid their money before hand, as is the use: I had
thought to have seen them no more: before their coming I was determined to
pluck the Cane wherein my Jewels were bidden, out of my cowtch and to have made
me a walking staff, to carry in my hand to Goa, thinking that I should have
gone thither on foot, but by the faithfulness of my Falchines, I was rid of
that trouble, and so in four days they carried me to Goa, in which time I
made hard fare, for ye thieves left me neither money gold nor silver, and that
which I did eat, was given me of my men for gods sake: and after at my coming
to Goa I paid them every thing rially all that I had of them: from Goa I
departed for Cochin, which is a voyage of 300. miles, and between these two
Cties are many holds of the Portingales, as Onor, Mangalor, Barzelor and
Cananor. The hold or forte that you shall have in going from Goa to Cochin
Four small fortes of the Portingales.
that belongs to the Portingales, is called Onor, which is in the kingdom of
the Queen of Battacella, which is tributary to the king of Bezeneger: there is
no trade there, but only a charge with the Captain and company he keeps
there: and passing this place, you shall come to another small Castle of the
Portingales called Mangalor, and there is a very small trade only for a little
Rice: and from thence you go to a little fort called Barzelor, there they have
good store of Rice which is carried for Goa: and from thence you shall go to a
city called Cananor, which is a Hargabush shot distant The commodities that
go out of the kingdom of Cananor.
from the chiefest city that the king of Cananor has in his kingdom, being a
king of the Gentiles: and he and his are a very naughty and malicious people,
always having delight to be in wars with the Portingales, and when they are in
peace, it is for the intrest to let their marcha^dize pass: there goes out of
this kingdom of Cananor, all the Cardomomo, great store of pepper, Ginger,
Honey, Ships laden with great Nuttes, great quantity of Archa which is a
fruict of the biggnes of Nutmegges, which fruict they eat in all those parts of
the Indies and beyond the Indies, with the leaf of an herb which they call
Bettell, the which is Bettell is a very profitable herb in that cuntry
like unto our Juye leaf, but a little lesser, and thinner: they eat it made
in Plaister^ with the lime made of Oystershelles, and through the Indies, they
spend great quantity of money in this composition, and is used daily, which
thing I would not have believed if I had not seen it: The customers get
great profit by these Herbs, for that they have custom for them: when
these people eat and chaw this in their mouths, it makes their Spittle to
be read, like unto blood and they say, that it makes a man to have a very
good stomach and a sweet breath, but sure in my judgment, they eat it
rather to fulfill their filthy lusts and of a knauerye, for this Herb is
moist and hot, and makes a very strong expultion. From Cananor to Crangenor,
which is another small forte of the Portingales in the Land of the king of
Crangenor, which is another king of Enemies to the king of Portingales.
the Gentiles, and a Country of small importance, and of a hundredth and
twenty miles, full with theeeues, being under the king of Callicut, a king also
of the Gentiles and a great enemy to the Portingales, which when he is always
in wars, he and his country is the Neast and resting for stranger thieves:
and these be called Moors of Carposa, because they wear on their heads, long
red Hattes, and these thieves part ye spoils that they take on the sea, with
the king of Calicut, for he gives leave unto all that will go a roauing
liberally to go in such wise that all along that coast, there is such a number
of Thieves, that there is no sailing in those Seas but with great Ships and
very well armed or elle they must go in company with the army of the
Portingales: from Crangenor to Cochin, is 15. miles.

Cochine.
COchine is next unto Goa, the cheifest place Within Cochineis the kingdom of
Pepper.
that the Portingales have in the Indies, and there is great trade of Spices,
drugs, and all other sorts of Merchandise for the kingdom of Portingale, and
there with in the la^d is the kingdom of Pepper, which Pepper the Portingales
lade in their ships by boulke and not in The pepper that the Portingales bring,
is not so good as that which goes for Meca, which is brought hither by the
straights.
sacks, the Pepper that goes for Portingale is not so good, as that which
goes for Meca, because that in times passed, the officers of the king of
Portingale, made a contract with the king of Cochine, in the name of the king
of Portingale, for the prices of Pepper, and by reason of that agreement
between them at that time made, the prise can neither rise nor fall, which is
a very low and base price, and for this cause the Uillaines bring it to the
Portingales, green and full of filthe. The Mores of Meca that give a better
price* have it clean and dry, and is better conditioned: all the spices and
drugs that is brought to Mecha, is stolen from thence as Contrabanda. Cochine
is two cities, one of the Portingales, and another of the king of Cochines:
that of the Portingales is scituat nearest unto the sea, and that of the kings
of Cochin is a mile and a half up higher in the land, but they are both set on
the banckes of one river, which is very great, and of a good depth of water,
which river comes out of the mountains of the king of the Pepper, which is a
king of the Gentiles, in whose kingdom are many Christians of S. Thomas
order: the king of Cochine is also a king of the Gentiles and a great faithful
friend to the king of Portingale, and to those Portingales which are married,
and Citizens in the City Cochine of the Portingales, and by this name of
Portingales, throughout all the Indies they call all the Christians that come
out of the West, whether they be Italians, Frenchmen, or Almaines, and all they
that mary in Cochine do get an office, according to the trade he is of, this
they have by the great privilege the Citizens have of that City, because there
is two principal commodities that they deal Great privileges that the
Citizens of Cochin have.
withal in that place, which are these: the great store of silk that comes
from China, and the great store of Sugar which comes from Bengala, the
married: Citizens pay not any custom for these two commodities: for all
other commodities they pay four per cento custum to the king of Cochine,
rating their goods at their own pleasure: those which are not married and
strangers, pay in Cochine to the king of Portingale, eight per cento of all
manner of merchandise, I was in Cochine when the Uiceroye of the king of
Portingale wrought what he could to break the priuelege of the Citizens, and
to make them to pay custom as other did: at which time the citizens were glad
to way their Pepper in the night, that they laded the ships withal that went
to Portingale, and stole the custom in the night. The king of Cochine having
understanding of this, would not suffer any more Pepper to be wayed: then
presentlye after this, the Merchants were licenced to do as they did before,
and there was no more speech of this matter, nor any more The small power of
the king of Cochine.
wrong done. This king of Cochine is of a small power in respect of the other
kings of the Indies, for he can make but seuentye thousand men of arms in his
camp: he has a great number of Gentlemen which he calls Amochy, and Amochy
and Nayrii are very hardye men, and have their wives common.
some are called Nayry: these two sorts of men esteem not their lives any
thing: so that it may be for the honor of his king, they will thrust
themselves forward in every danger, although they know they shall dye. These
men go naked from the girdell upwards, with a clothe rolled about their legs,
going bare footed, and having their hair very long and rolled up together on
the top of his head, and always they carry their Bucklers or Targets with
them, and their Swords naked: these Nayry have their wives common amongst
themselves, and when any of them go into the house of any of these women, he
leaves his Sword and Target at the door, and the time that he is there, there
dare not any be so hardy as to come into that house. The kings children shall
not inherit the kingdom after their Father: because they hold this opinion,
that perchance they were not begotten of the king their Father, but of some
other man, therefore they accept for their King, one of the Sons of the kings
Sisters, or of some other woman of the blood royal for that they be sure they
are of the blood royal.

The Nayri and their wives use for a brauerye to make A very strange thing
hardlye to be believed
great holes in their ears, and so big and wide, that it is incredible,
holding this opinion, that the greater the holes be, the more noble they
esteem themselves. I had leave of one of them, to measure the circumference of
one of them with a thread, and within that circumference I put my arm up to the
shoulder, clothed as it was, so that in effect they are monstrous great. Thus
they do make them when they be little, for then they open the ear, and hang
a piece of gold or lead thereat, and in the opening, in the ^ole they put a
certain leaf that they have for that purpose, which makes the hole so great.
They lade Ships in Cochine for Portingale and for Ormus, but they that go for
Ormus, carry no Pepper but by Contrabanda, as for Sinamond, they easilye get
leave to carrye that away, for all other Spices and drugs they may liberallye
carry them to Ormus or Cambaia, and so all other merchandise which come from
other places, but out of the kingdom of Cochine proper, they carry away from
thence into Portingale great abundance The mercha^dize that the Portingales
carye from Cochine.
of Pepper, great quantity of Ginger, dried and conserved, wild Sinamond,
good quantity of Arecha, great store of Cordage of Cayro, made of the bark of
the Tree of the great Nut, and better then that of Hemp, of which they carry
great store into Portingale.

The Ships every year depart from Cochine to go Note the departing of the
ships from Cochine.
for Portingale, in the fist of December, or the fifth of Januarie. Now to
follow my voyage for the Indies: From Cochine I went to Coylane, distant from
Cochine seauentie and two miles, which Coylan is a small Fort of the king of
Portingales, situate in the kingdom of Coylane, which is a King of the
Gentiles, and of small trade: at that place they lade only half a Ship of
Pepper, and then she goes to Cochine to take in the rest, and from thence to
Cao Comeri, At Caocomery ends the coast of the Indies.
is seauentie and two miles, and there ends the coast of the Indies, and
along this coast, near to the water side, and also of Cao comery, down to
the low land of Chialoa, which is about two hundred miles: The people there are
as it were all returned to the Christian faith: there are also Churches of the
Friars of Saint Paul's order, which Friars do very much good in those places
to turn the people, and in converting them, and take great trouble in
instructing them in the law of Christ.

The fishing for Pearls.
THe Sea that lies between the coast which discendeth The order how they
fish for pearls.
from Cao Comery, to the low land of Chialoa and the Island Zeyland, they call
it the Fishing of Pearls, which fishing they make every year* beginning in
March or April, and it lasts 50 days, but they do not fish every year in
one place, but one year in one place, and another year in another place of
the same sea: when the time of this fishing draws near, then they send very
good Diverse, that go to discover where the greatest heaps of Dysters be under
water, and right against that place where the greatest store of Dysters be,
there they make or plant a village with houses and a Bazaro, all of stone,
which stands as long as the fishing time lasts, and it is furnished with
all thing necessary, and now and then it is near unto places that are
inhabited, and other times far of, according to the place where they fish. The
fisherme^ are all Christians of the country, and who that will may go to
fishing, paying a certain Duty paid to the king of Portingale for the fishing
of perles.
duty to the king of Portingale, and to the Churches of the friars of S.
Paul, which are in that coast, all the while that they are fishing, there is
three or four Fustes armed to defend the fishermen from Corsarios: It was my
chance to be there one time in my passage, and saw the order, that they used in
fishing, which is this* there are 3 or 4 barks y^ make co^sort together, which
are like to our little pilot boats and a little less, there goes 7. or 8. men
in a Boat: and I have seen in a morning great number of them go out, and
anchor in 15. or 18 fadomes of water which is the ordinarye depth of all that
coast: when they are at ankor, they cast a rope into the Sea and at the end of
the rope they make fast a great stone, and then there is ready, a man that has
his nose and his ears well stopped, and anointed with Oil and a Basket about
his neck, or under his left arm, then he goes down by the rope to the
bottom of the sea, and as fast as he can he fills the basket, and when it is
full, he shakes the rope and his fellows that are in the Bark, hale him up
with the basket: and in such wise they go one by one until they have laden
their bark with Oysters: and then at the evening they come to the village, and
then every company makes their mountain or heap of Oysters, one distant
from another in such wise that you shall see a great long row of mountains or
heaps of Oysters, and they are not touched, until such time as the fisshing
be ended, and at the end of the fishing, every company sits round about
their mountain or heap of Oysters, and fall to opening of them, which they may
easily do because they be dead, dry and brittle, and if every Oyster These
Perles are prised according to the caracts which they way, every caract is
four grains, and these me^ that prise them have an instrument of copper with
holes in it, which be made by degrees for to sort the Perles withal.
had pearl in them, it would be a very good purchase, but there is very many
that have no pearls in them: when the fishing is ended, then they see whether
it be a good gathering or a bad: there is certain men expert in the pearls,
whom they call Chitini which set and make the price of pearls according to
their carracts, bewty and goodness, making four sorts of them: the first sort
be the round pearls, and they be called Aia of Portingale, because ye
Portingales do buy them: the second sort which are not round, are called Aia
of Bengala: the 3. sort which are not so good as the second, they call Aia of
Canara, that is to say the kingdom of Bezeneger: the fourth and last sort,
which are the least and worst sort, are called Aia of Cambaia. Thus the price
being set, there is Merchants of every country, which are ready with their
money in their hands: so that in a few days all is bought up, at the prizes
set according to the goodness and caracts of the Pearls. In this sea of the
fishing of pearls is an Island called Manar, which is inhabited by Christians,
of the country which first were Gentiles, and have a small hold of the
Portingale, being situate over against Zeyland: and between these two Islands
there is a Channel, but not very big and has but a small depth therein, by
reason whereof there cannot any great ship pass that way, but small Ships,
and with the increase of the water, which is at the change or the full of the
Moon, and yet for all this they must unlade them, and put their goods into
small vessels to lighten them before they can pass that way, for fear of
Sholdes that lie in the channel, and after lade them into their Ships, to go
for the Indies, and this do all small Ships that pass that way, but those
Ships that go for the Indies Eastwardes, pass by the coast of Chiarimandell,
on the other side by the low Land of Chiloa which is beetweene the Firm Land
and the Island Manor, and going from the Indyes to the coast of Chiarimandell,
they loose some Ships, but they be emptye, because that the Ships that
pass that way discharge their goods at an Island called Peripatane, and there
landiug their goods into small flat bottomed Boats, which draw little
water, and are called Taken and can run over every Sholds without either
danger or loss of any thing, for that they tarrye in Peripatane until such
time as it be fair weather: Before they depart to pass through the Sholdes
there the small Ships and flat bottomed Boats go together in company, and
when they have sailed six and thirty Great trouble and danger. Great dangers
for ships.
miles, they arrive at the place where as the Sholdes be, and at that place the
winds blow so forcible that they are forced to go through, not having any
other refuge to save them selves: the flat bottomed Boats they go safe
through, where as the small Ships if they miss the aforesaid Channel, stick
fast on the Sholds, and by this means many are lost: and coming back from the
Indies, they go not that way but pass by the Channel of Manor as above
said, whose Channel is O^ye, and if the Ships stick fast, it is great
chance if there be any danger at all: the reason why this Channel is not more
surer to go thither is, because the winds that raygne or bl^weth between
Zeyland and Manar make the Channel so dry with water, that almost there is not
any passage: from Cao Comery to the Island of Zeyland is 120. miles overthwart.

Zeyland.
ZEyland is an Island, in my judgment a great deal bigger then Cyrus, on that
side toward the Indies: then westwards is the Colomba a hold of the
Portingales,
city called Colomba, which is a hold of the Portingales, but without wales or
enemies: it has toward the sea his fr^e port: ye lawful king of that Island,
is in Colomba, and is turned Christian, and maintained by the king of
Portingale, being deprived of his kingdom: The king of the Gentiles, to whom
this kingdom did belong was called the Madoni, which The policy of the son
deprived the father of his kingdom.
had two sons* the first named Barbynas the Prince, and the second Ragine:
this king by the policy of his younger son was deprived of his kingdom,
because he had ^ntised and done that which pleased the army and Soldiers, in
dispight of his father and brother being prince, usurped the kingdom, and
became a great warriar: first this Island had three kings, this Ragine, with his
father, and Barbinas his brother: the king of Cotta with his conquered
prisoners: the king of Candia, which is a part of that Island, and is so called
by the kingdom of Candia, which had a reasonable power, and was a great friend
to the Portingales, which said that he lived secretly a Christian: the third
was the king of Gianifanpatan: in 13. years that this Ragine governed this
Island Cayro is a stuff that they make ropes with the which is the bark of a
tree.
he became a great tyrant. In this Island there grows fine Sinnamon, great
store of pepper, great store of Nuttes* and Arochoe, there they make great store
of Cairo^ to make Cordage: it brings forth great store of Crystal Cattes
eyes, or Echi de Gaty, and they say that they find there some Rubyes, but I
have sold Rubies well there, ye I brought with me from Pega: I was very
desirous to see how they gather the sinnamon, or tak it from the tree that it
grows on, and so much the rather, because the time that I was there, was the
season which they gather it in, which was in the month of April: whereas at
which time, y^ Portingales were in arms and in the field, with the king of the
country: yet I to satisfy my desire, although in great danger, took a guide
with me and went into a wood, 3. miles from the city, in which wood was great
store of sinnamon trees growing together among other wild trees, and this
sinnamon tree is a small tree, The cutting and gathering of sinamon.
and not very high, and has his leaves like to our Bay tree: In the month of
March or April, when the sap goes up to the top of the tree, then they take
the sinamon from that tree: in this wise they cut ye bark of the tree round
about in length from knot to knot, or from joint to joint, above and below,
and then easily with their hands they take it away laying it in the sun to dry:
and in this wise it is gathered: and yet for A rare thing*
all this the tree dies not, but against the next year it will have a new
bark, and that which is gathered every year is the best sinnamon: for that
which grows 2. or 3. years is great and not so good as the other is: and in
these woods grows much Pepper.

Negapatan.
FRom Zeyland within ye Island, to go with small ships to Negapatan within the
firm land: and 72. miles of is a very great city, and very populous of
Portingales and Christians of the country, and part Gentiles: it is a
country of small trade, neither have they any trade there save a good quantity
of Rice, and cloth of bumbast which they carry into diverse parts: it was a very
plentiful country of victuales, but now a great deal less, and that
abou^dance of victuales, caused many Portingales to go thither, and build
houses and dwell there with small charge.

This City belongs to a noble man of the kingdom of Bezeneger being a
Gentile, nevertheless the Portingales and other Christians are well entreated
there, and have their Churches there with a Monastery of S. Francis order, with
great devotion and very well accommodated, with bouses round about, yet for
all this they are amongst tyrants, which always at their pleasure may do them
some harm, as it happened in the year of our Lord God* 1565, which I remember
very well, how that the Naic, that is to say the Lord of the City, sent to
the Citizens to demand of them certain Arabian Horses, and they having
denied them unto him, and gainesaid his demand, it came to pass that this Lord
had a desire to see the Sea, which when the poor Citizens understood thereof,
they doubted some evil, to hear a thing which was not wont to be, they
thought that this man would come to sack the City, and presently they
embarked themselves the best they could with their mooueables, A foolish fear
of Portingales.
merchandise, Jewels, money and all that they had, and caused the ships to put
from the shore, when this was done, as their ill chance would have it, the
next night following, there came such a great storm, which put all the ships a
land perforce, and brake them to pieces, and all the goods. that came a land
and was saved, was taken from them by the Soldiors and army of this Lord,
which came down with him to see the sea, and were attendant at the Sea side,
not thinking any such thing to have happened.

Saint Thomas, or san Tome.
FRom Nega patan sollowing my voyage toward the East, a hundredth and fifty
miles, S. Thomas his sepulcher.
I found the house of blessed S. Thomas, which is a Church of great devotion,
and greatly regarded of the Gentiles for the great miracles that they have
heard has been done by that blessed Apostle: near unto this Church the
Portingales have builded them a City in the country subject ^o the king of
Bezeneger, which Cittye, although it be not very great, in my judgment it is
the fairest in all that part of the Indyes: and it has very fair houses and
fair Gardens, in vacant places very well accommodated: it has streets large
and straight, with many churches A description of S. Thomas his town, called
of the Portingales S. Tome.
of great devotion: their houses be set close unto an other, with little
doors: every house has his defense, so that by that means it is of force
suffitient to defend themselves against that country: the Portyngales there
have no other possession but their Gardens, and houses that are within the
City: the customs belong to the king of Bezeneger, which are very small and
easy, for that it is a Country of great riches, and great trade: there
comes every year two or A painted kind of cloth and dyed of diverse colors
which those people delight much in and esteem them of a great price.
three great ships very rich, besides many other small ships: one of the two
great ships goes for Pegan, and the other for Mallaca, laden with fine bumbast
cloth of every sort, painted, which is a rare thing, because those kind of
clothes show as they were gilded with diverse colors, and the more they be
washed, the liuelier the colors will show: also there is other cloth of bumbast
which is wouen with diverse colors, and are of great value: also they make in
Sane Tome, great store of red Yarne, which they dys with a root called Saya,
and this color will never wast, but the more it is washed, the more redder it
will show: they lade this yarne the greatest part of it, for Pegan, because
that there they work and weaue it to make cloth according to their own
fashion, and with lesser charges: It is a marvelous thing to them which have
not seen the laging and vnlading of men and marcha^dize in S. Tome as they do,
it is a place so dangerous, there a man cannot be served with small barks,
neither can they do their business with the boats of the ships because they
would be beaten in a thousand pieces, but they make certain barks (of purpose)
high, which they call Masady, they be made of little Boardes: one Board sowed
to another with small cords, and in this order are they made: And when they
are thus made: and that they will embarke any thing in them eythe men or
goods, they lade them a land, and when they are laden, the Bark men shruste
the boat with her lading into the stream: and with great speed they make
haste, all that they are able to row out against the huge waves of the sea
that are on that shore until that they carry them to the Ships: and in like
manner they lade these Masudies a^ the Ships with merchandise and men: when
they come near the shore, the Bark-men keep out of the Bark into the Sea to
keep the Bark right that she cast not thwart the shore, and being kept
right, the Suffe of the Sea sets her lading dry a land, without any burt or
danger, and sometimes there is some of them that is overthrown, but there can
be no great loss, because the^ lade but a little at a time: all the
merchandise that they la^ outwardes they emball it well with Ox hides so that
if ^^ take wette it can have no great harm.

In my voyage returning, in the year of our Lord God, one thousand, five
hundred, sixtye and six. I went from Goa unto Malacca, in a Ship or Galion
of the King of Portingales, which went unto Banda for to lade Nutmegs In the
Island of Banda they lade Nutmegs for there they grow.
and Maces: from Goa to Malaca, one thousand eight hundred miles we passed
within the Island Zeyland, and went through the channel of Nicubar, or else
through the channel of Sombrero, which is by the middle of the Island called
Sumtara, called Taprobana: and from Nicuber to Pigue is as it were, a row or
chain of an infinite number of Islands, of which many are enhabited, with
wild people, and they call those Islands the Islands of Andeman, and they call
their In the Islands of Andeman they eat one another
people sauadge or wild, because they eat one another: also these Islands
have war one with another, for they have small Barks, and with them they
take one an other and so eat one an other, and if by evil thaunce any Ship be
lost on those Islands, as many have been, there is not one man of those Ships
lost there that escapes uneaten or vnstaine, these people have not any
acquaintance with any other people, neither have they trade with any, but line
only of such fruits as those Islands yields: and if any Ship come near unto
that place or coast as they paase y^ way, as in my voyage it happened, as I
came from Malaca through the channel of The Mowsies is a kind of fruit
growing in clusters and are 5 or 6 inches long 2 piece, and they grow 5. or 7.
on a cluster and are a very good meat.
Sombrero, there came two of their barckes near unto our ship laden with
fruit, as with Mouces which we call Adams apples, with fresh nuttes, and with
a fruit called Inany: which fruit is like to our Turnops, but is very sweet
and good to eat: they would not come into the ship for any thing that we
could do: neither would they take any money for their fruit, but they would
trucke for old shirtes or pieces of old linen breches, these rags they let
down with a rope into their bark unto them, and look what they thought those
things to be worth, so much fruit they would In any a fruit like to a T^^nep,
deliciou^ to eat.
make fast to the rope and let us hale it in, and it was told me that at
sonetimes a man shall have for an old shirte a good piece of Ambar.

Sumatra.
THis Island of Sumatra is a great Island and divided and governed by many
Kings, and divided into many channels, where through there is passage: upon
the head land toward the West is the kingdom of Assi and governed by a Moore
King, this king is of great force and strength as he that beside his great
kingdom, has many foists and Galleys. In his kingdom grows great store of
Pepper, Ginger, Benjamin, he is an utter enemy to the The commodities that
grow in the kingdom of Assi.
Portingale and has diverse times been at Malacca to fight against it, and
has done great harm to the bowroughes thereof, but the City alwaie
defended him valientlie, and with their ordinance did great spoil to his
Camp, at length I came to the City of Malacca.

The City Malacca.
MAlacca is a City of merueitous great trade of all The great trade that is
at Malacca.
kind of Merchanbize. Which comes from diverse parts, because that all the
Ships that sail in these seas, both great and small, are bound to touch at
Malacca, to pay their custom there, although they unlade nothing at all as we
do at Elsinor: and if by night they escape away, and pay not their custom,
then they fall into a greater danger after: for if they come into the Indies
and have not the seal of Malacca* they pay double custom, I have not passed
farther then Malacca toward the East, but that which I will speak of here, is
by good information of them Voiages which are only for the king and his noble
men.
that have been there. The sailing from Malacca toward the East, is not
common for all men, as China and Giapan, and so forwards to go who will, but
only for the king of Portingale and his nobles, with leave granted unto them
of the king to make such voiages, or to the jurisdiction of the captain of
Malacca, where he expects to know what voiages they make from Malacca
thither, and these are the kings voiages, that every year, either departs from
Malacca, two Galions of the kings, one of them goes to the Mulluccos to lade
Cloves, and the other goes to Banda to lade At the Moluccos they lade the
Cloves.
Nutmegs and Maces. These two Galians are laden for the king, neither do they
carrye any particular man's goods, saving the portage of the Mariners and
Soldiors, and for this cause, they are not voiages for Merchants, because that
going thither he shall not have where to lade his goods of return, and besides
this the Captain will not carrye any Merchant for either of these two places.
There goes small Ships of the Mores thither, which come from the coast of
Iaua, and change or guild their commodities in the kingdom of Assa, and these
be the Maces, Cloves, and Nutmegs, which go for the straights of Meca. The
voiages that the king of Portingale grants to his nobles are these, of China
and Giapan: from China to Giapan, and from Giapan to China, and from China to
the Indies, and the voyage of Bengaluco Sonda, with the lading of fine cloth,
and every sort of Bumbast cloth* Sonda is an Island of the Mores, near to the
roast of Giaua, and there they lade Pepper for China. The ships that goes
every year from the Indies to China is The ship of Drugs, so termed of the
Portingales.
called the Ship of Drugs, because she carries diverse drugs of Cambaya: but the
greatest part of her lading is silver. From Malacca to China is 1800. miles,
and from China to Giapan, goes every year a great ship of great importance,
laden with silk, which for return of their silk bring bars The distance of
places.
of Silver which they truck in China, that is distant between China an^ Giapan
2400 miles, and in this way there is diverse Islands, not very big, in the which
the Friars of S. Paul by the help of God, make many Christians there like to
themselves: from these Islands hither wards is not Islands not discovered.
yet discovered, for the great sholdnes of Sands that they find. The
Portingales have made a small City near unto the coast of China called Macha,
whose church and houses are of wood, and has a Bishoprike: but the customs
are of the king of China, and they go and pay it at a City called Canton,
which is a City of great importance, and very beautiful, two days iorneye
and a half from Macheo, which people are Gentiles, and are so iealious and
fearful, A kind of iealious people.
that they would not have a stranger to put his foot within their land, so
that when the Portingales go thither to pay their custom, and to buy their
Merchandise, they will not consent that they shall lie or lodge within the
City, but sends them forth into the subburbs. The country of China China
is under the government of the great Tartar.
is in the kingdom of great Tartaria, and is a very great country of the
Gentiles, and of great importance, which may be judged by the rich and
precious merchandise that come from thence, the which I believe are not better
nor greater quantity in the whole world, then these are that The riches of
China.
come from thence. First great store of gold, which they carye to the Indies,
made in plates like to little Ships* and in value 23 caracts a piece, very
great abundance of fine Silk, Cloth of Damask and Taffitle, great quantity
of Musk, great quantity of Occom in bars, great quantity of Quicksiluer and
of Cinaper, great store of Camfora, an infinite quantity of Procellane, made in
vessels of diverse sorts, great quantity of painted cloth and squares, infinite
store of the roots of China, every year there comes from China to the
Indies two or three great Ships, laden with most rich and precious
Merchandise. The Rubarbe comes from thence over land, by the way of Percia,
because that every year there goes a great Carauan from Percia to China,
which is in going thither six months* Carauan arriueth at a city called
Lanchine, the place where the king is resident It is a most excellent fine
metal as may be made.
with his court, I spoke with a Persian that was three years in that City of
Lanchine, and he told me that it was a great City and of great importance. The
voiages of Malacca which are in the jurisdiction of the Captain of the
castle, are these, that every year he sends a small Ship to Timor to land
white Sandolo, for all the Tymor an Island from whence comes all the white
Sa^dolo.
best comes from this Island: there comes also from Color, but that is not
so good: also he sends another small ship every year to Cochine China, to
lade there wood of Aleos, for that all the wood of Aleos comes from this
place, which is in the firm land near unto China, and in that kingdom I
could not know how that wood grows by any means. For that the people of the
country will not suffer the Portingales to come within the land, but only
for wood and water, and as for all other things that they wanted, as victuals
or merchandise, the people bring y^ a board the A market kept aboard of the
ships.
ship in small barks, so that every day there is a mart kept in the Ship,
until such time as she be laden: also there goes another ship for the said
Captain of Malacca to Asion, to lade Verzino: all these voiages are for the
Captain of the Castle of Malacca, and when he is not disposed to make these
voiages, he sells them to another.

The City Sion.
SIon was the imperial seat, and a great City, but in the year of our Lord
God, 1567, it was taken by the king of Pegu which king made a voyage or came by
A prince of a merueilous strength and power.
land four months journey with an army of men through his land, and the
number of his army was a Milion and four hundredth thousand men of war: when
he came to the City, he gave assault to it, and besieged it twentye and one
months before he could win it, with great loss of his people, this I know,
for that I was in Pegu six months after his departure, and saw when that his
officers that were in Pegu* sent five hundredth thousand men of war to furnish
the places of them that were slain and lost in that assault: yet for all this,
if there had not been treason against the City, it had not been lost,
Treason.
for on a night there was one of the gates set open, through the which with
great trouble the king gat into the City, and became governor of Sion: and
when the Emperor saw that he was betrayed, and that his enemy was in the City,
he poisoned himself, and the wives and children, friend and noblemen, that
were not slain in the first affront of the entrance into the City, were all
carried captives into Pegu, where I was at the coming home of the king with
his triumphs and victory, which coming home and returning from the wars
was a goodlye sight to behold, to see the Elephants Great triumph^.
come home in a square, laden with Gold, Silver, Jewels, and with Noble men and
women that were taken prisoners in that City.

Now to return to my voyage: I departed from Malacca, in a great Ship which
went for S. Tome, being a City situate on the coast of Chiriamandell, and
because the captain of the castles of Malacca having understanding proaduyzo,
that the king of Assi would come with a great army and power of men against
them, therefore upon this he would not give license that any Ships should
depart: Wherefore in this Ship we departed in the night, without making any
provision of our water: and we were in that ship four hundredth and odd
men: we departed from thence with Intention to go to an Island to take in
water, but the winds were so contrary, that they would not suffer us to fetch
it, so that by this means we were two and forty days in the sea as it were
lost, and we were driven too and fro, so that the first land that we
discovered, was beyond Saint Tomes, more then five hundredth miles The
mountains of Zerziline.
which were the mountains of Zerzerline, near unto the kingdom of Orisa, and
so we came to Orisa with many sick, and more that wear dead for want of
water: and they that were sick in four days died: and I for the space A
miserable thing.
of a year after had my throat so sore hoarse, that I could never fatisfie
my thirst in drinking of water: I judge the reason of my hoarsenesse to be with
soppes that I wette in vinnigar and Oil wherewith I sustained my self many
days, there were not any want of bread neither of wine: But the wines of that
country are so hot that without water they kill a man: neither are they able
to drink them: when we began to want water, I saw certain Moors that were
officers in the Ship, that sold a small dish They would have given two hundred
and a half of pepper for a small dish of water and they would not take it
their misery was so great.
full for a Duckat, after this, I saw one that would have given a Bar of
Pepper, which is two quintalles and a half, for a little measure of water, and
he could not have it. Truly I believe that I had died with my slave, whom then
I had to serve me, which cost me very dear, but to provide for the danger at
hand, I sold my slave for half that he was worth, because that I would save
his drink that he drunks to serve my own purpose, and save my life.

Of the Kingdom of Orisa, and the River Ganges.
ORisa was a fair Kingdom, and trustye, A rare thing*
through the which a man might have gone with Gold in his hand without any
danger The love of the King to strangers was so great, that he would take no
custom of them.
at all, as long as the lawful King reined which was a gentile, which was in
the city called Catecha, which was within the land six days Journey. This
King loved Strangers marvelous well, and Merchants which came in and out in
his Kingdom, in such wise, that he would take no custom of of them, neither
any other grievous thing. Only the Ship that came thither paid a small thing
according to her portage, and every year in the port of Orisa, laded 25. or
30. Ships great and small, with Ryce diverse sorts of fine white bumbaste
cloth. Oil of Zerzclnie, which they make The commodities that go out of Orisa.
of a Seed, and is very good to eat and to frye fish withal, great store of
Butter, Lacca, long Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolany dry, and condyt, great store of
cloth of herbs, which is a kind of Silk which grows amongst the woods
without This cloth we call Nettle cloth.
any labor of man, only when the bole thereof is grown round as big as an
Orange* then they take care only to gather them. About sixteen years passed,
this King with his Kingdom were destroyed by the King of Patane, which was In
this Bengala, they lade Nutmegges, for there they grow.
also King of the greatest part of Bengala, and when he had got the kingdom
he set custom there twenty pro cento, as Merchants paid in his Kingdom, but
this tirant enjoyed his kingdom but a small time, but was conquered by another
tirant, which was the great Magoll, King of Agraa, Dely and of all Cambaia,
without any resistance. I departed from Orisa to Bengala, to the harber
Picheno, which is distant from Orisa toward the East a hundredth and seauenty
miles. They go as it were rowing along the coaste The River of Ganges*
fifty and four miles, and then we enter into the River Ganges: from the
mouth of this River, to a City called Satagan where the Merchants gather them
selves together with their trade, are ^ ^20. miles, which they row in 18.
hours: with the increace of the water, in which River it flows and ebbeth as
it does in the Themes, and when the ebbing water is come, they are not able to
row against it, by reason of the swiftness of the water, yet their Barks be
light and armed with oars, like to Foistes, yet they cannot prevail Bazaras
and Pa^uas are the names of the Barks that they row in the River Ganges.
against that stream, but for refuge must make them fast to the bank of the
river until the next flowing water, and they call these barks Bazaras and
Patuas: they row as well as a Gallyot, or as well as ever I have seen any, a good
tides rowing before you come to Satagan, you shall have a place which is called
Buttor, and from thence vpwardes the Ships do not go, because that upwards
the River is very shallowe, and little water, every year at Buttor they make
and unmake a Village, with houses and shops, made of Straw, and with all
things necessary to their uses, and this village stands as long as the
ships ride there, and depart for the Indies, and when they are departed,
every man goes to his plotte of houses, and there sets fire on A town made
for two or three months and then burnt.
them, which thing made me to marvel. For as I passed up to Satagan, I saw
this village standing with a great number of people, with an infinite number of
Ships and Bazars, and at my return coming down with my Cartaine of the
last ship, for whom I tarried, I was all amazed to see such a place so soon
rased and burnt, nothing left but the sign of the burnt houses, the Small
Ships go to Satagan, and there they lade.

Of the City of SATAGAN.
IN the port of Satagan every year ladeth 30. or 35. Ships great and small,
with Ryce The commodities that are laden in Satagan.
Cloth of Bombaste, of diverse sorts, Lacca, great abundance of Sugar,
Mirabolany, dried and preserved, long Pepper, Oil of Zerzeline, and many other
sorts of Merchandise. The City of Satagan is a reasonable fair City for a
City of the Moors, abounding in all things, and was governed by the King of
Patane, and now is subject to the great Magoll, I was in this Kingdom four
months, whereas many merchants did buy or freight boats for their benefits,
and with these barks they go up and down the river of Ganges to Faires,
buying their commodity with a great advantage, because that every day in the
Week they have a Fair, now in one place, and now in another, and I also hired
a bark and went up and down the river and did my business, and so in the
night I saw many strange things. These Gentiles are Idolators.
The kingdom of Bengala in times past have been as it were in the power of
Moors, nevertheless there is great store of Gentiles among them, always
whereas I have spoken of Moors are of the sect of Mahomet.
Gentiles, is to be understood Idolaters, and whereas I speak of Moors I mean
Mahomets sect, especially those people that be within the land do greatly
worship the river of Ganges, for when any is sick, he is brought out of the
country to the bancke of the river, and there they make him a small cottage of
Straw, and every day they wet him with A Ceremonye of the gentiles when they
are dead.
that Water, whereof there is many that die, and when they are dead, they make
a heap of sticks and boughs and lay the dead body thereon, and putting fire
thereunto, they let the body alone until it be half roasted, and then they
take it off from the fire, and make an empty iar fast about his neck, and so
throw him into the river. These things every night as I passed up and down
the river I saw for the space of Portingales do not drink of the water* of
the River Ganges.
two months, as I passed to the fayres to buy my commodities with the
Merchauntes, and this is the cause that the Portugalles will not drink of the
water of the river Ganges, yet to the sight it is more perfecter and clearer
then that water of Nylus is. From y^ port of Pechineo I went to Cochim, and
from Cochim to Malaca, from whence I departed for Pegu eight hundred miles
distant, that voyage was wo^t to be made in twenty five or thirty days, but
we were four months, and at the end of three months our Ship was without
victualles. The Pilot told us that we were by his altitude from a City
called Tenassiry, a City in the kingdom of Pegu, and these his words were
not true, but we were (as it were) in y^ middle of many Islands, and many
uninhabited rocks, and there were also some Portugals that affirmed that they
knew the Land, and knew also where the City of Tenassiry was.

Which city of right belongs to the kingdom of Sion, which is situate on a
great river side which comes out of the kingdom of Sion: and where this
river runs into the Mergy a harbor where ships land.
sea, there is a village called Mergy, in whose harbor every year there
ladeth some Ships with Uerzina, Nypa, and Benjamin, a few cloves, nuts and
maces which come from the coast of Sion, but the greatest merchandise there is
verzing, and nypa, which is an excellent Wine, which is had in the flower of a
tree called Nyper. Whose liquor they distill, and Niper Wine is a most
excellent drink.
so make an excellent drink clear as Crystal, good to the mouth, and
better to the stomach, and it has an excellent gentle virtue, that if one
were rotten with the french pocks, drinking good store of this, he shall be
whole again, and I have seen it proved, because that, when I was in Cochin,
there was a friend of mine, that his nose began to drop away with that
diseaze, and was counseled of the doctors of physic, that he should go to
Tenassary at the time of the new Niper Wine good to cure the french disease.
wines, and that he should drink of the nyper Wine, night and day, as much as
he could before it was distilled, which at that time it is most delicate, but
after that it is distilled, it is more stronger, and drink much of it, it
will fume into the head with drunkenness. This man went thither, and did so,
and I have seen him after with a good color and Niper Wine very dear in the
Indians.
sound. This Wine is very much esteemed in the Indies, and for that that it
is brought so far off, it is very dear: in Pegu ordinarily it is good
cheap, because it is nearer to the place where they make it, and there is
every year great quantity made thereof: and returning to my purpose, I say
being amongst these rocks, and far from the land which is over against
Tenassary, with great scarsitie of victualles, and that by the saying of the
pylate and two Portugalles, holding then firm that we were in front of the
aforesaid harbor, we determined to go thither with our boat and ^etch
victualles, and that the ship should stay for us in a place assigned, we
were twenty and eight persons in the boat that went for victualles, and on a
day about twelve of the clock we went from the Ship, assuring our selves to be
in the harbor before night in the aforesaid port, we rowed all that day, and
a great part of the next night, and all the next day without finding harbor,
or any sign of good landing, and this came to pass through the evil counsel
of the two Portugalles that were with us.

For we had ouershot the harbor and left it behind us, in such wise that we
had lost the land, enhabited with the ship, and we twenty eight men had no
manner of victual with us in the boat, but it was the Lords will that one of
the Mariners, had brought a little Ryce with him in the boat to barter away for
some other thing, and it was not so much but that three or four men would have
eaten it at a meal: Great extremity at Sea.
I took the government of this Ryce, promising that by the help of God that
Ryce should be nourishment for us until it plesed God to send us to some place
that was enhabited: and when I slept I put the ryce into my bosom because they
should not rob it from me: we were nine days rowing along the coast,
without finding any thing but Countries uninhabited, and deserts Island, where if
we had found but grass it would have seemed Sugar unto us, but we could not
find any, yet we found a few leaves of a tree, and they were so hard that
we could not chew them, we had Water and Wood sufficient, and as we rowed, we
could go but by flowing Water, for when it was ebbing Water, we This Tortu go
is a shell fish which lives in y^ Sea, and yet lays his Eggs in the Sand,
I have seen 200. and od eggs in one of their b^^ lies.
made fast our boat to the bancke of one of those Islands, and in these nine
days that we rowed, we found a cave or nest of Tortugaes eggs, wherein was a
hundred and forty four eggs, the which was a great help unto us: these
eggs are as big as a hens egg, and have no shell about them but a tender
Skin, every day we sodde a kettle full of them eggs, with an handful of
ryce in the broth thereof: it pleased God that at the end of nine days, we
discovered certain fisher men, a fishing with small barks, and we rowed
toward them, with a good cheer, for I think there were never men more glad
then we were, for we were so sore afflicted with penury that we could skarce
stand on our legs. yet according to the order that we set for our ryce, when we
saw those fisher men, there was left sufficient for four days. The first
village that we came too, was in the gulf of Tauay, under the King of Pegu,
whereas we found great store of victualles, then for two or three days
after our ariuall there, we would eat but little meat, any of us: and
Tauay under the King of Pegu.
yet for all this, we were at the point of death the most part of us. From
Tauay to Martauan, in the Kingdom of Pegu, are seventy two miles. We laded
our boat with victuals which was abundantly sufficient for six months,
from whence we departed for the port and City of Martauan, where in short
time we arrived, but we found not our ship there as we had thought we should,
from whence presently we made out two backs to go to look for her. And they
found her in great calamity, and need of Water, being at an ancker with a
contrary wind, and came very ill to pass, because that she wanted her boat
a month which should have made her provision of wood and water, The ship also
by the grace of God arrived safely in the aforesaid port of Martauan.

The City of Martauan.
WE found in the City of Martauan ninety Portugalles of Merchantes Martauan
a City under the King of Pegu.
and other base men, which had fallen at difference with the Retor or governor
of the City, and for this cause, that certain vagabondes of the Portugalles
had slain five falchines of the Kings of Pegu, which chanced about a month
after that the King of Pegu was gone with a million and four hundredth
thousand men to conquer the kingdom of Sion, they have for custom in this
Country and Kingdom, that the King being wheresoever his pleasure is to be
out A custom that these People have when the King is in the wars.
of his kingdom, that every fifteen days there goes from Pegu a carauan of
Falchines, with every one a basket on his head full with some fruits or
other delicates of refreshings, and with clean clothes, it chaunsed that this
carauan passing by Martauan, and resting themselves there a night, there
happened between the Portugalles and them: words of dispight, and from words
to blows, and because it was thought that the Portugalles had the worse, the
night following, when the Falchines were a sleep with their company, the
Portugalles went and cut off five of their heads. Now there is a Law in Pegu
that whosoever A law in Pegu for killing of men.
kills a man, he shall buy the shed blood with his money, according to the
estate of the person that is slain, but these Falchines being the servants
of the King, the Retors durst not do any thing in the matter, without the
consent of the King, because it was necessary that the King should know of
such a matter. When the King had knowledge thereof, he gave commandment that
the malifactors should be kept until his coming home, and then he would
duly minister justice, but the captain of the Portugalles would not deliver
those men, but rather set himself with all the rest in arms, and went every
day through the city marching with the Drum and ancient displayed. For at
that time the City was empty of men, by reason they were gone al to the
wars and in business of the king, in the midst of this rumor we came
thither, and I thought it a strange thing to see the Portugalles use such
insolency Great pride of the Portin galls.
in another man's City. And I stood in doubt of that which came to pass,
and would not unlade my goods because y^ they were more surer in the ship then
on the land, the greatest part of the lading was the owners of the ship, who
was in Malacca, yet there were diverse mercha^ts there, but their goods were of
small importance, al those merchants told me y^ they would not unlade any of
their goods there, unless I would unlade first, yet after they left my
counsel and followed their own, and put their goods a land and lost it every
whit. The Rector with the customer sent for me, and demanded why I put not my
goods a land, and pay my custom as other men did? to whom I answered, that I
was a merchant that was newly come thither, and seeing such disorder amongst A
good discrete way taken for safe guard of his goods.
the Portugalles, I doubted the loss of my goods which cost me very dear,
with the sweat of my face, and for this cause I was determined not to put my
goods a land, until such time as his honor would assure me in the name of
the king, that I should have no loss although there came harm to the
Portugalles, that I nor my goods should not have any hurt, because I had
neither part nor any difference with them in this rumor: my reason sounded well
in the Retors ears, and presently commanded to call the Bargits, which are as
Counselors of the City and there they promised me on the Kings head or in the
behalf of the King, that neither I nor my goods should have any harm, but
that we should be safe and sure: of which promise there was made public notes,
and then I sent for my goods and had them a land, and paid my custom, which is
in that country ten in the hundredth of the same goods, and for my more
security I took a house right against the Retors house. The Captain of the
Portugalles, and all the Portugal Merchants were put out of the City, and I
with twenty and two poor men which were officers in the Ship, we had our
dwelling in the City. After this, the Gentil^ devised to be revenged of the
Portugales, but they would not put it in execution until such time as our
small Ship had discharged all her goods, and then the nert night following,
came from Pegu four thousand soldiers A revenge on the Portingales.
with some Elyphants of War, and before that they made any rumor in the
city, the Retor sent, and gave commandment to all Portugales that were in
the City, that when they heard any rumor or noise, that for any thing they
should not go out of their houses, and as they tendered their own health.
Then four hours in the night I heard a great rumor and noise of men of
War, with Eliphants which threw down the doors of the Warehouses of the
Portugalles, and their houses of wood and straw, in the which rumor there
were some Portugalles wounded, and one of them slain, and others without
making proof of there manhood, which the day before did so brag at that
time: put themselves to flight most shamefullye, and saved them selves a
boorde of little Ships, that were at an ancker in the harbor, and some that
were in their beds fled away naked, and that night they carried away all the
Portugalles goods, out of the suburbs into the City, and those Portugalles
that had their goods in the suburbs with all. After this the Portugalles that
were fled into the ships to save themselves, took a new courage to
themselves, and came a land and set fire on the houses in the suburbs, which
houses being made of board and straw, and a fresh wind: in small time they
were burnt and consumed, with which fire half the City had like to been
burnt, when the Portugalles had done this, they were without all hope to
recover any part of their goods again, which goods might amount to the sum
of sixteen thousand ducats, which if they had not set fire to the town,
they might have had their goods given them gratis, then the Portugalles having
understanding that this thing was not done by the consent of the King, but by
his lifetenant and the Retor of the city, they were very ill content, knowing
that they had made a great fault, yet the next morning following, the
Portugalles began to batter and shoot their ordinance against the City, which
battery of theirs continued four days, but all was in vain, for the shot
never hit the City, but light on the top of a small hill near unto it, so
that the City had no harm, when the Retor perceiving that the Portugalles
made batry against the City, he took twenty and one Portugalles that were
there in the City, and sent them four miles into the Country, there to
tarry until such time as the other Portugalles were departed, that made the
battery, who after their departure let them go at their own liberty without
any harm done unto them, I was always in my house with a good guard appointed
me by the Retor, that no man should do me injury, nor harm me nor my
goods, in such wise that he performed all that he had promised me in the
name of the King, but he would not let me depart before the coming of the
king, which was my hindrance greatly, because I was twenty and one months
sequested, that I could not buy nor sell any kind of merchandire. Those
commodities that I brought thither, was Peper, Sandolo, and Procellan of China,
so when the King was come home, I made my supplication unto him, and I was
licensed to depart when I would.

From Martauan I departed to go to the chiefest City in Pegu* is the name of
the Kingdom and y^ choice City is called after that name.
the kingdom of Pegu, which is also called after the name of the Kingdom,
which voyage is made by sea in three or four days, they may go also by Land,
but he that has merchandire it is better for him to go by sea and lesser
charge, and in this voyage you shall have a Marcareo, which is one of the
meruellous things in the world y^ nature has wrought, and I never saw any
thing so hard to be believed as this, The great increasing and deminishing that
the Water makes there at one pushe or instant, and with the horrible A thing
most marvelous that at the coming of the tide, that the earth should quake
earth quake and great noise that it makes where it comes. We departed from
Martauan in barks, which are like to our Pylot boats, with the increase of the
Water, and they go as swift as an arrowe out of a bow, so long as the tide
runs with them, and when the water is at the highest, then they draw
themselves out of the Chanel toward some bancke, and there they come to anchor,
and when the Water is diminished, then they rest a dry: and when the barks
rest dry, they are as high from the bottom of the Channel, as any house top
is high from the ground. They let their barks lie so high for this respect,
that if there should any ship rest or ride in the Channel, with such force
comes in the Water, that it would overthrow ship or bark: yet for all this,
that the barks be so far out of the Channel, This tide is like to the tides
in our River of Seuerne.
and though the Water has lost her greatest strength and fury before it come
so high, yet they make fast their prowe to the streme, and often times it
makes them very fearful, and if the Anchor did not hold her prow up by
strength: she would be overthrown and lost with men and goods, when the
Water begins to increase, it makes such a noise and so great that you would
think it an earthquake, and presently at the first it makes 3. wanes. So that
the first washes over the bark, from stem to stern the second is not These
tides make their just course as o^rs do.
so furious as the first, and the third ratseth the anchor, and then for the
space of six hours y^ the water increases, they rolve with such swiftness
that you would think they did fly, in these tides there must be lost no jot
of time, for if you ariue not at the stagious before the tide be spent, you
must turn back from whence you came For there is no staying at any place but
at these stagious, and there is more danger at one of these places then at
another, as they be higher and lower one then another. When as you return
from Pegu to Martauan, they go but half the Tide at a time, because they will
lay their barks up aloft on the banckes, for the reason aforesaid, I could
never gather any reason of the noise that this Water makes in the increase of
the This Macareo is a tide or a coraot. Houses made of Cane and covered with
leaves of trees.
Tide, and in deminishing of the Water. There is another Macareo in Cambaya,
but that is nothing in comparison of this, by the help of God we came safe to
Pegu, which are two cities, the old and the new, in the old City are the
Merchant strangers, and merchants of the Country, for there is the greatest
doings and greatest trade. This City is not very great, but it has very
great suburbs. Their houses be made with canes, and covered with leaves, or
with Godon is a pla^e or house for merchants to lay their goods in.
straw, But the merchants have all one house or Magason, which house they call
Godon which is made of Brickes, and there they put all their goods of any
valor, to save them from the often mischances y^ there happens to houses made
of such stuff, in the new city is the palace of the king, and his abiding
The form of the building of the new Cittye of Pegu.
place with all his barons and nobles, and other gentlemen and in y^ time that
I was there, they finished the building of the new city, it is a great city,
very plain and flat, and 4. square, walled round about, and with ditches y
compass the walls about with water, in which diches are many crockadels, it
has no draw Bridges, yet it has twenty gatcs, five for every square on y^
walls, there is many places made for sentinels to watch, made of Wood and
covered or guilt with gold, the streets thereof are the fairest that I have
seen, they are as straight as a line from one gate to another, and standing at
the one gate, you may discover to the other, and they are as broad as 10. or
12. men may ride a breast in the^: and those streets that be thwart are fair
and large, these streets both on the one side and on the other, are planted at
the doors of the houses: But trees of India, which make a very commodious
shadow, the houses be made of Wood and covered with a kind of tiles in form
of cups, very necessary for their use, the Kings Palace is in the middle of
the City, made in form of a walled Castle, with ditches full of Water round
about A rich and stately Pallaice.
it, The lodgings within are made of Wood, all over gilded with fine pynacles,
and very costly work, covered with plates of Gold. Truly it may be a Kings
house: within y^ gate there is a fair large Court, from the one side to the
other, wherein there is made places for the strongest and stoutest Eliphantes
appointed for the service of the Kings Four white Eliphants
person, and amongst all other Eliphants, he has four that be white, a thing
so rare that a man shall hardly find another King that has any, and if this
King know any other that has white Eliphants, he sends for them as for a
gift. The time that I was there, there was two brought out of a far Country,
and that cost me something the sight of them, for that they command the
Merchantes to go to see them, and then they must give somewhat to the men that
This money called tansa is half a ducket which may be three shillings and four
pence.
bring them, the brokers of the Merchantes give for every man half a Ducket,
which they call a Tansa, which amounts to a great sum. For the number of
Merchants that are in that City, and when they have paid the aforesaid
Tansa, they may choose whether they will see them at that time or no, because
that when they are in the Kings stall, every man may see them that will, but
at that time they must go and see thent, for it is the Kings pleasure it
should be so. This King amongst all other his Titles, he is called the King
of the white Eliphants, and it is reported The Prince valor of a King to
hazard his whole Kingdom ^o^ (...) Eliphant*
that if this King knew any other King that had any of these white Eliphants,
and would not send them unto him, that he would hazard his whole Kingdom to
conquer them, he esteems these white Eliphantes very dearly, and are had in
great regard, and kept with very meet service, every one of them is in a
house, all gutlded over, and they have Eliphantes houses golded over with Gold
and ^aue the^^ meat given them in vessels of Silver and Gold. A warhke
policy.
there meat given them in vessels of Silver and gold, there is one black
Eliphant the greatest that has been seen, and he is kept according to his
bigness, he is nine cubits high, which is a meruellous thing, it is reported
that this King has four thousand Eliphants of War, and all have their
teeth, and they use to put on their two vppermoste teeth sharp pikes of iron,
and make them fast with rings, because these beasts fight, and make battle
with their teeth he has also very many young Eliphantes that have not their
teeth sprowted forth, also this King has a brave device in hunting to take
these Eliphantes when they will, two miles An execllent device to ^un^ and take
wild Elliphants.
from the City. He has builded a fair pallaice and al gilded, and within it
a fair Court, and within it and round about there is made an infinite number
of places for men to stand to see this hunting, near unto this Palace is a
mighty great Wood, through the which the hunts-men of the A subtle
composition.
King, ride continually on the backs of the femine eliphants, teaching the^ in
this business, every hunter carries out with him five or six of these Femines
and they say y^ they anoint the secret place, with a certain composition that
they have, that when the wild Eliphant does sinell thereunto, they follow the
femines and cannot leave them when the hunts-me^ have made provision, and the
Eliphant so entangled: they guide the Femines toward the Palace which is
called Tambell, and this palace has a door which does open and shut with
ingines, before which door there is a long straight way with trees on both the
sides, which covers the way in such wise as it is like darkness in a
corner, the wild Eliphant when he comes to this way, thinks that he is in
the Woods. At the end of this dark way there is a great field, when the
hunters have gotten this pray, when they first come to this field, they send
presently to give knowledge there to the City, and with all speed there goes
out fifty or sixty men on horseback, and do be set the field round about,
in the great field then the females, which are taught in this business go
directly to the mouth of the dark way, and when as the wild Eliphant is entered
in there, the hunters shoute and make a great noise, as much as is possible to
make y^ wild Eliphant entering in at the gate of y^ palace, which is then
open, and as soon as they be in, the gate is shut without any noise, and so
the hunters with the female Eliphants, and the wild one are all in the Court
together, and then within a small time the Females withdraw them selves away
one by one, out of the Court, leaving the wild Eliphant alone, and when he
perceives that he is left alone: he is so mad that for two or three hours
to see An excellent pastime of the Eliphants.
him, it is the greatest pleasure in the World, he wepeth, he flingeth, he
runs, he iustleth, he thrusts under the places, where the people stand
to see him, thinking to kill some of them, but the postsand timber is so strong
and great that they cannot hurt any body, yet he often times breaks his
teeth in the grates, at length when he is weary and has labored his body
that he is all wet with sweat, the^ he plucketh in his trunk into his mouth,
and then he throws out so much Water out of his belly, that he sprinkleth
it over the heads of the lookers on, to the vttermoste of These canes are like
to the^ in Spain which they call Iaco de^ore.
them, although it be very high, and then when they see him very weary,
there goes certain officers into the Court with long sharp canes in their
hands and prick him that they make him to go into one of the houses that is
made alongest the Court for the same purpose, as there is many which are made
long and narrosve, that when the Eliphant is in, he cannot turn himself to
go back again, and it is requisite, that these men should be very wary and
swift, although their canes be long, yet the Eliphant would kill them if they
were not swift to save themselves, at length when they have gotten him into one
of those houses, they stand over him in a loft and get ropes under his belly
and about his neck, and about his legs, and bind him fast, and so let him
stand four or five days, and give him neither meat nor drink. At the end
of these four or five days, they unloose him and puts one of the Females
unto him, and give them meat and drink, and in eight A strange thing that a
beast so wild should in so short time be made ^ame.
days he is become tame. In my judgment there is not a beast so intellectiue
as is these Eliphants, nor of more understanding in all the World: for he
will do all things that his keeper says, so that he lacks nothing but
human speech.

It is reported that the greatest strength that the king The greatest strength
that the King of Pegu has.
of Pegu, has is in these Eliphantes, for when they go to battle, they set
on their backs a Castle of Wood bound to his back, with bands under his
belly: and in eucrie Castle four men, very commodious^ie set to fight with
Hargubushes, with Bows and arrows, with Darts, with Pikes, and other
launcing weapons, and they say that the Skin of this Eliphant is so hard,
that any Harquebusse will not pierce it, unless it be in the eye, temples, or
some other tender place of his body, and besides this, they are of great
strength, and have a very excellent order in their battle as I have seen at
their feasts which they make A goodly order in a barberous people.
in the year, in which feasts the King makes triumphs, which is a rare
thing and worthy memory, that in so barbarous a people there should be such
goodly orders as they have in their armies which be distinckt in squares of
Eliphantes, of Horsemen, of Harquebushers and Pi^emen, that truly the number of
them are infinite: but their armor The order of their weapons and number of
his men.
and Weapons are very naught and weak as well the one as the other, they have
very bad Pikes, their swords are worse made, like long knives without points,
his harquebushes are most excellent, and always in his wars he Exercise in
arms is the cheifest defense of a Cuntry.
has eighty thousand Harquebushes, and the number of them increases daily.
Because the King will have them shoot every day at the Plancke, and so by
continual exercise, they become most excellent Shot: also he has great
ordinance made of very good metal, to conclude there is not a King on the
earth that has more power or 26. crowned Kings at his command.
strength then this King of Pegu, because he has twenty and six crouned Kings
at his command. He can make in his Camp: a milion and half of men of War
in the field against 15. hundredth thousand men in one Camp
his enemies, the state of his kingdom and maintenance of his army, which is
a thing incredible to consider the victualles that should maintain such a
number of people in the Wars, but he that knows the nature and quality of
that people, will easily believe it, I have seen with A people of a hard
nature and fit for wars.
my proper eyes that those people and soldiers have eaten of all sort of Wild
beasts, that are on the earth, whether it be very filthy or otherwise, all
serves for their mouths, yea, I have seen them eat Scorpions and Serpents,
also Eating of Serpents.
they feed of all kind of herbs and grass. So that if such a great army
want not Water and salt, they will maintain themselves a long time in a bush
with roots, flowers and leaves of trees, they carry rice with them for their
voyage and that serves them in stead of comfetts: it is so dainty unto This
King of Pegu is the great King of Tartaria, which we call the great Came, or the
King of Q^in say.
them. This King of Pegu has not any army or power by sea, but in the land for
people, dominions, gold and silver, he far exceedes the power of the great
Turk in treasure and power. This king has diverse Magasons full with treasure,
as Gold, silver, and every day, he increases it more and more, and it is
never deminished, also he is Lord of the mines of Rubyes, Safyrs and Spineles,
near unto his royal palace, there is an estimable treasure where of he
makes no The riches of this Ring of Pegu.
account, for that it stands in such a place that every one may see it, and
the place where this treasure is: is a great Court walled round about with
walls of stone, with two gates which stand open every day: and within this
place or Court, are four gilded houses covered with lead, and in every one
of these are certain panim Idols of a very great valor, In the first house
there is a stature of ye Image of a man of Gold very great, and on his head a
crown of Gold, beset with most rare rubies and Safires and round about him are
four little Children of Gold. In the second house, there is the stature of a
man of silver, that is set as it were, sitting on heaps of money: whose
stature in height as he sits, is so high: that his highness exceedes the
height of any one flower of a house he is so high, I measured his feet and
found that they were as long as all my body was in height, with a Crown of
his head like to the first: and in the third house, there is a stature of
brass of the same bigness, with a like Crown of his head.

In the fourth and last house, there is a stature of a man, An excellent fine
metal made by a mixture of Copper and Lead.
as big as the other, which is made of Gausa, which is the metal they make
their money of, and this mettle is made of Copper and lead mingled together.
This stature also has a Crown on his head like the first, this treasure being
of such a valor as it is: stands in an open place, that every man at his
pleasure may go and see it. For the keepers thereof never forbid any man the
sight thereof, I say as I have said before, that this King every year in his
feasts triumphs, and because it is worthy of the noting, I The great pomp
of this King.
think it meet to writ thereof, which is as follows. The king rides on a
triumphing Cart or Wagon, all gilded, which is drawn by sixteen goodly horses:
and this Cart is very high with a goodly canapie over it, behind the Cart goes
twenty of his Lords and Nobles, with every one a rope in his hand made fast
to the Cart, for to hold it upright, that it fall not. The King sits in the
middle of the cart, and upon the same Carte, about the King stands four of
his Nobles most The order of their going.
favored of him, and before this Carte wherein the King is, goes all his
army as aforesaid, and in the middle of his army goes all his Nobility
round about the Cart, that are in his dominions, a meruellous thing to see so
many people, such riches and such good order in a people so barberous, as they
be.

This King of Pegu has one principal wife, which is kept in This King has
one wise and 300. concubines.
a Seralyo, he has three hundredth Co^cubines, of who^ it is reported, that he
has ninety Children. This King sits every day in person to hear the
suites of his Combacts, but The order of Justice.
he nor they never speak one to another, but by supplications made in this
order. The King sits up alost in a great hall, on a tribunal seat, and
lower under him sits all his Barons round about, then those that demand
audience, enter into a great Court before the King, and there set them down on
the ground forty paces distant from the Kings No difference of person before
the king in controversies or in Justice.
person, and amongst those people there is no difference in matters of audience
before the King, but all alike, and there they sit with their supplications
in their hands, which are made of long leaves of a Tree, these leaves are
three quarters of a yard long, and two fingers broad, which are written with
a sharp iron made for that purpose, and in those leaves are their
supplications written, and with their supplications: they have in their hands
a present or gift, according to the waightinesse If we had such paper in
England, suits in law would not hang so long.
of their matter. Then come the secretaries down and read these supplications,
and then take them after and read them before the King, and if the King think
it good to do to them that favor or justice that they demand: then he
commands to take the present out of his hand, but and if he think their
demand be not justly, or according to right: he commands them away
without taking of their gifts or presents. In the Indies there is not any
merchandise that is good to bring to Pegu, unless it be at some times by
chance to bring at sometimes Opium of Cambaia, and if he bring money he shall
lose by it. Now the commodities that come from S. Tome, are the only
Merchandice for that place, which is the great quantity of cloth made there,
which they use in Pegu: which cloth is made of The commodities that are
ventured in Pegu.
bombast wouen and painted, so that the more that kind of cloth is washed, the
more linelier they show their colors, which is a rare thing, and there is
made of this kind of cloth which is of great importance, so that a small bale
of it will cost a thousand or two thousand Ducats. Also from S. Tome, they
laid great store of red yarne, of Bombast died with a root which they call
Saia, as aforesaid, which color will never out. With which merchandise every
year there goes a great Ship from S. Tome to Pegu of great importance, and
they usually depart from S. Tome to Pegu the 10. or 11. of September, and if
she stay until the twelfth, it Note the de parture of the Ships from S. Tomes
to Pegu.
is a great hap if she return not without making of her voyage. Their use was
to depart the sixth of September, and then they made sure voiages, and now
because there is great labor about that kind of cloth, to bring it to
perfection and that it be well dried, as also the greediness of the captain,
that would make an extraordinary gain of his freight, thinking to have the
wind always to serve their turn, they stay so long that at sometimes, the
Wind turns. For in those parts the winds blow firmly, For certain times
with the which they go to Pegu, with the wind in powpe and if they ariue not
there before the Wind change, and get ground to anchor: perforce they must
return back again, for that the gales of the wind blow there for three or
four months together always in one place with great force. But if they get
the coast and anchor there: then with great labor he may save his voyage. Also
there goes another great Ship from Bengala, every year laden with fine cloth of
bombast of al sorts which ariueth in the harbor of Pegu, when ye ship y^
comes from S. Tome departs the harbor where these two ships ariue, is
called Cosmin, from Malaca to Martauan, which is a part in Pagu, there comes
many small Commodities brought into Pegu.
ships, and great, laden with peper, Sadolo, Procellam of China, Camfora,
Bruneo, and other mercha^dice. The ships y^ come from Meca, enter into the port
of Pagu and Cirion, and those ships bring cloth of Wool, Scarlets, Ueluets,
Opium, and Chickenes: The Chicken^ are pieces of Gold worth sterling 7.
shillinges.
by the which they lose, and they bring them because they have no other thing
that is good for Pegu: but they esteem not the loss of them, for that they
make such great gain of their commodities that they carry from thence out of
that kingdom, also the King of Assi his Ships come thither into the same
port laden with Peper, from the coast of Saint Tome of Bengala out of the Sea
of Bara to Pegu are three hundredth miles, and they go it up the River in four
days, with the increasing Water, or with the flood to a City called Cosmin,
and there they discharge their ships whether the customers of Pegu come to take
the note and marks of all the goods of every man, and take y^ charge of the
The Custom house of Pegu is in y^ Kings house.
goods on them, and convey it to Pegu, into the Kings house wherein they make
the custom of the merchandise when the customers have taken the charge of the
goods and put it into barks, the Retor of the city gives license to the
merchantes to take bark, and go up to Pegu with their merchandise, and so
three or four of them take a bark and go up to Pegu in company. God deliver
every man that he Great rigor for the stea ling of Cust omes.
give not a wrong note, and entry or think to steal any custom, for if they
do, for the least trifle that is, he is utterly undone, for the King does take
it for a most great afront to be deceived of his custom, and therefore they make
diligent searches, three times at the lading and vnlading of the goods and at
the taking of them a land. In Pegu this search they Jewels pay custom.
make when they go out of the ship for Diamonds, Pearls, and fine cloth which
takes little rome: for because that all the Jewels that come into Pegu, and
are not found of that country: pay custom, but Rubies, Safyres, and
Spynelles, pay no custom in: nor out, because they are found growing In those
Centries there is another inner lodging, but every man that trauelleth must
hier his house, and bring his necessaries with him.
in that country. I have spoken before, how that all Merchantes that mean to
go through the Indies, must carry all manner houshoulde stuff with them, which
are necessary for a house, because that there is not any lodging nor Innes nor
hosts, nor chamber room in that Country, but the first thing a man does when
he comes to any City is to hier a house, either by the year or by the
month, or as he means to stay in those parts.

In Pegu their order is to hier their houses for six months. Now from Cosmin
to the City of Pegu, they go in six hours with the flood, and if it be
ebbing Water, then they make fast their boat to the River side, and there
tarry Description of the fruitfulnes of that soil.
until the Water flow again. It is a very commodious and pleasant voyage,
having on both sides of the rivers many great villages, which they call
Cities: in the which Hens, Pygions, Eggs, Milk, ryce, and other things be
very good cheap. It is all plain, and a goodly Country, and in eight days
you may make your voyage up to Macceo, distant from Pegu twelve miles, and
there they discharge Deling is a small litter carried with men as is aforesaid.
their goods, and lade it in Carts or Waynes drawn with Oxen, and the
merchauntes is carried in a closet which they call Delinge, in the which a man
shall be very well accommodated, with Cushions under his head, and covered
for the defense of the Sun and rain, and there he may sleep if he have will
thereunto: and his four Falchiues carry him roming away, changing two at one
time and two at another. The custom of Pegu and freight thither may amount unto
twenty or twenty two per cento, and 23. according as he has more or less
stolen from him, that day they custom the goods. It is requisite that a man
have his eyes watchful, and to be careful, and to have many friends, for
when they custom in the great hall of the King, there comes many Gentlemen
accompanied with a number Most vile filching of goods.
of their slaves, and these gentlemen have no shame that their slaves rob
strangers: whether it be cloth in showing of it or any other thing: they laugh
at it. And although the merchantes help one another to keep, watch, and look
to their goods, they cannot look to that so narowly but one or other will rob
something, either more or less, according as their Merchandise is more or
less: and yet in this day there is a worse thing then this, although you have
set so many eyes to look there for your benefit, that you escape vnrobbed of
the slaves, a man cannot choose but that he must be robbed Pay custom of the
same goods.
of the officers of the custom house. For paying the custom with the same
goods often times they take the best that you have, and not by rate of every
sort as they ought to do, by which means a man pays more then his duty, at
length when you have dispatched the goods out of the custom house, in this
order the Merchant causes them to be carried to his house, and may do with
them at his pleasure.

There is in Pegu eight Brokers of the Kings, which are Tareghe are names of
the brooks.
called Tareghe, who are bound to sell all the merchandise to come to Pegu, at
the common or the corent price, then if the merchants will sell their goods at
that price: they sell it away, and the Brokers have two in y^ hundredth of
every sort of Merchandise, and they are bound to make good the debtes of that
goods, because it is sold by their hands or means, and on their words, and
oftentimes the merchant The brokers are lowed to make good all the debts to the
merchant.
knows not to whom he gives his goods, yet he cannot lose any thing
thereby, for that the broker is bound in any wise to pay him, and if the
merchant sell his goods without the consent of the broker: yet nevertheless
he must pay him two percento, and be in danger of his money, but this is very
seldom seen, because the Wife, Children, and A law for banckroutes.
slaves of the debttor are bound to the creditor, and when his time is expired
and payment not made, the creditor may take the debtor and carry him home to
his house, and shut him up in a Magazen, whereby presently he has his money,
and not being able to pay the creditor, he may take the wife, children, and
slaves of the debtor, and sell them, for so is the law of that kingdom. The
corant money that is in this city, and throughout all this kingdom is called
Gansa or Ganza which is made of Copper and Lead: It is not the money of the
King, but every man may stamp it that will, because it has his just
partition or valor: but they make many of them false by putting overmuch lead
into them, Every man may stamp what money ^e will.
and those will not pass, neither will any take them. With this money Ganza,
you may buy Gold or Silver, Rubies and Musk, and other things. For there is
no other money corant amongst them. And Gold, Silver, and other Merchandise,
is one time deerer then another, as all other things be.

This Ganza goes by weight of Byze, and this name of Buy Gold and filuer with
copper and lead.
Byza goes for the accounpt of the weight, and commonly a Byza of a Ganza is
worth (after our account) half a ducket, little more or less: and according
as Gold and Silver The order of their monye.
is more or less in price, but the Byza never changes, every Byza makes a
hundredth Ganza of weight, and so the number of the money is Byza. They that go
to Pegu to buy Jewels, and if he will do well: it behooves him to be a whole
year there to do his business, if he will do it well. For if so be that
he would return with the Ship he came in, he cannot How a man may despose him
self for the trade in Pegu.
do any thing well, for the breuity of the time, because that when they
custom their goods in Pegu: that come from S. Tome in their Ships: it is as
it were about the nativity, and when they have customed their goods, then they
must sell it for credit, for a month or two: and then at the beginning of
March the Ships depart. The Merchants that come from S. Tome, take for the
payment of their goods, gold, and silver, which is never wanting there. And 8.
or 10. days Good instructions.
before their departure, they are all satisfied: also they may have Rubies in
payment, but they make no account of them and they that will winter there for
another year, it is needful that they be aduertized, that in the sale of
their goods, that they sperify in their bargain, the term of two or three
mo^ths payment, and y^ their payment shall be in so many Ganza, and neither
gold nor silver, because that with the Ganza they may buy and sell every
thing with great advantage. And how needful it is to be aduertized, that
when they will recover their payments: in what order they shall receive their
Ganza, because he that is not practicke may do him self great wrong in the
weight of the Gansa, as also in the falsenesse of them, in the weight he may
be greatly deceived, because that from place to place, it does rise and fall
greatly: and therefore when any man will receive money or make payment, he
must take a public wayer of money: a day or two before he go about his
business, and give him in payment for his labor, two Byza a month, and for
this he is bound to make good all your money heerby: and to maintain it for
good, for that he receives it and seals the bags with his Seal: and when
he has received any store, there he causes it to be brought into the
Magasea of the Merchant, that is the owner of it.

That money is very weighty, for forty Byza is a great Porters burden, and
also where the Merchant has any paymente to be made for those goods, which
he buyeth: the Common wayer of money that receives his money must make the
payment thereof. So that by this means, the Merchant with the charges of two
Byzes a month, receives and pays out his money without loss or The
merchandise that go out of Pegu.
trouble. Those merchandise that go out of the Pegu are these, as Gold,
Silver, Rubies, Sapphires, Spynelles, great store of Beniamen, long Peper,
Lead, Lacca, Ryce, Wine, some Sugar, yet there might be great store of Sugar
made in the Cuntry, for that they have abundance of Canes, but they give them
to Eliphants to eat, and the people consume great store of them for food, and
many more do they consume in vain things as these. In that Kingdom they
spend many of these Sugar canes in making of houses and tents which they call
Varely for their Idols, which they call Pagody, whereof there is great
abundance, great and small, and these houses are made in form to little
hills, like to Sugar loaves or to Belles, and some of these houses are as high
as a reasonable steeple, at the foot they are very large, that some of them
be in circuit a quarter of a mile, the said Idol houses what fashion they are
of.
houses within are full of earth, and walled round about with brickes and dirt
in stead of lyme, and without form, from the top to the foot they make a
covering for them with Sugar Canes, and plaistered with lyme all over, for
otherwise they would be spoiled, by the great abundance of rain that falls
in those Countries, also they consume about these verily or Idol houses great
store of lease Gold, for that they ouerlay all the tops of the houses with
gold, and some of them is covered with Gold from the top to the Idol houses
covered with Gold.
foot. In covering whereof there is great store of Gold spent, for that every
ten years they new ouerlay them with gold, from the top to foot, so that with
this vanity they spend great abundance of gold. For every ten years the
rain does consume the Gold from these houses. And by this means they make
Gold dearer in Pegu then it would be, if they consumed not so much in this
vanity. Also it is a thing to be noted in the buying of Jewels in Pegu, for he
that has no knowledge shall have as good Jewels, and as good cheap as he that
has been practiced there a long time, which is a good order, which is this.
There is in Pegu four men of good reputation, which are called Tareghe, or
brokers of Jewels. These four men have all the Jewels, or Rubies in their
hands, and the Merchant that will buy, comes to one of these Tareghe and
tells him, that he has so much money to employ in Rubies. For through the
hands of these four men passes all the Rubies: for they have such quantity,
that they know not what to do with them, but sell them at a most vile and
base price. When the Merchant has broke his mind to on of these Brokers or
Tareghe, they carry him ho^e to one of their Shops, although he have no
knowledge in Jewels: and when the Jewellers perceive that he will employ a
good round sum, they will make bargain, and if not, they let him alone. The
use generally of this City, is this: y^ when any Merchant has brought any
great quantity of Rubies, and have agreed for them, the Merchant carries them
home to his house, let them be of what valor they will, he shall have space to
look on them and relooke them two or three days: and if he have no knowledge
in them, he shall always have many Merchants in that City that has very good
knowledge in Jewels: with whom he may always confer and take counsel with
them, and show them unto whom he will, and if he find that he has not
employed his money well, he may return his Jewelles back to them whom he
had them of, without any loss at all. Which thing is such a shame to the
Tereghe to have his Jewels return, that he had rather to bear a blow on the
face then that it should be thought that he should sell them so dear to have
them returned. For these men have always great care that they make good
employmentes, especially to those that have no knowledge. This they do,
because they would not loose their credit: and when those Merchantes that
have knowledge in Jewelles buy any, if they buy them dear it is there own
faults and not the Brokers: yet it is good to have knowledge in Jewelles, by
reason that he may An honest care of hea then people.
somewhat ease the price. There is also a very good order for which they have
in buying of Jewelles: which is this, there is many merchants that stands by
at the making of the bargain, and because they shall not understand how the
Bargains made with the nipping of Fingers under a cloth.
Jewels be sold: The Broker and the Merchants have their hands under a cloth,
and by touching of fingers and nipping the joints they know what is done, what
is bidden, and what is asked. So that the standers by know not what is demanded
for them, although it be for a thousand or ten thousand Ducats. For every
joint and every finger has his signification. For if the Merchants that stand
by, should understand the bargain: it would breed great controversy amongst
them, and at my beeinge in Pegu in the month of August, in Anno 69. and having
gotten well by my endeavor, I was desirous to see mine own Country, and I
thought The Authors desire to see his Cuntry.
it good to go by the way of Saint Tome, but then I should tarry until March.

In which journey I was councelled, yea, and fully resolved to go by the way
of Bangala, with a Ship there ready to depart for that voyage. And when we
were departed from Pegu to Chitigan, a great harbor or port, from whence
there goes small Ships to Cochin, before the fleet depart for Portugal,
in which Ships I was fully determined, to go to Lyshborn, and so to Venice.
When I This Touffon is an extraordinary storm at Sea.
had thus resouled my self, I went a board of the Ship of Bengala, at which
time it was the year of Touffon, and to understand what this Touffon is:
understand, that in the Indies often times, there is not storms as is in other
countries, but every ten or twelve years, there is such tempests and storms,
that it is a thing incredible, but to those that have seen it, neither do
they know certain what year it will come.

Unfortunate are they that are at Sea in that year, and time of Touffon,
because few there are that escape that Touffon comes but every 10. or 12.
years.
danger. In this year it was our chance to be at Sea with the like storm,
but it happened well unto us, for that our Ship was newly ouer-plancked, and
had not any thing in her save victual and balastes, Silver and Gold, which
from Pegu they carry to Bengala, and no other kind of Merchandise. This
Touffon or cruel storm endured three days and three nights, In which time
it carried away our sails, yardes, and Rother, and because the Ship labored
in the Sea, we cut our mast over bo^rd: which when we had done: she labored a
great deal more then before, for when our Mast was gone, the Ship labored
worse then before* in such wise, that the Ship was almost full with Water
that came in over the highest: and so went down, and for the space of three
days and three nights, sixty men A heavy case*
did nothing but bale out Water out of her in this wise, twenty men in one
place and twenty men in another place, and twenty in another place: and for
all this storm, the Ship was so good, that she took not one jot of Water
allow through the sides, but all ran down through the hatches, that those
sixty men did nothing but cast the Sea into the Sea. And thus driving two and
fro as the wind and Sea would, we were driven in a dark night about four
of the clock and cast on a Should, yet when it was day: we could neither see
land on one side nor other, and knew not where we were. And as it pleased the
divine power, there came a great wave of the Sea, and so drive us beyond the
Should. And when we felt the Ship a^lote, we rose up as A manifest token of the
ebbing and flowing in those Cuntries.
men revived, because the Sea was calm and smoth water, and then sounding we
found twelve fadome Water, and within a while after we had but ^i^e Fadom, and
then presently, we came to anckor with a small anckor that was left us with the
stern, for all our other were lost in y^ storm, and by and by the Ship was
a ground and stroke, and then we did prop her that she should not overthrow.

When it was day: the ship was all a dry, and found the Ship a good mile
from the sea on dry Land. This Toffon being ended, we discovered an Island
not far from us, and we went from the ship on the Sands to see what This
Island is called Sond^ua.
Island it was: and we found it a place inhabited, and to my judgment, the
firtelest Island in all the World, the which is divided into two pars by a
chanel which passes be tween it, with great trouble we brought our ship into y^
channel which parts the Island with a flowing Water, and there we determined
to stay forty days to refresh us, and when the people of ye Island saw the
Ship, and that we were coming a land: presently they made a place of Bazar or
a Victualles good cheap.
market: with Shops right over against the Ship with all manner of provision of
victualles to eat, which they brought down in great abundance, and sold it so
good cheap, that we were amazed at the cheapenesse thereof. I bought many
salted kine there for the provision of the Ship: for half a Larine a piece,
which Larine may be twelve shillinges six pence, and very good and fat: and
four wild hogs ready dressed for a Larine, a great fat hen for a Bizze a
piece, which is at the most a penny: and the people told us that we were
deceived the half of our money, because we bought things so dear. Also a
sack of fine Ryce for a thing of nothing, and consequently all other things
for human sustenance, were in such abundance, that it is a thing incredible
but to them that have seen it. This Island is called Sondiua Sondiua is the
fruitful le^t Cuntry in all the world.
belonging to the kingdom of Bengala, distant 120 miles from Chitigan, to which
place we were bound. The people are Moors, and the King a very good man of a
Moore king, for if he had been a Tyrant as others be, he might have robbed
us of all, because the Portugal Captain of Chitigan was in arms against the
Retor of that place and every day there were some slain, at which news we
rested there with no small fear* keeping good watch and ward abroad every
night as the use is, but the governor of the Town did comfort us, and bad us
that we should fear nothing, but that we should repose our selves securely
without any danger, although the Portugalles of Chitigan had slain the
Governor of that City, and said that we were not culpable in that fact, and
more he did us every day what pleasure he could, which was a thing contrary
to our judgments considering that they and the people of Chitigan were both
subjects to one King. We departed from Sondiua, and came to Chitigan the great
port of Bengala, at the same time that the Portugalles had made peace and taken
a truce with the governors of the Town, with this condition that the chief
Captain of the Portugalles with his Chitigan is a port in Bengala, where the
Portingalles go with their ships.
Ships should depart without any lading, for there were then at that time
eighteen Ships of Portugalles great and small. This Captain being a
Gentleman and of good courage: Yet for all this, he was contented to depart to
his great hindrance, rather then he would seek to hinder so many of his
friends as were there, as also because the time of the year was spent to go
to the Indies. The night before he departed, every Ship that had any lading
in them put it a boorde of the Captain to help to ease his charge and to
recompense his courtesies. In this time there The King of Rachim neighbor to
Bengala.
came a Messenger from the King of Rachim to this Portugal Captain, who said
in the behalf of his King, that he had heard of the courage and valor of
him, desiring him gently that he would vouchsafe to come with this Ship
into his port, and coming thither he should be very well entreated. This
Portugal went thither and very well satisfied of this King.

This King of Rachim has his seat in the middle coast The force of the King
of Rachim.
between Bengala and Pegu, and the greatest enemy he has is the King of
Pegu: which King of Pegu imagines night and day, to make this King of Rachim
his subject, but by no means he is able to do it: because the King of Pegu,
has no power nor army by sea. And this King of Rachim may arm two hundredth
Galleyes or Fusts by Sea, and by Land he has certain s^uses with the which
when the king of Pegu pretends any harm toward him, he may at his
pleasure drown a great part of his Country. So that by this means he cutteth
off the way that the King of Pegu The commodities that go from Chitigan to the
Indies.
should come with his power to hurt him. From ye great port of Chitigan they
carry for the Indies great store of ryce, very great quantity of Bombast
cloth of every sort, Sugar, Corn and Money, with other merchandise. And by
reason that Wars was in Chitigan, the Portugal Ships tarried there so
late, that they arrived not at Cochin to soon as they were wont to do other
years.

For which cause the fleet that was at Cochin was departed for Portugalle
before they arrived there, and I being The Portingall ships depart toward
Portingall out of the harbor of Cochine.
in one of the small Ships before the fleet, in discovering of Cochin, we
also discovered the last Ships of the Fleet that went from Cochin to
Portugal, where she made sail, for which I was meruelouslie discomforted,
because that all the year following* there was no goinge for Portugalles, and
when we arrived at Cochin I was fully determined to go for Venice by the way
of Ormus, and at that time the City of Goa was besieged by the people of
D^al^an, but the Citizens forced not this assault, because Goa was besieged.
they supposed that it would not continue long. For all this: I embarked my
self in a Gallie, that went for Goa, and there to Ship my self for Ormus,
but when we came to Goa, the viceroy would not suffer any Portugal to depart,
by reason of the Wars. And being in Goa but a small time, I fell sick of an
infirmity that held me four months: which with Physic and diet cost me
eight hundredth Ducats, and there I was constrained to sell a small quantity
of Rubies to sustain my need, and I sold that for five hundredth Ducats, that
was worth a thousand, and when I began to wax well of my diseaze: I had but
little of that money left, every thing was so scarce. For every A Chicken or a
Hen cost 6. shillinges
Chicken (and yet not good) cost me seven or eight lyuers, which is six
shillings or six shillinges eight pence, beside this great charges, the
Apothecaries with their medicines was no small charge to me. At the end of six
months, they raised the siedge, then I began to work, for Jewels were risen
in their prices: for, whereas before I sold a few of refused Rubies: I
determined to sell the rest of all my Jewelles that I had there, and to make an
other voyage to Pegu. And for this cause, for that at my departure from Pegu,
Opium was Opiu^ a good Commoditye in Pegu.
in great request, then I went to Cambaya to employ a good round sum of
money in Opium, and there I bought sixty percells of Opyum, which cost me two
thousand and a hundredth Ducats, every Ducket at four shillings two pence,
and more I bought three bales of Bombast cloth, which cost me eight hundred
Ducketts, which was a good commodity for Pegu: when I had boughte these
things: the viceroy commanded that the custom of the opium should be paid in
Goa, and paying custom there they might carry it whether they would. I shipped
my 3 bales of cloth at Chiale in a ship that we went for Cochin, and I went
to Goa to pay to the aforesaid custom for my Opium, and from Goa I departed to
Cochin in a ship that was for the voyage of Pegu, and went to winter then at S.
Tomes, when I came to Cochin, I understood that the ship that had my 3. bales
of cloth was cast away and lost, so y^ I lost my 800 Seraffines or ducats, and
departing from Cochin to go from S. Tome: I in casting about for the Island of
Zeiland the Pilote was deceived, for that the cape of the Island of Zeyland,
lies far out into the sea, and the Pilot thinking that he might have passed
hard abord the cape: and paying remour in the night: when it was morning we
were far within the cape, and past all remedy to go out, by reason the
winds blewe so fearcely against us. So that by this means we lost our voyage
for that year, and we went to Manar with the ship to Winter there, the Ship
having lost her mas^tes, and with great diligence we hardly saved her with great
losses to the captain of the Ship, because he was forced to freight another
Ship in S. Tomes from Pegu with great losses and interest, and I with my friends
agreed together in Manar to take a bark to carry us to S. Tomes, which thing, we
did with all the rest of the merchants, and ariuing at S. Tomes I had news through
or by the way of Bengala y^ in Pegu: Opium was very dear, and I knew that in
S. Tome there was no Opium but mine to go from Pegu that year, so that I was
holden of all the Merchantes there: to be very rich, and so it would approved,
if my adverse fortunes had not been contrary to my hope, which was this. At
that time there went a great ship A reconing before the host.
from Cambaya, to the King of Assi, with great quantity of Opium, and there to
lade Peper: in which voyage there came such a storm, that the ship was forced
with wether to go romor 800 miles, and by this means came to Pegu, Whereas they
arrived a day before me, so that Opion which was before very dear was now at a
base price: so that which was sold for fifty Bize before, was sold for two
Bizze and half, there was such quantity came in that Ship, so that I was
glad to stay two years in Pegu unless I would have given away my
commodity: and at the end of two years I made of my 2100 Ducats which I
bestowed in Cambaya, I made but a thousand Ducats. Then I departed again from
Pegu to go for the Indies and for Ormus with great quantity of Lacca, and
from Ormus I returned into the Indies for Chiall, and from Chiall to Cochin,
and from Cochin to Pegu, Once more I lost occasion to make me rich, for
whereas I might have brought good store of Opion again I brought but a little,
being fearful of my other voyage before, In this small quantity I made good
profit. And now again I determined to go from my Country, and departing
from Pegu, I tarried and wintered in Cochin, and then I left the Indies and
came for Ormus.

I think it very necessary before I end my voyage, to reason somewhat, and
to show what fruits the Indies does yield and bring forth. First, in the
Indies and other East parts of India, there is Peper and Ginger, which grows
in all parts of India. And in some parts of the Indies, the Pepper tree.
greatest quantities of Peper grows in amongst wild bushes, without any
manner of labor: saving, that when it is ripe* they go and gather it. The
tree that the Peper grows on, is like to our Juie, which runs up to the
tops of trees wheresoeur, and if it should not take hold of some tree, it
would ly flat and rotte on the ground. This Peper tree has his flower and
berry, like in all parts to our Juie berry, and those berryes be graynes in
Peper: so that when they gather them they be green, and then they lay them in
the Sun, and they become black.

The Ginger grows in this wise, the Land is tilled and sown, and the herb
is like to Panyzzo, and the root is the Ginger.
Ginger. These two spices grow in diverse places.

The Cloves came all from ye Moluches, which Moluches Cloves.
are two Islands, not very great, and the tree that they grow on is like to our
Laurel tree. Nutmegs and Maces.


The Nutmegs and Maces, which grow both together, are brought from the Island
of Banda, whose tree is like to our Walnut tree, but not so big.

All the good white Sandolo is brought from the Island of White Sandolo. Canfora.
Timor. Canfora, being compound comes all from China, and all that which
grows in canes comes from Bruneo, and I think that this Canfora comes not
into these parts For that in India they consume great store, and that is very
dear.

The good Lignum aleos comes from Chochinchina. Lignu^ Aloes* Benjamin. Long
Pepper.


The Beniamen comes from the kingdom of Assi and Sion.

Long Peper grows in Bengala, Pegu and Giaua. This Musk the Jews do^
counter^eite and open the Cods and take out half the good musk and take and
beat the flesh of an ass and put that in the room of it. Amber.


Musk comes from Tartaria, which they make in this order, as by good
information I have been told, there is a certain beast in Tartaria, which is
wild as big as a wolf, which beast they take alive, and beat him to death with
small staves that his blood may be spread through his whole body, then they
cut it in pieces, and take out all the bones, and beat the flesh with the blood
in a mortar very small, and dry it, and make purses to put it in of the
Skin, and these be the coddes of musk.

Truly I know not whereof the Amber is made, and there is diverse opinions of
it, but this is most certain, it is cast out of the Sea, and thrown a land
and found upon the sea banckes. Rubies, Saphires, and Spinelly.


The Rubyes, Sapphires, and the Spynelly, they be gotten in the kingdom of
Pegu. The Diamandes they come from diverse places: and I know but three of the^.
That sort of Diamands, that is called Chiappe, they come from Bezeneger. Those
that be pointed naturally come from the land of Dely, and from Iaua, but the
Diamonds of Iaua are more weighty then the other. I could never understand
from whence they that are called Balasy* come.

Pearls, they fish them in diverse places, as before in this Pearls.
book is shown.

From Cambaza, as the Spodiom coniealeth in certain Spodiom.
canes: I found many of them in Pegu, when I made my house there, because
that (as I have said before) they make their houses there of wouen Canes like
to mattes. From Chianela they trade alongest the coast of Melyndy in Ethiopia,
On the coaste of Melindy in Ethiopia, in the land of Caferaria the great trade
that the Portingalls have.
within the land of Caferaria, on that coaste are many good harbors kept by
the Moors. Thither the Portugalles bring a kind of Bombast cloth of a Low
price, and great store of Paternosters or beads, made of paltrie glass, which
they make in Chiawle according to the use of the Country: and from thence they
carry Eliphants teeth for India Slaves, called Caferi and some Amber and Gold.
On this coast* the king of Portugal has his castle called Mozenbich, which is
of great importance as any castle that he has in all his Indies under his
protection, and the captain of this castle has certain voiages to this
Caferaria, to which places no merchantes may go, but by the agent of this
Captain, and they use to go in small ships, and trade with the Caferaries,
Buying and selling with* out words one to ano^hes.
and their trade in buying and selling is without any speech one to the other.
In this wise the Portugalles bring their goods by little and little along the
sea coast, and lay it down: and so depart, and the Cafer merchants come and see
ye goods, and there they put down as much gold as they think the goods is
worth, and so goes his way and leaves his gold and the goods together, then
comes the Portugal: and finding the gold to his content, he takes it and
goes his way into his ship, and then comes the Cafer, and takes away the
goods and carries it away: and if he find the gold there still, it is a
sign that the Portugalles are not contented, and if the Cafe^ think he has
put to little: he adds more, as he thinks the thing is worth, and the
Portugalles must not stand with them to strickt, for if they do: then they
will have no more trade with them, For they disdain to be refused, when they
think that they have offered enough, for they be a peevish Golden trades that
the Portingalls have.
people, and have dealt so of a long time, and by this trade the Portugals
change their commodities into gold, and carry it to the Castle of Mozonbich,
which is an Island not far distant from the firm land of Caferaria on the cost
of Ethiopia and distant from ye India 2800 miles. Now to return to my voyage,
when I came to Ornus, I found there M. Fra(...)is Berettine of Venice, and we
fraighted a bark together to go for Basora for 70 ducats, and with us there
went other mercha^ts, which did ease our freight, and very co^modiouslie we
came to Balzora and there we stayed ^o days for providing a Carauan of barks to
go to Babylon becase they use not to go^ or 3 barks at once but 25 or 30,
because in y^ night they cannot go, but must make the^ fast to ye banks of the
river, and then we must make a very good and strong guard, and to be well
provided of armor, for respect and safeguard of our goods, because ye number of
thieves is great y^ come to spoil and rob ye merchants, and when we depart from
Babylon we go a little with our sail and the voyage is ^8 or 40 days long, but
we were 50 days on it, when we came to Babylon we staid there 4 months, until
the Carauan was ready to go over the wilderness, or desert for Alepo, in this
city we were 6. merchants y^ accompanted together, 5 Venecians and a Portugal
whose names were as follows, Messez Florinasa with An order how to provide to
go over the Desert from Babylon to Alepo.
one of his kinsmen Meser Andrea depolo, the Portugal and M. Franses berettin
and I, and so we furnished our selves with victuals and beans for our horses
for 40 days, we bought horses and Mewles, for that they be very good cheap
there, I my selfbought a horse there for 11 akens, and sold him after in Lepo
for 30 ducats. Also we bought a Teant which did us very great pleasure: we
had also amongst us 32 Camels laden with merchandise: for the which we paid 2
ducats for every camels lading, and for every ten camels they made 11, for so
is there use and custom. We take also with us 3 men to serve us in the voyage
which are used to go in those voiages for 5. Dd. a man, and bound to serve us
to Alepo: so y^ we passed very well without any trouble when the camels call down
to rest, our pauilio^ was the first that was erected, the Carauan makes but
sinall iournies about 20 miles a day, and they set forwards every morning
before day ^ hours, and about ^ in ye after noon they sit down, we had great
good hap in our voyage for that it rained. For which cause we never wanted
water, but every day found good Water, so that we could not take any hurt
for want of Water. Yet we carried a Camel laden always with water yt for
every good respect yt might chance in the desert, so that we had no want
neither of one thing, nor other that was to be had in the country. For we
came very well furnished of every thing, and every day we eat fresh mutton,
because their came many Shepherds with us with their flocks, who kept those
Sheep that we bought in Babylon, and every merchant marked his sheep with
his own mark, and we gave the Shepherds a Maidene, which is two pence of our
money, for the keeping and feeding our Sheep on the way, and for killing of
them. And beside the Maiden, they have the heads, the Skins, and the
intralles of every Sheep they kill. We six bought twenty sheep, and when we
came to Alepo we had seven alive of them, and in the Carauan they use this
order: that the merchants do lend flesh one to another, because, they will not
36 days iourny over the Wilderne.
carry raw flesh with them, but accomodate one another by lending one one day,
and another another day.

From Babylon to Alepo is fortye days journey of the which they make thirty
six days, over the Wilderness, in which thirty six days: they neither see
house, trees, nor people, that inhabit it: but all only plain, and no sign
of any way in the world. The Pilots they go before, and the Carauan follows
after. And when they sit down all the Carauan vnladeth, and sits down, for
they know the stations, where the walls are. I say in thirty six days we
pass over the wilderness. For when we depart from Babylon two days we
pass by villages inhabited until we have passed the river Euphrates. And then
within two days of Alepo we have villages enhabited. In this Carauan An order
how to provide for the going to Ierusalems.
there goes always a Captain that does Justice unto all men: and every night
they keep watch about the Carauan, and coming to Alepo, we went to Trypolie,
whereas M. Florin, M. Andreapolo, and I, with a friar went and hired a bark,
to go with us to Jerusalem, departing from Tripoly, we arrived at Zaffo: from
which place in a day and half we went to Jerusalem, and we gave order to our
bark to tarry for us until our return. We stayed in Jerusalem fourteen
days, to visit those holy places: from whence we returned to Zaffo, and from
Zaffo to Tripoly, and there we shipped our selves in a Ship of Venice called
the Bagazzana: And by the help of the divine power, we arrived safely in
Venice the fifth of November, 1581. If there be any that has any desire to go
into those parts of India, let him not be Counsel of the author.
astonished, at the troubles that I have passed: because I was imbaratsed in many
things: for that I went very pore from Venice with 1200. Ducats, employed in
merchandice, and when I came to Tripoly, I fell sick in the house of M. Regaly
O-ratio, and this man sent away my goods with a small Carauan, that went from
Tripoly to Alepo and the Carauan was robbed, and all my goods lost saving four
ches^s of glasses: which cost me 200 Ducats, of which glasses, I found many
broken: because the thieves thinking it had been other Merchandise: they brake
them up, and seeing they were glasses they let them all alone. And with this
only capital, I adventured to go into the Indies: And thus with change and
rechaunge, and by diligence in my voyage, God did bless and help me: so that
I got a good stock, I will not be unmindful to put them in remembrance, that
have a desire to A very good order that they have in those Cuntries for the
recovering of the Goods of the dead.
go into those parts, how they shall keep their goods, and give it to their
heirs, in the time of their death, and which shall be done very securely, in
all the Cities that the Portugalles have in the Indies, there is a house called
the school of Sancta misericordia comissaria: which with leaving an alms
there to them for their pains, to take a coppie of your Will and Testament,
which you must always carry about you and cheefely when you go into the
Indies. In the Country of the Moors and Gentiles, which in those voyages
always, there goes a Captain to administer Justice to all Christians of the
Portugalles, Also this Captain has authority to recover the goods of those
Merchauntes that by chance dies in those voyages, and they that have not made
their Wills and registered them in the aforesaid schools, the Captains will
consume their goods in such wise, that little or nothing will be left for his
heirs and friends. Also there goes in these same vilages: some merchantes
that are commissaries of y^ school of Sancta misericordia, that if any
merchantes dye and have his will made, and that he has given order that the
School of myser shall have his goods: and to sell them, and then to send the
money by exchange to the school of Misericordia in Lishborne, with that coppie
of his testamente, then from Lyshborn they give intelligence thereof, into what
part of Christendom soever it be, and the heirs of such a one coming
thither, with testimonial Those Merchants that dies in Pegu love the one
third of their goods to the King.
that they be heirs, they shall receive there the valor of his goods: in such
wise that they shall not loose any thing, but those that dies in the kingdom
of Pegu loses the third part of their goods by anciente custom of the
Country, that if any Christian dies in the kingdom of Pegu the king and his
officers rest heirs of a third of his goods, and there has never been any
deceit or fraud used in this matter. I have known many rich men that have
dwelled in Pegu, and in their age they have desired to go into their own
cu^trie to die there, and have departed with all the goods and substance
without let or trouble.

In Pegu the fashion of there apparel is all one, as well Order of apirell in
Pegu.
the noble man, as the simple: the only difference is in the finest of the
cloth, which is cloth of Bombast one finer then another, and they wear their
apparel in this wise: First, a white bombast cloth which serves for a shirt,
then they gird another painted bombaste cloth of forteen brases which they
bind up betwixt their legs, and on their heads they there wear a small
tock of three braces, made in guize of a myter, and some goes without tocks,
and carry (as it were) a have on their heads, which does not pass the lower
part of his ear, when it is lifted up: they go all bare footed, but the noble
men never go on foot, but are carried by men in a (...) with great reputation
with a hat made of the (...) of a tree to keep him from the rain and Sun,
or otherwise they ride on horseback with their feet bare in the styrops, all
The order of the women's aparell in Pegu.
sorts of Women whatsoever they be: wear a smock down to the girdle and
from the girdle downwards to the foot they were a cloth of three brases, open
before: so strait that they cannot go, but they must show their secret as
it were aloft, and in their going they feign to hide it with their hand, but
they cannot by reason of the straightness of their cloth. They say that this
use was invented by a queen to be an occasion the sight thereof might remove
from men the vices against nature, which they are greatly given unto: which
sight should cause them to regard women the more also the Women go bare footed,
their arms laden with hoopes of gold and jewels. And their fingers full of
precious rings with their hair rolled up about their heads. Many An admonition
of the Author.
of them wear a cloth about their shoulders in stead of a clock. Now to
finish yt which I have begun to write, I say that those parts of the Indies is
very good, because that a man y^ has little: shall make a great deal thereof,
always they must govern themselves that they be taken for honest men, for
why? to such there shall never want help to do well, but he that is vicious, let
him tarry at home and not go thither, because he shall always be a beggar,
and dye a poor man.

FINIS.

