TRVE RELATIONS OF SUNDRY Confwerences had betweencertaine Protest(...) and a
IESVIT called (...)sooner in Lond^^ for the Cathol(...) Fayt(...) togeath(...)
Defenses of the (...) IN WHICH Is showed, that there has always been,
sinc(...) Church, and in it a Visible Successio(...) Doctors (...) Pastors,
Teaching the vnchan^^^ Doctrine of ^^yth, left (...) Christ and his Apostles,
in (...) pains necessary to Sal^^tio^ AND THAT Not Protestants, b^^ only Roman
Catholics have had and (...) Church and in it such (...) and Doctors, of
(...) men may (...) what poi(...) Faith are necessary to Salvation.

By A. C.

(...)

Romans 16.v.^^ Permissu Superiorum M. DC. XXVI.

The Preface of the Publisher of these Relations.
GENTLE READER,
I have thought good to present to thy view these Relations, together with the
defe^ces of them; not doubting but if thou peruse and ponder them well, they
will turn to thy benefit more ways then one. First, supposing thou never
heardst any thing of these conferences but in general, or perhaps have heard
particulers falsely related by some who are partially affected, or misinformed;
thou may by this my labor be certified of the truth, and heerby enabled to
do a work of Charity, in freeing others from ignorance and error, and
contradicting such false rumors as thou may chance to understand to have
been spread abroad, whether in speech, or in print, about this matter.

Secondly, if thou be not thy self already resolved a right in matter of Faith
necessary to salvation, thou may gain no small help toward a sound settling
of thy mind; first, in the true knowledge and belief of that One Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church which is mentioned in the Apostles, and the
Nicene Creed; and by means of it, in every other article, and point of that
true Catholic Faith, which S. Athanasius in his Creed signifies to be so
necessary to salvation, that whosoever does not hold it entire (that is, in all
points) and inuiolate, (that is, in the true, unchanged, and incorrupted sense,
in which Christ, and his Apostles left it, as a sacred Depositum, to be kept
always in the Church) without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

Thirdly, if thou be already rightly resolved, thou may receive confirmation
in thy Faith, and consolation, in considering how plainly it is proved, that
there is no other Church, nor consequently Faith, which can (with any probable
color) be pretended to be truly Christian and Catholic, besides that which
always was, and yet is, the Roman, or united with the Roman Church, and Faith.

Lastly, having once thy mind thus settled, and confirmed in the right Roman,
Christian Catholic Faith, and thereby freed from wavering in uncertainty and
doubtfulnes about any particular point of Faith, thou needst not spend time in
endless Disputes about Controversies of Faith, nor be always reading, and
learning (as many curious people be now adays, and never coming to settled,
and well-grounded knowledge, or belief of all points of Faith) but may bestow
thy time, 2. Pet. 1.
as S. Peter cou^selleth those who be faithful Christians, when he says:
Employing all care, minister ye in your Faith, Virtue (by which you may live
conformably to that Faith) and in Virtue, Knowledge (by which you may discern
practically good from ill) and in Knowledge, Abstinence (from all that is ill)
and in Abstinence, Patience (in regard there will not want some pain to be
suffered, whiles you labor to abstain from ill) and in Patience, Piety (or
Devotion, out of which will spring spiritual comfort, inabling you to endure
patiently all kind of pain) and in Piety, Love of the fraternity (or
brotherhood, and unity of the whole Church, not suffering your selves with a
preposterous piety of private feeling devotion, to hate, or separate from the
common Doctrine, Sacrifice, Sacraments, Service, Rites or Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church) and in Love of the fraternity, Charity (or love of God;
which charity of it be well grounded, and rooted in your heart, it will
doubtless move you to labor, as the same S. Peter further advises) by good
Works (and not by only Faith, Ibid.
or apprehe^sion that your sins be forgiven; or that you be just, or the
children of God, or of the number of the Elect) to make sure your Vocation and
Election, which doing, you shall not (as the same Apostle promises) sin at
any time; Ibid.
and there shall be ministered unto you abundantly, an entrance into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Some may perhaps marvel, Why these Relations come out so late, it being now
long since the Adversaries have given out false Reports, both in speeches, and
print? For answer hereof, it must be considered, that besides the ordinary
difficulties which Catholics in England have, either to write for want of
convenient place, time, commodity of books, and conferring which others, or to
print; there have been some special extraordinary impediments which have
hindered the same. As namely, that M. Fisher was straightly charged, upon his
Allegiance, from his Majesty, that then was living, not to set out, or publish
what passed in some of these Conferences, until he gave License; which made
both M. Fisher, and his friends to forbear, hoping (as was promised by him who
delivered his majesty's message) that D. White and others were not to publish
any thing, L. K.
until they meeting with M. Fisher, should treat, and agree, and under their
hands confirm what was said on both sides; which his Majesty perusing, would
grant license to publish. The which meeting M. Fisher expected a long while,
and once went to D. Whytes House, to know what he would say about the Relation
which he had set out; but found him unwilling to make any such treaty and
agreement, nor would himself set out in print, or writing, what he thought to be
the true Relation, as knowing by likelihood that he could not set out the
truth, without disadvantage of his cause, or not without impayring, or at least
not advancing his own credit so much, as he desired.

If any marvel, why in these Relations so little is said of the second Days
Conference with Doctor White, the reason is, because in a manner all the
speech of that meeting, was between his Majesty, and M. Fisher, who bears
that dutiful respect to his Sovereign, that he will not permit any thing said
by him, to be published now after his death, which he had so specially
forbidden to be published in the time of his life. For if this cause had not
been, it had been also now published as well as the rest; there being nothing in
it, which M. Fisher should be ashamed off, or by which any prejudice might come
to the Catholic Cause: for if there had been any such matter, D. White (who
in general terms does in his Preface seek to disgrace M. Fisher, saying, he
vanished away with disgrace) would not have omitted to set down in particular
some, at least one, blameworthy Argument, or Answer. But of this, as also of
D. Featlyes indeauouring to disgrace M. Fisher, by obiecting falsly-supposed
Untruths, Contradictions etc. more is to be said in another place; and
therefore not being willing to hold thee, Gentle Reader, any longer from the
consideration of the first Occasion of all this business, I commit thee to the
Protection of Almighty God.

Thy hearty Wellwisher, and servant in Christ. W. I.

THE TABLE Of the principal Contents, and Chapters of the ensuing Relations.
THE Occasion of a certain Conference D. Francis White, and M. John Fisher.
page 1. A Relation of what passed between D. White, M. Fisher, about a
certain Paper, given by the said M. Fisher to an Honorable Lady, wherein was
proved the Catholic Roman Church and Faith to be the right. page 13. A
Relation of the Conference between a certain M. Fisher; defended against the
said B. his Chaplain. page 37. and 41. An Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled,
The Fisher In which is showed that the Protestant Church was not so visible in
all Ages, as the true Church ought to be; and consequently is not the true
church, of which men may learn Infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation. CHAP.
1. About the first occasion of the Conference; in which is showed that M.
Fisher did not seek it, nor provoke his Adversaries by any challenge unto it,
nor did intend to have it so public, as by his Adversaries fault it proved.
page 1. A Copy of the first Paper, which M. Fisher wrote and delivered to an
old Gentleman, before the meeting. page 7. A copy of the second Paper, written
by M. Fisher before the said meeting. page 10. CHAP. II. About that which
passed in the conference it self. page 12. CHAP. III. Of the issue of the
conference. page 43. CHAP. IIII. containing a Reuiew, and Reflection upon the
Premises. Together with diverse Observations concerning the Occasion, Meaning,
Method, and Manner of proceeding in the foresaid conference. page 46. and seqq.
D. White and D. Featly, against M. Fishers Relations, and writings. page 73. D.
White, and D. Featly, who have undertaken to show a visible Protestant Church
in all Ages, by naming, proving, and defending visible Protestants in all Ages
out of good Authors. The first Part. In which is showed, that neither they, nor
any other have performed this undertaken Task, in such method and manner, as
M. Fishers Question (proposed unto the said Doctors in a former Conference)
required: And much less have they, or can they, or any other show such a
visible Protestant Church in all Ages and Nations, as Christ's true Church is
(in the Prophesies, and Promises of holy Scripture) described. Whence it
follows, that the Protestant Church is not the true Church of Christ. page 1.
CHAP. I. About the vtility of M. Fishers Question (requiring Names of visible
Protestants in all Ages out of good Authors) for finding out the true Church,
and by it, the true Faith. page 9. CHAP. II. In which M. Fishers Question is
explicated, and D. Whytes and D. Featly Answer given in the Conference, is
showed to have been very deficient. page 13. CHAP. III. In which is showed, how
many Ministers, after the Conference aforesaid, have endeavored to make
Answer: And that none have sufficiently answered M. Fishers Question. page 17.
CHAP. IIII. About M. Bernards Answer, entitled, Look beyond Luther. page 19.
CHAP. V. Concerning M. Rogers his Answer to M. Fishers five Propositions. page
22. A true Copy of M. Fishers five propositions aforesaid. page 24. CHAP. VI.
Concerning W. C. his idle Dialogue. page 36. An Argument proving, that he that
denies the Authority of the Church in any one point, takes away infallible
Certainty. page 39. CHAP. VII. About a certain Treatise of the Visibility of
the true Church. page 51. CHAP. VIII. About a Book entitled, Luthers
Predecessors, set forth by a Namelesse Author. page 61. CHAP. IX. Concernining
D. Whytes Answer. page 65. CHAP. X. A Reply to D. Featly his Answer to M.
Fishers Question. page 71. Certain shifts, and Tergiuersations used by D.
Featly. page 79. CHAP. XI. About D. Vshers Sermon preached before his Majesty
^0. of June, 1624. page 123. CHAP. XII. Containing a Confutation of the
Pamphlet, called, The Protestant Calendar. page 136. D. White, and D. Featly.
In which is showed, that the Catholic Roman Church can name, prove, and
defend visible Professors of her Faith in all Ages. And that she only, and
such as agree in Faith with her, is the True visible Catholic Church, out of
which there is no salvation. page 143. CHAP. I. In which is showed, that the
Roman Church has had visible Professors, whose Names may be showed in all
Ages. page 145. CHAP. II. In which is showed, that out of the Catholic Roman
Church, there is no salvation. page 152. A Discourse wherein is demo^strated by
Reasons page 153. The first Argument thereof. page 157. The second Argument.
page 158.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the Relations of the Conferences.
Page, Line, Fault, Correction. 24 31 whom when dele whom 26 5 be true to be
true 33 7 being a divine coming from a divine Ibid 11 this definition so this
definition 44 24 of faith of points of faith 45 23 to be firm be firm 49 4 it
not is not 51 1 and 2 so rudely formerly Ibid. 13 known foreknowne 56 15 for
contra for if contra Ibid. 18 What then? Is it What then is it? 57 2 to Rome to
come 61 14 do justify do not like 64 vlt. argument against 66 15 out opposite
but opposite 70 12 union vnanime

In the Answer to the Fisher catched. etc.
4 17 questions question 8 vlt. solloweth follows 16 12 repotteth reports
23 11 sense: Whereof sense whereof 39 18 defired desired 59 16 heahen heathen 60
28 with which 67 26 pre-present present 71 6 Prostant Protestant.

In the Reply to D. White, and D. Featly.
1 17 offeringes ofspringes 4 18 pages ages 6 6 denied not confessed not 8 11
different deficient 11 5 pretended produced 14 31 or defend and defend 15 8 The
Proofs Moreover the Proofs 21 18 first fifth 28 4 is of are of 32 12 of the
argument against the argument Ibid. 31 possessours professors 33 2 the M. the
same M. 36 7 pretenteth pretends 41 21 to move does move 45 22 (especially
obstinatly) dele vlt. parenthesim and read (especially obstinately against the
known faith of the Church) any one etc. 68 26 precept of positive etc. read,
positive and negative precept of profession etc. 69 18 infer answer 74 20
Mayor Minor 84 vlt. to be good not to be good 96 9 do not denominate. read, do
not (as the Name Protestant does) denominate etc. 67 vlt. every piously
disposed. read, every intelligent, and piously disposed etc. 108 21 points, to
take points. To take etc. 109 29 but say and say 117 32 it seems It seems
118 1 notable not able 119 9 hunreds hundreds 131 29 found in sound in 140 27
be names he names 146 3 Fayh Faith 147 19 Traditions. The Traditions; the 151
19 defined defined 153 13 had,) dele parenthesim. 163 31 uncharitable
uncharitably

THE OCCASION OF A Certain Conference had betvveene D. Francis White, and M.
John Fisher.
THE Occasion of this Conference, was a certain written Paper, given by M
Fisher to an Honble Lady, who desired something to be briefly written to prove
the Catholic Roman Church, and Faith, to be the only right.

The Copy of this Paper is as follows.
FIRST, It is certain, Ephesians. 4. Heb. 11.
that there is one, and but one, true, divine, infallible Faith, without which
none can please God, or attain Salvation.

2. This one, true, divine, infallible Faith, is wholly grounded upon the
authority of Gods word; and in this it differs not only from all humane
sciences bred by a clear sight, or evident demonstration, and from humane
opinion proceeding from probable arguments or conjectures, and from humane
Faith built upon the authority of Pithagoras his Ipse dixit, or the word of any
other man; but also from all other divine knowledge, had, either by clear
vision of the divine Essence, which Saints have in heaven, or by clear
revelation of divine Mysteries, which some principal persons, to wit,
Patriarchs, and Prophers, and Apostles had on earth; and also from that
Theological discursiue knowledge, which learned men attain unto, by the use
of their natural wit, in deducing Conclusions, partly out of the foundations
of supernatural Faith, partly out of principles of natural reason: From all
these kinds of knowledge (I say) that one true, divine, and infallible Faith
differs, in that it is grounded wholly upon the authority of the Word of
God, as humane fallible Faith is grounded upon the authority of the Word of
Man.

3. This Word of God, upon which divine infallible faith is grounded, is not
only the word of God Increate, or the prime Verity, but also the word Created,
or Revelation proceeding from that prime Verity, by which the truth of
Christian mysteries, by Christ (who is true God) was first made manifest to the
Apostles, and other his Disciples; partly by the exterior preaching of his
own mouth, but chiefly by the inward revelation of his eternal heavenly
Father, and by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. Secondly, It was made known
to others living in those days, partly by owtward preaching, partly by the
writings of the aforesaid Apostles, and Disciples, to whom Christ gave
lawful mission and commission to teach, saying Teach all nations, Matthew. 28..
promising that himself would be with them all days, Joan. 16.
unto the end of the world; Luc. 10.
and that his holy Spirit should assist them, and teach them, (and consequently
make them able to teach others) all Truth, in such sort, as whosoever should
hear them, should hear Christ himself, and so should be made docibles Dei,
and as the Prophet foretold, docti a Domino, and as S. Paul speaks of some,
Epistola Christi, the epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the
spirit of God. Whence appears, that not only the Word Increate, but also the
Word Created, may be truly said to be the Foundation of our Faith; and not only
that Word which was immediately inspired by the heavenly Father, or by the holy
Ghost, in the hearts of the Apostles, and other Disciples, who lived in our
Saviors days; but also the Word, as well preached, as written by the
Apostles, and also that Word, which by the preaching and writing of the
Apostles, was by the holy Ghost imprinted in the hearts of the immediate
hearers, who were thereupon said to be the Epistles of Christ, as I have already
noted.

4. This Word of God (which I call Created, to distinguish it from the word
Increate) being partly preached, partly written, partly inspired or imprinted
in manner aforesaid) was not to cease at the death of the Apostles and
Disciples and their immediate hearers, 1. Tim. 2.
but by the appointment of God (who would have all men to be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the Truth,) was to be derived to posterity; not by new
immediate revelations, or Enthusiasmes, nor by sending Angels to all
particular men, but by a continuated succession of Visible Doctors, and
Pastors, and lawfully-sent Preachers in all ages, who partly by Transcripts of
what was written first by the Apostles; but chiefly by Vocal preaching of the
same doctrine, without change, which the Pastors of every age successively one
from another received of their predecessors, as they who lived in the age next
to the Apostles days, received it from the Apostles, as a sacred Depositum, to
be kept and preserved in the Church, maugre all the assaults of Helly gates,
which according to Christ's promise, shall never preua-le against the Church
Whence follows, that not only for 400. or 500. or 600. years, but in all ages
since Christ, there was, is, and shall be the true Word of God preached by
visible Doctors, Pastors, and lawfully sent Preachers, so guided by Christ and
his holy spirit, that by them people of every Age were, are, and shall be
sufficiently instructed in true, divine, infallible Faith, in all things
necessary to Salvation; to the intent, that they may not be little ones,
wavering, Ephesians. 4.
nor carried about with every wind of new doctrine; which being contrary to
the old and first received, must needs be false.

5. Whereas by this which is already said (which if need be, may be morefully
proved) it apeareth first, that there is one, true, divine, infallible Faith,
necessary to salvation. Secondly, that this Faith is wholly grounded upon the
word of God. Thirdly, that this word of God, is not only the word Increate, but
also the word Created, either inwardly inspired, or outwardly preached, or
written, and continued, without change in one, or other continued succession of
Visible Pastors, Doctors, and lawfully-sent Preachers, rightly teaching, by
the direction of Christ, and his holy spirit, the said word of God whereas (I
say) all this does most evidently appear by this which is already said.

That I may prove the Roman Church only, and those who consent and agree in
doctrine of Faith with it, to have that one, true, divine, infallible Faith,
which is necessary to salvation,

Thus I dispute. Visible Pastors, in which, and by which the unchanged word of
God, upon which true, divine, infallible Faith is grounded, is preserved and
preached; and no other succession besides that of the Roman Church, and others,
which agree in Faith with it, can be showed (as if any such were, may be
showed) out of approved Histories, or other ancient monuments; Then without
doubt, the Roman Church only, and such as agree with it in Faith, have that
true, divine, infallible Faith, which is necessary to salvation.

But there must be one, or other such succession of Visible Pastors; and no
other can be showed out of approved Histories or ancient momuments, besides
that of the Roman Church only, and such others as agree with it in Faith. Ergo.

The Roman Church only, and such others as agree with it in Faith, has true,
divine, infallible Faith, necessary to salvation.

The Consequence of the Mayor cannot with reason be denied, and if it be, it
shall be proved.

The Minor has two parts. The first whereof is plain, by that which is
already said, and if need be it shall be more fully proved out of holy Scriptures.

The second part, may be made manifest, first out of Histories, secondly out of
the confession of Protestants.

The second Argument.
If the Roman Church had the right Faith, and never changed any substantial
part of Faith: Then it follows, that it has now that one true, divine,
infallible Faith, which is necessary to salvation.

But the Roman Church once had the right Faith, and never changed any
substantial part of Faith. Ergo.

The Roman Church now has the right Faith; and consequently Protestants, so
far as they disagree with it, have not the right soule-sauing Faith.

The Mayor is evident.

The Minor has two parts. The first is clear out of S. Paul, Romans 1. and is
confessed by Protestants.

The second part, I prove thus: Roman Church changed any substantial part of
Faith, then there may be showed the point changed, the person which was the
Author of that change, the time when, and place where the change was made; and
others may be named, who persisting in the ancient Faith, continued opposition
against the innovation and change, as may be showed in other like, and less
changes, and namely in Luthers, and Caluins change.

But these circumstances cannot be showed. Ergo. No change.

If my Adversaries name any point, which they affirm to have been changed. 1.
This will not suffice, unless they name the other circumstances of the Author,
time, place, and who persisting in the former unchanged Faith, opposed and
continued oppositio^ against it, as against a Nouelty, and Heresy; as we can
do in other changes, and namely in that which was by Luther and Calvin.

2. These points, which they say were changed after the first 600. years, may
be showed them to have been held, by more ancient approved Authors, in the
same sense, in which they are held by the Roman Church; which does argue, that
there was no such change made.

A brief Relation of what passed between D. White, and M. Fisher, about the
foresaid written Paper.
THIS forsaid paper passing from one to another, came to some hands, who gave
it to D. Francis White to answer, and to prepare himself to oppugn it in a
Conference with M. Fisher: who when he wrote it, and gave it to the Lady, did
not think, or suspect that any such great matter should have been made of it,
as after proved, M. D. White having (as he confessed after to M. Fisher) had
this paper about ten days in his hands, studying what to say to it, came as
he was appointed to the place of meeting, and M. Fisher being then a Prisoner,
was also sent for. At the hour and place prefixed, both the one, and the other
(as they were bidden) sat down before a few, but very Honorable Persons,
whose names I will only (as M. Fisher first did) express in these ensuing
letters. L. K. L. M. B. L. B. and M. B. Then D. White drew out a copy of the
aforesaid written paper, and asked M. Fisher whether he wrote it. Unto which M.
Fisher answered, I wrote such a thing, and if it be a true copy, I will defend
it.

Then D. White read the first point of the said paper, in which was said: This
is one, and has one, was, divine Faith etc. This says D. White, is true, if
Faith be understood explicit, or implicit. Which to be the true sense M.
Fisher assented.

Then D. White read the second point, in which was said, That this true, divine
Faith, was wholly provided upon the word of God etc. This also D. White yielded
to be true.

Then D. White read the third point, in which was said, That this word of God,
upon which Faith was grounded, is not only the Word increate, but also the Word
Created, to wit, the divine revelation made manifest, partly by Christ's (...)
preaching, partly by the holy Ghosts inward inspiration in (...) hearts of the
Apostles etc.

This point also D. White allowed, but knowing what followed in the fourth
point, he asked M. Fisher, whether he thought that the holy Ghost was equally
in others, as in the Apostles? M. Fisher said, that the inspiratio^ of the holy
Ghost was promised, and given both to the Apostles, and others, yet not in the
same degree, nor in the samefull measure; but the Apostles, as being after
Christ the prime foundations of the Church, had the holy Ghost in such high
degree, and full measure, that they could, and did write Canonical Scriptures.
Others that were Pastors and Doctors, had it in an inferior degree, yet so,
as by it they were enabled to teach infallibly, and without change, the
substance of all points needful to salvation, especially when in a general
Council, after discussion of the matter, they did conclude as the Apostles and
Seniours did, Visum est spiritui sancto and nis. It seems good to the holy
Ghost, and us. The people also had a measure of the same spirit, sufficient to
enable the^ to conceive rightly and to believe steadfastly the teaching of their
Pastors.

D. White did not disallow the substance of this answer, but only made a
verbal Objection, saying: The Apostles had inspiration, Pastors and People
only illumination.

M. Fisher answered, that both Apostles and Pastors had inspiration and
illumination, in regard the motion of the holy Ghost, as received in the
understanding, is called Illumination, and as received in the will, it is
called Inspiration.

L. K. bad them leave that verbal controversy, and proceed in the matter. D.
White excepted against that part of the paper, wherein was said, That the word
of God was partly written, partly unwritten, and would have nothing to be the
word of God, but what is written in Scripture.

M. Fisher to justify that part of the paper, first alleged that Text of S.
Paul, Hold the traditions which you have learned, whether by our Word, or
Epistle. 2. He made these two ensuing arguments (to prove that more is to be
believed by divine Faith then is written in Scripture.)

It is necessary to believe, by divine Faith, that Genesis, Exodus, and other
particular Books are Canonical, and divine Scripture.

But this to be so, is not assuredly known by the only Word written. Ergo etc.

Moreover Protestants hold, and believe this proposition: Nothing is to be
believed by Christian Faith, but what is contained in Scripture:

But this Proposition, is not contained in the word written. Ergo. Something is
believed even by Protestants which is not contained in the written Word, and
therefore they must admit for a ground of Faith some Word of God not written.

D. White answered: Although at that time when S. Paul wrote the text alleged,
some part of Gods word was not written, yet afterward all needful to be
believed, was written. This D. White said, but did not, not cannot prove,
especially out of any part of the written Word.

D. Woyte alleged this text, Omnis scriptura diuinit(...) inspirata, vtilis
estetc. But (as M. Fisher then told him) this Text does not prove the point
which is to be proved. For this text does not say, that all which is divinely
inspired, was written, or that Genesis, Exodus, and other particular books, are
divinely inspired, or that nothing is to be believed which is not contained in
scripture; but only says, That all, or every Scripture divinely inspired, is
profitable.

D. White said: Scripture is not only said simply to be profitable, but to be
profitable, to argue, to teach, to correct, to instruct, that the man of God
may be perfect: and therefore being profitable to all these offices, it may be
said to be sufficient.

M. Fisher replied: Although wood be profitable to make the substance of the
house, to make wainscot, to make tables and stools, and other furniture, yet
hence does not follow, that wood alone is sufficient to build and furnish a
house. I will notsay, that here D. White was at a Nonplus, because I
understand that word Nonplus, does not please him; but the truth is that to
this D. White did make no answer. And for my part I profess, I do not see
what answer he could have made to the purpose, and worthy of that Honorable,
and understanding Audience.

D. White therefore without saying any thing to this instance, seemed to be
weary, and giving the paper to M. Fisher, had him read on.

M. Fisher taking the paper, read the fourth Point, in which was said, That at
the word of God manifested to the Apostles, and by them to their immediate
hearers, was not to cease at their death, but was to be continued and
propagated without change, in, and by one, or other company of visible
Pastors, Doctors, and lawfully-sent preachers successively in all ages etc.
All which to be true being at last granted, or not denied by D. White, M.
Fisher proposed the first of the two arguments set down in the aforesaid
Paper. viz.

If there must be in all ages one, or other continual succession of visible
Pastors, Doctors, and lawfully-sent Preachers by whom the unchanged word of
God, upon which Faith is grounded, was preserved etc preached in all ages since
Christ; and no other is visible, or can be showed, besides those of the Roman
Church, and such as agree in Faith with them; Then none, but the Pastors of
the Roman Church, and such as agree in Faith with them, have that one,
infallible, divine, unchanged Faith which is necessary to salvation.

But there must be such a visible succession, and none such can be showed
different in Faith from the Pastors of the Roman Church. Ergo.

Only the Pastors of the Roman Church; and such as agree in Faith with them,
preserve and teach that one, infallible, divine, unchanged Faith which is
necessary to salvation.

D. White answered, That it was sufficient to show a succession of visible
Pastors, teaching unchanged doctrine in all points fundamental, although not
in points not fundamental.

M. Fisher replied saying: First, that if time permitted, he could prove all
points of divine Faith, to be fundamental (supposing they were points
generally held, or defined by full authority of the Church; (to which purpose
he did recite the beginning of this sentence of S. Augustine: Ferendus est
disputator errans in alijs quaestionibus non diligenter digestis, nondum plena
authoritate Ecclesia firmatis, ibi ferendus est error; non tantum progredi
debet, vt ipsum fundamentum quatere moliatur. In which S. Auston insinuates,
that to err in any questions defined by full authority of the Church, is to
shake the foundation of Faith, or to err in points fundamental. But M. Fisher
not having the book at hand (and fearing to be tedious in arguing upon a text
which he had not ready to show) passed on: and secondly required D. White to
give him a Catalogue of all points fundamental, or a definition or description
(well proved out of Scripture, and in which all Protestants will agree) by
which one may discern which be, and which be not points fundamental.

D. White rejected this demand, as thinking it unreasonable to require of him
a Catalogue, or definition, or description of Points fundamental, out of
Scripture, in which all Protestants will agree. But (considering in what sense
D. White did understand this distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental (to wit, that none could be saved who did not believe all points
fundamental rightly; and that none should be damned for not believing other
points, unless he did wilfully against his conscience deny, or not believe
them;) M. Fishers demand was both reasonable and most necessary; for since all
Protestants agree in houlding it necessary to be certain of their salvation;
and that none can be saved, who do not believe all points fundamental; and
that in these points, one must not content himself with implicit Faith, but
must expressly know them; it is most necessary, that all Protestants should
out of Scripture) which they pretend to be their only Rule of Faith) find, and
conclude with unanimous consent certainly, what is, and what is not a
fundamental point of Faith, necessary to salvation. For whiles some hold
more, some less to be fundamental, and none of them gives (out of Scripture)
a sufficient rule by which it may be discerned, which is, and which is not
fundamental; how can each particular Protestant rest assured, that he belieueth
expressly all points fundamental, or so much as is necessary, and sufficient to
make him assured of salvation. But to return to the Relation. D. White, having
rejected M. Fishers demand, requiring a Catalogue, definition or description
out of Scripture (in which all Protestants will agree) said: That all those
points were fundamental, which were contained in the Creed of the Apostles.

M. Fisher might have asked him diverse questions upon this answer. 1. What
text of scripture taught him, that all the points contained in the Apostles
Creed were fundamental in the sense aforesaid? Or, That this Creed was
composed by the Apostles, as a summary of Faith, containing points needful (at
least necessitate Praecepti) to be expressly believed by all men? The Church
indeed so teaches, but the Scripture has not any text which does expressly
say so, or whence by necessary consequence so much may be gathered; and
therefore according to Protestant principles (permitting nothing to be believed
but Only Scripture) the Apostles Creed ought not to be believed, as a rule of
any point of Faith, and much less a rule containing all principal and
fundamental points of Faith.

2. M. Fisher might have asked, Whether Only the words of the Creed are
needful to be held, as a sufficient foundation of Faith, or the Catholic
senses. If only the words; then the Arrians, and other condemned Heretics
may be said to have held all the fundamental points sufficient to Salvation;
which is contrary to the judgment of Antiquity, and is most absurd. If the
Catholic sense; then the question must be, who must be judge to determine
which is the catholic sense? and whether it be not most reasonable, and
necessary, that the Catholic Church it self, rather then any particular man,
or Sect of men, should teach the true sense? When especially, Joan. 14. and 16.
the holy Ghost was promised to the catholic church (and not to any
particular man, or Sect of men, differing in doctrine from it) to teach it all
Truth.

3. M. Fisher might have asked, whether all points fundamental were expressed
in the creed, or not? If they be not, by what other rule shall one know, what
is a point fundamental? If all which is fundamental be expressed in the
creed, then to believe only Scripture, or to believe that there is any
Scripture at all, is not fundamental, or necessary to Salvation; but to
believe the catholic church (and consequently the truth of all such doctrines
of Faith, which she generally teaches, or defines in her general counsels)
is fundamental. So as, we may say with S. Athanasius, Whosoever will be saved,
must believe the catholic Faith (that is, the Faith taught by the catholic
church) and this not only in part or in a corrupt sense, but in all points, and
in catholic sense. For as the same S. Athanasius says, unless one believe the
said Catholic faith (integram inuiolatam*) entiere and inuiolate, without
doubt he shall perish everlastingly. All these questions M. Fisher might have
asked, but he at that present only asked, Whether all articles of the Creed,
were held by D. White to be fundamental?

To which Question D. White answered, That all was fundamental.

M. Fisher asked, Whether the article of christ's descending into hell, were
fundamental?

D. White said, Yes.

Why then (said M. Fisher) did M. Rogers affirm, That the Church of England is
not yet resolved, Rogers in his doctrine of the Church of England, Art. 3.
what is the right sense of that Article?

It was answered, that M. Rogers was a private man. M. Fisher replied: That his
Book in the title professes to be set out by public authority. To which M.
Fisher might have added. That the Book so set out by public authority,
bears title of the Catholic, or Universal doctrine of the church of
England; by which addition is showed a difference betwixt this book of M.
Rogers, and some others, which were objected to be set out by license of the
catholic side: for these our books are only licenced to come out in the name
of such, or such a private author, and as books declaring his private opinions:
but this of M. Rogers was authorized, and graced with the title of the
Catholic doctrine of the church of England, and therefore ought by Protestants
to be more respected, then other private men's books.

M. Fisher not thinking it necessary to press this difference, returned again
to D. Whytes first answer to the maine argument, in which he having said, That
it was sufficient to show a visible succession of such as held points
fundamental, did implicitly grant it necessary, that a succession should be
showed of such visible Pastors as did hold all points, which at least himself
held to be fundamental, or necessary to salvation. Whereupon M. Fisher bad D.
White name a continual company, or succession of visible Protestants
(different from the Roman Church which they call Papists) holding all points
which he accounted fundamental.

D. White expressly granted, That he could not show such a visible succession
of Pastors and Doctors (differing in doctrine from the Roman church) who
held all points which he accounted fundamental. Which his ingenuous
confession, I desire the Reader to note, applying it to the argument which M.
Fisher proposed, showing that Only the Roman church has had such a
succession. For if, as the argument urges, one such succession has been, and
none differing in doctrine from the Roman can be showed by D. White (being
accounted a prime Protestant Controuersist, who may teach such as D. Featly, as
was lately professed by D. Featly himself) we may absolutely conclude, that no
such visible succession was of Protestants, so far as they differ in doctrine
from the Roman church, and consequently till they assign some other (which
they can never do) they must acknowledge the Roman to be the only church, or
at least a church which has had a visible succession, teaching the unchanged
Faith of christ in all ages, in all points, at least fundamental: which being
acknowledged, worthily might M. Fisher ask (as he did ask) D. White, Why
Protestants made a schism from the Roman church? and why Protestants did
persecute Roman catholics, contrary to the custom of the ancient Fathers,
who still kept unity with other churches, although in their opinion holding
errors; (until the catholic church by full authority defined them to be
errors in Faith) and that after such definition of the church (which was yet
never made against the Roman church) they would still obstinatly persist in
error; as appears in S. Cyprians case. To these demands made by M. Fisher,
D. White answered; We do not persecute you for Religion. About which answer I
desire the gentle Reader to observe, that M. Fisher asked two Questions. 1. Why
Protestants made a schism from the Roman church? 2. Why Protestants did
persecute Roman catholics?

To the first of these questions being about Schism, D. White answered not a
word, and yet this was the most important Question, sufficient to show
Protestants to be in a damnable state, unless they repent and return to unity
with the Roman church. For on the one side, it cannot be denied, but that
schism or separation of ones self from church-Vnity, is a most damnable
sin, which cannot be made lawful for any cause, nor cannot without
repentance, and returning to Unity, be washed away, even with martyrdom it
self, as the ancient Fathers confess: And on the other side it is evident
(and even confessed by some Protestants) that Protestants did separate
themselves from the Roman Church, which is confessed to be the mother Church,
and which cannot be showed to have separated it self from a former church yet
extant, as the true church of christ must always be visibly extant; Neither
can there be showed any other reason, why Protestants did make, and continue
this their separation, then were, or might have been alleged by Heretics,
and Scismatiques of ancient times, separating themselves from the catholic
Roman church: For setting aside all temporal respects, which doubtless were
(but were very insufficient and unworthy) causes why some did first, and do yet
continue this separation; there cannot be imagined any pretended cause which
may not be reduced to these two heads: to wit, corruption of Manners, or
corruption of Doctrine. Corruption of manners, is not a just cause to make one
leave the Faith, Sacraments, and rites of the church, our Savior having
sufficiently forewarned what is to be done in this case, Matthew. 21.
when he said; Upon the chair of Moses the Scribes and Pharisees have sitten;
all therefore that they say unto you, observe, and do, but according to their
works do not. For by this is showed that the separation which in other places
of Scripture is commanded, is not meant so, as if it were to be made by
neglecting or contradicting the doctrine of lawfully authorized Pastors, or by
corporally absenting ones self from communicating with them in necessary
Sacraments, and church Rites, but only spiritually to depart from the
imitation of their ill manners. The second, to wit, corruption of Doctrine,
pertaining to the common Faith of the catholic Church, neither did, nor can
happen to the whole visible church; christ having promised, that the holy Ghost
shall be always with it, to teach it all Truth; and that Hell-gates shall never
so prevail against it, as to overthrow in it the fundation of all goodness, to
wit, true Faith. And for other errors in such questions as are not determined
by full authority of the said catholic church, S. Austens rule is to be
observed, Aug. de verb. apost. Ser. 14.
whom when he says, Ferendus est disputator errans: neither must one for the
error of a few, leave the society and communion of all; neither must one or a
few, presuming upon their own private reading, and interpreting of scripture,
or their private spirit (which is or may be the common pretext of all
Heretics) censure and condemn the doctrine, or practice of the universal
Catholic Church to be erroneous: which to do, is by S. Bernards sentence,
Intolerable Pride, and in S. Austans judgment, Insolent madness.

The beginning therefore and continuance of the Schism, and separation of the
Protestants from the Catholic Roman Church (in which even, as Calvin
confesses, Calvin l. Ep. epist. 141.
there was made a discession and departure from the whole world) is very
damnable, and altogether inexcusable. Which perhaps was the cause why D. White
passed over that part of the Question (touching this Schysme) with silence, and
only answered, as is above said, to the other part saying: We do not
persecute you for Religion.

To which answer M. Fisher replied, saying: You do us wrong, for my self being
a prisoner was never taxed with any state matter, but do suffer for Religion.
L. M. B. made another answer, saying: You of your side, did first persecute
Protestants.

M. Fisher answered, that we Catholics hold all points, in which Protestants
differ from us in doctrine of faith to be fundamental, and necessary to be
believed, or at least not denied, and so may have cause to punish them who
deny, or contradict. But Protestants, who believe catholics to hold right in
all points which themselves esteem fundamental, have no reason to persecute
us, for supposed errors in points not fundamental, which Protestants do not
account damnable. For better clearing whereof M. Fisher, asked D. White, whether
he thought error in a point not fundamental to be damnable?

D. White, said, No, unless one hold it against his conscience.

M. Fisher asked, How one could hold an error against his conscience? meaning
that one could not inwardly in his conscience believe that be true, which he
knew in his conscience to be an error.

D. White answered, That by peruersity of will he might hold an error against
the known truth. Which answer is true, if he mean, that one who knows the
truth at this instant, may after by peruersity of Will, incline the
Understanding to hold the contrary error. But that, at the same instant, he
should know the truth actually, and yet actually hold, in the same instant, the
contrary error in his conscience, or inward knowledge, is more then I think any
Philosopher can explicat. For this were to know, and not know, and to believe
two contraries, Truth, and Error, about the same object in the same subject,
the inward conscience at one, and the same instant, which is impossible.

M. B. meruayling at D. Whites answer asked, him again the same question,
saying: May one be saved that holds error in points of Faith, not
fundamental, supposing he hold not against his conscience?

D. White said; Yes.

Those (faith M. B.) who suffering for conscience hold error in Faith against
their conscience, are worthy to be damned.

M. Fisher having observed, that D. White had insinuated, that one might be
damned for holding error in points of Faith not fundamenall, in case he hold
them against his conscience, said; If it be damnable to hold errors in points
not fundamental, in case one hold them wilfully against his conscience: a
fortiori, it is damnable to hold the like errors wilfully and obstinatly,
against the known judgment, and conscience of the Church. For as S. Bernard
says: Qua major superbia, Bern. sermon. 5. de resurrect.
quam vt vnus homo iudicium suum praeferattoti Congregationi? What greater
pride, then that one man should prefer his judgment (or conscience) before
the judgment (and conscience) of the whole Church?

D. White said, he remembered that sentence of S. Bernard: but it is not
remembered that he gave any good answer, either to that sentence, or to the
argument confirmed by it. Neither indeed can he give any good answer, in
regard it is certain, that the judgment and conscience of the whole Church (or
Congregation of so many faithful, wise, learned, and virtuous men, assisted by
the promised Spirit of truth) is incomparably more to be respected, and
preferred before the judgment, and conscience of any private man; as appears
by that of Christ our Savior, who (without excepting any who pretends to
follow his conscience, and without distinguishing the matter in which he
pretends to follow it, into points fundamental, and not fundamental)
absolutely affirms, Matt. 1^.
He that will not hear ( that is, believe and obey) the Church, let him be to
thee as an Heathen and Publican.

Hence Protestants (who prefer their private Judgment and Conscience before
the judgment and conscience of the Catholic Church, in interpreting
Scriptures, or otherwise) may learn, in what state they remain, so long as
they do thus, being by the Censure of S. Bernard, extremely Proud, and in the
indgement of S. Austen insolently mad, and by the sentence of Christ
himself, to be accounted no better then Heathens and Publicans.

It seems that D. White did not deeply ponder this point, or else was willing
to pass over it (as a Cat over hot coals) and so he betook himself to
oppugn another part of M. Fishers paper, in which is said, that; No company of
visible Pastors delivering unchanged doctrine, could be showed in all ages,
besides those of the Roman Church.

D. White denied this to be true, and (notwithstanding he had before said that
he could not show any company differing in doctrine from the Roman Church,
holding in all ages all fundamental points) said, that both the Greek Church,
and the Protestant Church had such a succession of visible Pastors: which two
sayings, how D. White will reconcile, pertayneth to him to declare.

M. Fisher replied, and told him that the Greek Church changed, and erred in
a point of Faith, to wit, about the holy Ghost. A like, or greater change he
might, and in likelihood would, have told him to hauc been in many points held
by the Protestant Church, if he had not bin interrupted by L. K. who asked,
Whether notwithstanding that error of the Greek Church, Ignorant man might
not be saved?

M. Fisher answered to L. K. his question, saying: Some ignorant men may be
excused from actual sin, in holding that error, as, through invincible
ignorance, one holding some error against the holy Trinity it self, may be
excused. Yet for other actual sins, they might be damned for want of means
necessary for remission of them. This answer was meant by M. Fisher of such
ignorant men, who (although by invincible ignorance excused from the actual
sin of positive Infidelity, Heresy and Scisme) wanted true supernatural
Faith, Hope and Charity, out of which an act of true Contrition springs; or
wanted the true, and lawful use of the Sacrament of Penance, and Priestly
Absolution; which being needful to obtain pardon of sin, may easily be
wanting to such people as commit other sins against the light of nature, or
against those good motions of Grace, which now and then Almighty God gives to
all sorts, who consequently (through this their own fault) are not illuminated
with true supernatural Faith, but are permitted still to remain in
Infidelity, or Heresy, or Schism, or in a negative disposition of want of all
Faith, devotion, and desire of union with God, and such good men who truly
serve god in his true Church: of which sort of ignorant people, it is to be
doubted there be but to many in all (especially Infidel, Heretical, or
Schismatic) Countries. But hence does not follow, neither did M. Fisher ever
mean to affitme, that all ignorant Graecians, Protestants, or of any other
sort of Schismatiques, Heretics, or Infidels are damned; for if on the one
side this their ignorance be invincible, so as to excuse them from the actual
sin of their Schism, Heresy, and Infidelity; and on the other side, they by
Almighty Gods special grace, be preserved from other actual mortal sin,
and by the same grace be excited extraordinarily to Faith, Hope, Charity, and
to true Contrition for all finne, they may be saved: But this being
extraordinary, no man ought ordinarily presume, or rely on it, especially so,
as to neglect the ordinary means, known to be in the unity of the Catholic
Roman Church.

After this D. White excepted against another point of M. Fishers paper, in
which was said: That the Roman Church had still held vnhanged doctrime of Faith
in all points etc. And for instances of change made, he objected
Transubstantiation, Images, Communion under one kind, Sacrament of penance
etc. These points he slieghtly began to touch, but did not (as the paper
required) name when, and by whom the change was made in these points, but
said; It was not needful to show these circumstances. As for example (says he)
the Pharisees held error, in saying, that the gold of the Altar was more holy
then the Altar, which was a change in doctrine, and yet you cannot show when,
and by whom this change was made.

To this M. Fisher answered, that although he could not on the sudden tell
when, and by whom this Change was made; yet he did not doubt but that with
study he might find it out. And so indeed, he might have named the Author of
the Sect of Pharisees, who first brought in that error, and the time when that
Sect began, which is enough. For we do not press Protestants to tell the very
day, or hour in which every one of our supposed Errors were brought in; but to
name the first Author of any erroneous doctrine, or of any Sect of men who were
specially noted for teaching such a peculiar doctrine, and about what year, or
Age that Sect of men, first began; and who they were, who then noted them to
teach such doctrine, contrary so the formerly received Faith of the universal
Church; as must be, and is usually noted, when especially any such notorious
matters as those which D. White objected, were by any man, or any sect of men,
taught contrary to the formerly received Faith of the universal church.

Since therefore, the aforesaid circumstances are vlually noted in other such
kind of changes, and that it is morally impossible, that such great changes and
so universally spread over the world, should be made either in an instant, or in
succession of time, and that not one, or other writer would have made mention
of the change, and when, where, and by whom it was made, as they do of all
other such matters; D. White (who objected such great changes of doctrine to
have been made in the Roman church, accusing hereby greuiously her, which
consessedly was once the true Mother church,) is obliged and bound, not only to
prove this his accusation, by showing the foresaid circumstances, in good
Authors, if he will not be accounted an unnatural and false calumniator of his
true Mother Church: but he must also show another continually visible church,
which never did admit any any such change in doctrine of Faith, if he will not
impiously deny the truth of the Prophesyes and Promises of Scripture, whereby we
learn, that Hell gates shall not prevail against the church: And that christ
himself, and his holy spirit will always be with the church teaching it, and
consequently enabling it to teach us all truth, and making it the pillar and
ground of truth, and consequently free from all error in matters of Faith.

But D. White can never prove his accusation by showing out of good Authors the
aforesaid circumstances of the change of the Roman church, in doctrine of
Faith, nor can show any other continually visible church, which did not admit
change in doctrine of Faith. Let him therefore consider, whether it be not
better to recall his false unnatural accusation of his Mother the Roman
church, being sorry for it, with purpose here after humbly to hear, believe,
obey, and follo where doctrine and direction, rather then to incur, not only
the foresaid censure of men, but also of christ himself, who says; He that
will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen and Publican: that
is, cast out of the favor of God, and all good men, both in this present life,
and also, if he do not in time repent, in the future eternal life.

These be the chief points which I have gathered out M. Fishers first
Relation, which he showed to D. White with an intent that he should put him in
mind if any thing were not remembered, or misremembred: But the Doctor at that
time did not, nor could truly say, that any thing was safely related; only he
said, 1. That himself did not remember a point or two, which both M. Fisher
and M. B. did perfectly remember to have been so as is here related. 2. He
said, that something more was said then is related, which M. Fisher did not
deny, but was willing to add any thing, that D. White could put him in mind of,
or that himself should after remember: and so being put in remembrance made by
D. White, to wit, Whereas M. Fisher upon some occasion or other, had said, That
although a general Council might err in the premises, yet not in the
Conclusion, D. White objected, saying: That in all sciences the conclusion is
no more certain, the^ the Premises, and therefore if the premises in a
general council be fallible, the conclusion cannot be infallible. To which M.
Fisher answered, saying; Although in sciences which depend only upon the light
of Nature, the conclusion cannot be more certain then the premises; yet in a
general council, assisted by the holy Ghost, in the final conclusion, or
definitive sentence, the conclusion is always infallible, although sometimes
the premises be fallible.

And M. Fisher had great reason to answer in this manner. Indeed if to define
a matter of Faith were to conclude the same by way of discourse out of
Principles, as the Argument does suppose; then if Councels might err in the
Promises they might likewise err in their Conclusion, and d^finitiue
sentence. But this supposition is false, Infallibility in defining, being a
divine Assistance, not to infer one thing out of another by way of connection
and consequence, but to decree and declare what is conform(...) to the word of
God, by way of authority, binding the Church so to believe. And this definition
is ever infallible, though all the arguments the Council bringes by way of
discourse in proof of the definition either before or after the same is made,
be not still demonstratiue.

Another objection M. Fisher has since that time remembered (to wit) that D.
White alleged something out of Abulensis in Matt. 7. 19. which M. Fisher
differred to make answer unto, until he might see the Author himself, having
had experience enough, how falsely many Ministers the Authors, and how false
their Note-Bookes be. Now M. Fisher, has seen the book, and finds the
words cited by D. White to contain two parts; one, as contrary to D. White as
the other seems contrary to M. Fisher, and that the whole discourse of
Abulensis in that place, shows that even that part which seems contrary to
M. Fisher, does nothing preudice M. Fishers cause, as will appear to any that
will duly ponder all that is there said of the Authority of the Church, in
defining what books be, and what be not Canonical. For Abulensis expressly
declares, that all, and only those books are to be accounted Canonical.
which the church does define to be canonical: and the reason why he did (in
his private opinion) think one, or two Books not to be canonical, which we
do now hold for canonical, is, for that the Church had not then so clearly
defined them to be Canonical, as it has done since A(...)sts wrote that
passage as there are diverse other Books held for Canonical, even by
Protestants, which have not been so esteemed by some of the Ancient Fathers,
in regard the church had not then so clearly defined them to be canonical, as
is has done in after times.

A third objection was made by D. White about the worship of Images, which D.
White would needs affirm to be an Innovation, and gross^ Error of Papists:
Which M. Fisher denied, and said, that the worship (meaning the same worship
which is due to the Prototypon) is not given by us to the Image it self. This
objection D. White urged no further the first day; but the next day of meeting,
he urged those words of Bellarmine, Datur veneratio ipsi imagini. M. Fisher
anwered, that Bellarmine did not mean that the same worship, which was due to
the Prototypon, was given to the Image it self, but an inferior degree of
worship, and that also for the Prototypons sake.

Then D. White betook himself to Suares, saying: That Suares did hold, that
the same worship which was given to the Prototypon, was given to the Image. M.
Fisher answering, said: You do not understand our Authors: For, said M. Fisher,
they that seem to give most, give the least to Images; for those that say that
one and the same worship is given to the Image, and that which is represented
by it, hold the Image to be incapable of any part of worship, and so the whole
to pertayne to the thing: Whereas others who distinguish one honor to be due to
the thing, and another far inferior to be given to the Image, give something,
as M. Fisher explicated in the example of the respect one bears to the
picture of his friend, which although it be not capable of that friendly
respect, and affection which by looking upon it, he exciteth in himself
toward his friend represented by it; yet is it capable of an inferior degree
of respect, as to be set in a more worthy and eminent place etc. then it should
be, if it were the picture of some other, who were not ones friend.

These be the chief Passages of this Conference between D. White, and M.
Fisher, so far as has come to my notice, who have used so much diligence in
inquiring the truth of this matter, as I have no doubt, but for substance I
have not omitted any thing that may much import, considering what the occasion,
and subject of the Conference was; to wit, that Paper written by M. Fisher, in
which he proved the Roman Church, and those who agree in Faith with it, to be
that Company, of whom every one must learn what is the truth, in all points
and questions of Faith necessary to salvation: which paper not being
substantially confuted, as it was not, by any thing said by D. White, or any
other at that time or after, D. White is yet obliged to make a better answer,
if he mean to give satisfaction either to Catholics or Protestants in this
most important point of a perpetually visible church, of which all forts must
learn true, divine, infallible Faith, necessary to Salvation.

FINIS.
A RELATION OF THE Conference between a certain B. and M. Fisher, defended
against the said B. his Chaplayne.
The Preface.
GENTLE Reader, I think it needful to let thee understand, that whereas the
Chaplain of a certain B. says: (in the Preface of his Answer to a Relation
of what passed between the said B. and M. Fisher,) That the Jesuit spread
abroad papers of this Conference, which were full of partiality to his cause,
more full of calumney against the B. the truth is, that the Jesuit did not at
all, so much as in speech, and much less in papers publish this, or either of
the other two Conferences, which he had with D. White, until he was forced
unto it, by false Reports given out about them, to his private disgrace, and to
the prejudice of the Catholic Cause. Neither then did he spread papers
abroad, but only delivered a very few Copies to special friends; and this not
with intent to calumniate either the B. or the Doctor, or to make the papers
common, but to enable his friends to answer and countermaund such false
Reports, as they had heard, or might hear. Which being so, I do not see, how
the Chaplain can free himself from the faults of partiality and Calumny,
whereof he does accuse the Jesuit, unless he do (by some other proofs better
then his own, or his Masters bare affirmation) prove, that the Jesuit spread
such papers; showing also particulerly wherein he did relate partially to his
cause, and calumnlously against the B. I say relate, in regard I do not at this
present promise to examine exactly all doctrines insinuated in the Jesuits
Relation, and impugned by the Chaplain (as neither having sufficient leisure,
nor commodity of Books requisite for such a work;) but the Relation to have
been sincere and true, free from partiality, more free from calumny, I
undertake to defend. For which purpose I think best to set down the Jesuits
Relation (for the most part as I find it in the Chaplains printed Copy) in
greater letters, and in a lesser letter the Chaplains chiefest exceptions, and
my answer unto them.

I think the Jesuit himself for his own particular respect, could be content
to let pass this partial and calumnious Censure of his Relation, suffering it
patiently as one of the ordinary persecutions, which he, and others at this day
endure for the Catholic Faith, and for that peculiar order of life which he
professes, under the name of the Society of JESUS; comforting himself with the
example of Christ his Apostles, Act. 5. 41.
who rejoiced that they were thoughts worthy to suffer Contumely, for the name
of Jesus. In this respect I say, I suppose the Jesuit himself could be
content, that nothing were said to the Chaplains Censure: But considering the
hurt which may come to the common cause by his unjust disgrace, I have thought
it necessary to defend the sincerity and truth of his Relation, and some of the
chief heads of doctrine contained in it, to the intent that hereby men may be
moved better to trust what he has written heretofore, or may write hereafter,
in defense of the Catholic Faith and Church; and less trust his Adversaries,
who without just cause do so much endeavor to calumniate his person, or
writings.

M. Fishers Relation of the Conference, betvveene a certain B. and himself.
THE occasion of this Conference was, for that it was observed, that in a
second Conference with D. White, all the speech was about particular matters,
and little or nothing about a Continual, Infallible, Visible Church, which was
the chief and only point in which a certain Lady required satisfaction, as
having formerly settled in her mind, that it was not for her, or other unlearned
persons to take upon them to To wit absolutely and to rely upon their private
judgment, so, as to adventure Salvation upon it alone, or chiefly.
judge of particulers, without depending upon the Judgment of the true Church.

This La. therefore having heard it granted in the first Conference, that
there must be a continual, visible Company ever since Christ, teaching
unchanged doctrine, in all points Fundamental, that is, in all points
necessary to Salvation, desired to hear this confirmed, and proof brought to
show which was that Continual, The Chaplain noting the word, Infallible, to
be sometimes put in, sometimes left out, taxes M. Fisher of speaking
distractedly But I note herein, that M. Fisher spoke most advisedly, and with
precise care of pu^ctuall Truth: for when he speaks of what was observed, or
desired by the La. he puts in the word Infallible, because he knew it was an
infallible Church which she sought to rely upon. But when he speaks of what
D. White or L. K. granted, he leaves it out, because they did not mention the
word Infallible, but only granted a visible Church in all ages teaching
unchanged doctrine, in all matters necessary to Salvation.
Infallible, Visible Church, in which one may, and out of which one cannot,
attain Salvation. And therefore having appointed a time of meeting betwixt a
certain B. and my self, and thereupon having sent for the B and me, before
the B. came, the La. and a friend of hers came first to the room where I was,
and debated before me the aforesaid Question, and not doubting of the first
part, to wit, That there must be a Continual Visible Church as they had heard
granted by D. White, L. K. etc. The Question was, which was that Church? The
La. friend would needs defend, that not only the Roman, but also the Greek
Church was right. I told him, that the Greek Church had plainly changed, and
taught false in a point of doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost, and that I had
heard say, that even his Majesty should say, The Greek Church having erred
against the Holy Ghost, had lost the Holy Ghost. The La. friend not knowing
what to answer, called in the Bishop; who sitting down first The Chaplain
taxes the Jesuit, as if in this parcel he did insult: and says it was the
B. his modesty to use this excuse, and to say there were a hundred scholars
better then he. But I do not see any Insultation, but a simple and true
narration of what was said: Neither do I see less modesty in the Jesuits
preferring a thousand before himself, then in the B. his preferring a hundred
before himself.
excused himself as one unprovided, and not much studied in Controversies, and
desiring that in case he should fail, yet the Protestant Cause might not be
thought ill of, it having a hundred better Scholars to maintain it then he.
To which I said, there were a thousand better scholars then I, to maintain
the Catholic cause.

Then the Question about the Greek Church being The Chaplain tells, that the
Jesuit said, that what the B. would not acknowledge in this, he would wring
and extort from him: But these words, of wringing and extorting the Jesuit
never uses, eue^ to his meanest Adversaries, and therefore not likely to have
used the^ to the B. but at most, that he would euince, by argument, or such
like.
proposed, I said as before, that it had erred. The B. said, that the error
was not in a point The Chaplain faith, the B. was not so peremptory: his
speech was, that diverse learned men, and some of your own are of opinion (as
the Greeks expressed themselves) it was a question not simply fundamental.

But the Jesuit cannot remember the B. to have said these words; yet if he
did, the Jesuit did not much miss of the chief point of the B. his meaning,
which was by the distinction of Faith fundamental and not fundamental, to
defend the error of the Graecians not to be such (although held against the
known definitive sentence of the Church) as does hinder salvation, or exclude
them from being members of the true Church. About which see more hereafter.


Fundamental.

Whereupon I was forced to repeat, what I had formerly brought against D.
White concerning points fundamental, first The Chaplains corrupt Copy has
righting, inst^ed of reading the sentence of S. Austen. The whole sentence is
set down by the Chaplain thus: This is a thing founded: An erring Disputer is
to be borne with all in other questions not diligently digested, not yet made
firm by full auauthority of the Church; there error is to be borne with. But
it ought not to go so far that it should labor to shake the foundation it
self of the Church: S. August. Ser. 14. de verbis Apost. cap. 12.
reading the sentence of S. Augustine; Fere^dus est disputator errans etc. Out
of which is Out of this place we may gather, that all points defined are
fundamental. All points defined are (as S. Austen speaks) made firm by full
authority of the Church. But all points made firm by full authority of the
Church are fundamental, in such sense as the Jesuit takes the word
fundamental, that is (in S. Austens language) such as cannot be denied, or
doubtfully disputed against, without shaking the foundation of the Church. For
denying or doubtfully disputing against any one, why not against another, and
another, and so against all; since all are made firm to us by one and the same
divine revelation, sufficiently applied by one and the same full authority of
the Church: which being weakened in any one, cannot be to firm in any other.
proved that all points defined by the Church are By the word Fundamental, is
understood not only those Primae Credibilia, or prime Principles, which do not
depend upon any former grounds, for then all the Articles of the Creed were not
(as both the B. and D. White say they are) fundamental points; but all which
do so pertain to supernatural, divine, infallible, Christian faith (by which
Faith Christ the only prime foundation of the Church, does dwell in our hearts,
(1. Cor. 3. 11.) and which Faith is to the Church the substance, basis, and
foundation of all good things which are to be hoped for, Heb. 11.) as that
(they being once confirmed, or made firm by full authority of the Church) if
they are wittingly, willingly and especially obstinately denied or questioned,
all the whole frame and in a sort the foundation it self of all supernatural
divine Christian Faith is shaken.
fundame^tall.

Secondly, I required to know, what points the Bishop would account The
Chaplain grants, that there are quaedam prima Credibilia, or some prime
Principles, in the bosom whereof, all other Articles lay wrapped and folded
up; So as every point of the Creed is not a prime Foundation, and therefore the
B. himself did not understand the word fundamental so strictly, as if that
which in one respect is a foundation, may not in another respect (to wit, as
included in, and depending upon a more prime Principle) be accounted a
superstructure.
fundame^tall? He said; All the points in the If the B. mean, that Only those
points are fundamental, which are expressed in the Creed of the Apostles; I
marvel how he can afterward account Scriptures, whereof no express mention
is made in the Creed, to be the foundation of their Faith. But if he mean,
that not only those are fundamental which are expressed, but also all that is
infolded in the Articles of the Creed; Then not Scriptures only, but some at
least of Church- Traditions unwritten may be accounted fundamental, to wit,
all those that are inwrapped in these two Articles, I believe in the holy
Ghost, The holy Catholic Church: as all those are, which being first revealed
by the holy Ghost unto the Apostles, have been by successiue Tradition of the
Church (assisted by the same holy Ghost) delivered unto us; one of which is,
That the Books of Scriptures themselves be divine, and infallible in every
part: which is a foundation so necessary, as if it be doubtfully questioned,
all the Faith built upon Scripture falls to the ground. And therefore I
marvel how the B. can say, as he does afterward in the Relation, That
Scriptures Only, and not any unwritten Tradition, was the foundation of their
Faith.
Creed were such.

I asked, how then it happened that M. Rogers says, that the English Church is
not yet resolved what is the right sense of the Article of Christ his
descending into Hell? The B. said, that M. Rogers was but a private man. But
(said I,) if The reason why the Jesuit did specially urge M. Rogers book, was
for that it was both set out by public authority, and bears the Title of
the Catholic doctrine of the Church of England. Our private Authors are not
allowed (for ought I know) in such a like sort, to take upon them to express
our Cath. doctrine in any matter subject to question.
M. Rogers, writing as he did by public authority be accounted only a
private man, in what Book may we find the By Protestants public doctrine in
this place, the Jesuit meant, as he understood the B. to mean, only of
English Protestants; for the words going before making mention only of the
English Church, do limit the general word, Protestants, to this limited sense.
Protestants public Doctrine?

The B. answered; That to the Book of Articles This Answer has reference to
that sense which the question had of Only English Protestants, and not of all
English Protestants, out of such as the B. and others are, who by office are
teachers of Protestant doctrine, who do either swear to the book of Articles,
or by subscribing oblige themselves to teach that, and no contrary doctrine.
But if the Chaplain (to discredit the Relation) will needs enforce a larger
extent of the sense, contrary to the meaning of him that made the answer, and
him that asked the Question, who understood one another in that sense which I
have declared; he must know, that although none do swear or subscribe besides
the English clergy to the Book of Articles, yet all who will be accounted members
of, or to have communion with one and the same English Protestant church, are
bound either to hold all those Articles, or at least not to hold contrary to
any one of them, in regard the English Protestant church does exclude every one
from their church by Excommunication ipso facto, as appears in their book of
Canons. Can. 5. Who shall hold any thing contrary to any part of the said
Articles.

So as, in this respect I do not see, why any one who pretends to be of one
and the same Protestant communion with the church of England, can be said not
to be obliged to hold one, and the same doctrine which is in the book of
Articles, not only as the chaplain says, in chiefest doctrines (which like a
cheuerell point may be enlarged to more by those who agree in more, and
straightened to fewer by those who agree in fewer points) but absolutely in all
points, and not to hold contrary to any one, or any the least part of any one
of them. Such a shrew (as it seems) is the church of England become, (no less
then the chaplain says, the church of Rome to have been) in denying her
blessing, and denouncing Anathema against all that dissent (although most
peaceably) in some particulers, remote enough from the foundation, in the
Judgment of the purer sort, both of foreign and homebred Protestants.


they were all sworn: and the The Chaplain says, The Church of England
grounded her positive Articles upon Scripture etc. True; if themselves in their
own cause may be admitted for competent Judges; in which sort some other
Nouellist will say, that he groundeth his positive Articles upon scriptures;
and his Negative refuse not only our Catholic, but also Protestant doctrines.
As for example, Baptizing of Infants, upon this Negative ground, it not
expressly (at least evidently) affirmed in Scriptures, nor directly (at least
not demonstratiuely) concluded out of it. In which case I would gladly know,
what the Chaplain would answer, to defend this doctrine to be a point of
Faith, necessary (for the salvation of poor Infants) necessitate medij, as all
Catholic Deuines hold? I answer with S. Austen, Aug. l. 1. contra Cresc. c.
31. Scripturarum a nobis tenetur veritas, cum id facimus quod vniuersae placet
Ecclesiae, quam earundem scripturerum commend at authoritas: We hold the verity
of Scriptures, when we do that which pleases the whole Church, which the
authority of the same scriptures does commend. But what answer the chaplain
can make, I cannot easily guess, unless with us he acknowledge authority of
church-tradition to be necessary in this case.
Scriptures only, not any vnwritte^ Tradition was the foundation of their Faith.

I asked, how The Jesuit did not ask this question as doubting of the divine
authority of Scripture, but to make it seen, that beside scripture, which the
B. said was the Only foundation of Faith, there must be admitted some other
foundation, to wit, Unwritten Tradition, and this of infallible authority, to
assure us infallibly that these Books are divine; which to be divine is one
point infallibly believed by divine, Faith, and yet cannot be infallibly proved
out of Only Scripture; therefore Only Scripture cannot be said (as the B.
said) to be the Only foundation of Faith, or of every point believed by Faith.
I hope the Chaplain (who is so careful to avoid all suspicion of being
familiar with impiety, as he would have no question moved about this point upon
any terms or pretense) will not be so impious as to say, That to believe these
books to be divine scripture, is not a point of divine Faith; or that this
point (being so important as it is, to be most firmly believed) is believed by
divine Faith, without any ground or foundation; or without a sufficient
infallible, and divine foundation of Gods word, written or unwritten. Since
therefore this is a point of Faith, and has a foundation, yea an infallible
foundation; it is not against either art, or equity, or piety (for confutation
of Error, and confirmation of Truth) to enquire what particular foundation of
Gods word, written or unwritten, does assure us infallibly, that these
particular books contain the sole, and whole truth of God, believed by
christian Faith. Neither need any be troubled, or endangered by this question,
but such as not finding any sufficient foundation in gods word written, do
pertinaciously resolve, not to believe any thing to be Gods word which is not
written. Those that believe that there is a word of God, partly written and
partly unwritten (according to that of S. Paul (2 Thessalonians. 2.) Hold the
Traditions whether by our word or Epistle) do easily, without too much turning
in a wheel, or circle, answer the question. See the Reply to M. Wotton and M.
White in the Introduction (of which mention is made in the Relation,) where
this, and diverse other important matters pertaining to the drift of this
Conference, are handled at large.
he knew Scripture to be Scripture, and in particular Genesis, Exodus etc.
These are believed to be Scripture, yet not proved out of any place of
Scripture. The B. said, That the Books of Scripture are principles to be
supposed, and needed not to be proved. Against this I read what I had formerly
written in my Reply to M. John White; wherein I plainly in showed, that this The
Chaplain says, that some body told him, that the B. untied the knot; But why
does not the Chaplain tell how he did untie the knot? It seems the knot was
not well untied, when the Jesuit had a Reply so ready, as is insinuated, by
his only going again and reading in the Book which he had so rudely written.
Although a Praecognitum in faith need not be so clearly known as a
praecognitum in science; yet there must be this proportion, that as primum
praecognitum, the first thing foreknowne in a science, must be primo cognitum,
first known, and must not need another thing pertaining to that science to be
prius cognitum, known before it: So if in Faith, the Scriptures be the first
and only foundation, and consequently the first thing known, primum
praecognitum, it must be in Faith primo cognitum, first known, and must not
need any other thing pertaining to Faith to be prius cognitum, known before
it; and so Church-Tradition, which is one thing pertaining to Faith, could not
(as the Chaplain says it is, and as indeed it is) be known first, and be an
Introduction to the knowledge of Scripture. Moreover like as sciences which
suppose a principle proved in a higher science, cannot have certainty of that
principle, but either by having seen that principle evidently proved by other
principles borrowed of that higher science, or by giving credit to some that
have seen, or have by succession received it from others that have seen it
evidently so proved* So Faith cannot have certainty of her first principles,
but either by seeing proof from the knowledge of the Blessed, which ordinarily
no man now sees, or by giving credit immediately to some who have seen, as to
Christ who clearly saw, or to the Apostles to whom clear revelation (I say
clear in attestante) was made; or by giving credit to others who by succession
have had it from the first seers. In which last case the certainty of these
principles can be no greater then is the authority of that succession. If it be
merely humane and fallible, the science and Faith is humane and fallible.
Neither can either science or Faith be divine and infallible, unless the
authority of that succession be at least in some sort divine and infallible.

The chaplain therefore, who (as it seems) will not admit church-Tradition to
be in any sort divine and infallible, while it does introduce the belief of
scriptures to be divine books, cannot sufficiently defend the Faith introduced
of that point to be infallible, unless he admit an infallible impulsion of the
private spirit ex part subiecti, without any infallible sufficiently applied
reason ex part obiecti, which he seems not, not has reason to do (...)
this were to open the gap to Enthusiasms of all vpstart Anabaptists, and would
take away due proportion of Object and Subject, and the sweet order of things
which divine providence has appointed. It may be, that if he would but
consider the Tradition of the Church, not only as of a Company of fallible men,
in with sort the authority of it is but human and fallible, but also as it is
the Tradition of a Company; which (by it own light) shows it self to be
assisted by Christ and his holy Spirit, far more clearly then Scripture (by
it own light) does show it self to be the infallible word of God; he would
find no difficulty in that respect to account the authority of Church-Tradition
to be infallible, and consequently not only able to be an Introduction, but
also an infallible motive reason or at least condition ex Part obiecti, to
make both it self, and the books of Scripture appear (infallibly, though
obscurely) to our soul disposed and illuminated by Gods spirit, to have in
them divine and infallible authority, and to be worthy of divine and infallible
credit, sufficient to breed in us divine and infallible Faith.

Neither do I see why the Chaplain may not consider the Tradition of the
present Church these two ways, as well as the present scriptures printed and
approved by men of this age. For if the scriptures printed and approved by men
of this age must be considered, not only as printed or approved by men, in
regard the credit given to them thus considered can be no more then humane; but
also as printed, and by authority of men assisted by Gods spirit approved to be
true copies of that which was first written by the Holy Ghosts Penmen, before
we can give infallible credit unto them; I see no reason, why the like twofold
consideration of the Tradition of the present church may not be admitted,
especially when as the promise of Christ and his holy Spirits continual
presence and assistance ( Luc. 10. 16. Math. 28. 19. 20. Joan. 14. 16.) was
made no less (but rather more) expressly to the Apostles and their
successors, the lawfully-sent Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all ages,
in their teaching by word of mouth; then in writing, or reading, or printing,
or approving copies of what was formerly written by the Apostles.

Perhaps the Chaplain will ask me, how I know that any church or company of
men of this age, or any age since the Apostles, have promise of christ and his
holy spirits assistance? I answer that I know it both by Tradition and
Scripture (considered in the twofold manner aforesaid) both which without any
vicious circle, mutually confirm the authority of each other (as a Kings
Ambassadors word of mouth, and his Kings letter bear mutual witness of each
other); And I do not want other both outward and inward arguments or motives of
Credibility, which are sufficient not only to confirm the Faith of belieuers,
but also to persuade well disposed Infidells, that both the one and the other
were sent from God, and that one is the infallible word of God, speaking in and
by his Legates, the lawfully-sent preachers, of the Church; The other, the
infallible word of God speaking in and by his letters the holy scriptures,
which he has appointed his said legates to deliver and expound unto us, and
which among other things do warrant that we may hear and give credit to these
Legates of Christ, as to Christ the King himself.


Answer were was not good; and that no other Answer could be made but by
admitting some Word of God unwritten, to assure us of this point.

From this the La. called us, and desiring to hear, The Chaplain says: As it
is true, that this question was asked, (...) it is false, that it was asked in
this form, or so answered. I answer that the Jesuit does not say that the La.
asked this question in this, or any other precise form of words, but only
says, she was desirous to hear, whether the B. would grant the Roman Church
to be the Right Church: which to have been her desire the Jesuit is sure, as
having particulerly spoken with her before, and wished her to insist upon this
point.

Secondly, he is sure, that she did not propound the question in that precise
form insinuated by the Chaplayne, vz. whether the Roman Church be a true
Church; as if she meant to be satisfied with hearing the B. say, that the Romans
church is a true church, and the Greek church another, and the Protestant
another. This, I say, could not be her Question, for that she was persuaded
that all these were not true and right, and that there was but One Holy
Catholic church; and her desire was to hear, whether the B. would grant the
Romans church, (not only that which is in the City or Diocese of Rome, but all
that agreed with it) to be it?

Thirdly, what precise form of words the La. did use, the Jesuit did not
remember perfectly, and therefore did not adventure to set down; but by the B.
his Answer which he perfectly remenbred, and so set down in these words ( It
was) he thinks that her question was, whether the Roman church was not the
right church? (vz. once, or in time past, before Luther and others made a
breach from it?) To which question so uttered, or so understood (as it seems
by the Answer, and the ensuing discourse made by the B. it was understood) the
B. might truly (and certainly did) answer, as is related (to wit) not, It is;
but, It was: vz. once, or in time past the right Church; for so the Chaplain
does here confess page 37. The time was etc. that you and we were all of one
belief. Out of which answer it may be the B. suspected that the La. would
infer: If once it were the right, what hinders it now to be? since it did
not depart from the Protestant Church, but the Protest. Church departed from
it. And therefore (as in the Text) he was willing to grant, that the
Protestants made a Rent or division from it etc.


whether the B. would grant the Roman Church to be the right Church? The B.
granted, That it was. Further he The Chaplain (having told us that the B.
could be heartily angry,) says: The B. never said nor thought, that Protestants
made this rent. The cause of the schism is yours etc. I answer, that the
Jesuit is sure, that whatsoever the B. thought (which may be was as the
Chaplain now expresses, to wit, that we had given cause to the Protestants to
do as they did;) yet he did say (either ijsdem or aequipollentibus verbis) just
as is in the Relation. For the Jesuit did in fresh memory take special notice
of this passage, in regard it concerned a most important point, which being
urged by him in the first Conference against D. White in these words, Why did
you make a schism from us? Why do you persecute us? the Doctor slipped over
that of the schism without denying it to have been made by them, or laying the
cause to us, and only answered to the other, saying. We do not persecute you
for Religion. The Jesuit therefore, say, did, as he had reason, take special
notice in fresh memory, and is sure he related at least in sense, just as was
uttered by the B.

And I ask the Chaplain, what reason the B. had to discourse so long as he
did, endeavoring to show what reason Protestants had to make that rent or
division, or (if he like not these words) that discession, (to use Caluins
phrase) or departure, not only from the church of Rome, but also (as Caluis,
lib. Epist. ep. 141.) confesses, a toto mundo, from the whole world; if he had
not (as the Jesuit related) confessed that Protestants, being once members of
the Roman Church, separated themselves from it, as the world knows they did,
when they got the name of Protestants, for protesting against it. Now for the
Chaplains ascribing the Cause of the schism to us, in that by excommunication
we thrust them from us; he must remember, that before this, they had divided
themselves by obstinate holding and teaching opinions contrary to the Roman
Faith, and practice of the Church, which in S. Bernards judgment ( sermon. de
resur.) is most great pride. Quae mayor superbia etc. What greater pride, then
that one man ( Luther for example) should prefer his Judgment, not only before
a thousand Austens, and Cyprians, and King Harry-Churches; but before the whole
Congregation of all christian churches in the world? which in S. Austen his
Judgment is most insolent madness; for, contra id disputare etc. to dispute
against that which the universal church does practice, is, says S. Austen,
most insolent madness.

What then? Is it, not only by way of doubtful disputation, but by solemn
and public and protestation, to condemn the general practice of the church
as superstitious, and the doctrine as erroneous in Faith, yea as heretical and
even Antichristian? All this considered, the B. has no cause to be heartily
angry, either with the Jesuit for relating, or with himself for granting
Protestants to have made a rent or division from the Romans church; but might
with a safe conscience yet further grant, as one did (was it not He?) to an
Honorable person, That it was ill done of those, who did first make the
s^paration, Which is most true, both in regard there can be no just cause to
make a schism and diusion from the whole Church (for the whole Church cannot
universally err in doctrine of Faith, and other just cause there is none) and
also for that those who first made the separation ( Luther and his Associates)
gave the first cause in manner aforesaid to the Romans church to excommunicate
them, as by our Saviors warrant she might, when they would not hear the
church, which did both at first seek to recall them from their nouel^
opinions, and after their breach did permit, yea inuit them publicly with
safe conduct to Rome to a General Council, and freely to speak what they
could for themselves. And I make no doubt, (so far is the Romans Church from
being cause of continuance of the schisms, or hinderance of Reunion) that it
would yet (if any hope may be given that Protestants will sincerely seek
nothing but truth and peace) give them a free hearing, with most ampie and safe
conduct; which is more then ever we English catholics could obtain, although
we have made offers diverse times to come to public Dispute, first in Queen
Elizabeth her days, and also in his Majesty's that now is; only requiring the
Princes word for our safe^y and equality of Conditions of the dispute. Unto
which offer our Adversaries never did, nor ever will give good Answer: As one
says; Honestum responsum nullum dabunt praeter vnum, quod numquam dabunt;
Regina (Rex) spondet, Aduola. Camp. inrat, Acad. red.


granted, that Protestants made a Rent or Division from it.

Moreover he said, he would ingenuously acknowledge, that Corruption of ma^ners
was not a sufficient Cause to justify their departing from it.

But (said he) besides Corruption of manners, there were Errors in doctrine,
which when the General Church would not reform, it was lawful for particular
churches to reform themselves.

I This question the Jesuit made chiefly against that part of the B. his last
speech, in which he said, There were errors in doctrine; for if the B. meant
(as the Jesuit understood him to mean) that there were errors of doctrine of
Faith in the General Church, never did any lawful and competent Judge so
censure, neither can it so be. No power in Earth or Hell it self can so far
prevail against the General Church of Christ, built upon a Rock, as to make
it, or the pastors thereof err generally in any one point of divine truth.
Christ's promises stand ( Matthew, 16. and 28. Luc. 22. Joan. 14. and 16.) and
will never permit this, no not in Antichrists days. Particular Pastors and and
Churches may fall into Heresy or Apostasy, but the whole Church cannot. It may
sometime not expressly teach, or know all divine truths, which afterward it
may learn by study of Scriptures and otherwise; but it never did, nor can
universally, by its full authority teach any thing to be divine truth, which is
not; and much less, any thing to be a matter of Faith which is contrary to
divine truth, either expressed, or inuolued in Scriptures rightly understood.
So as no reformation of Faith can be needful in the General Church, but only
in particular Churches; in which case also when the need is only questionable,
particular Pastors or Churches must not take upon them to judge, and condemn
others of error in Faith, but as S. Irenaus intimates, must have recourse to
that Church which has more powerful Principality, the Church of Rome, and to
her Bishop being Chief Pastor of the whole Church, as being Successor to S.
Peter: To whom Christ promised the Keys, ( Math. 16.) For whom Christ prayed,
that his Faith might not fail: ( Luc. 22.) and whom he charged to confirm his
brethren; and to feed and govern the whole flock, lambs and sheep ( loan.
21.) people and Pastors, subjects and superiors; which he shall never refuse
to do in such sort, as that this neglect shall be a just Cause for any
particular man or Church to make a schisime or separation of himself and
others, from the whole General Church, under pretense of Reformation either of
manners, or of Faith.

Protestants therefore did ill in first dividing themselves from the General
Church, and do still ill in continuing divided from it. Neither can those
Protestants be excused from intolerable pride and insolent madness, who presume
to be Accusers, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners of the sentence pronounced
by themselves against the Church in General, and against the principal and
Mother Church, and the B. of Rome, which is, and ought to be their Judge in
this case. For although it be against equity that Subjects and Children should
be accusers, witnesses, judges and executioners against their Prince and Mother
in any case; yet it is not absurd that in some case the Prince or Mother may
accuse, witness, judge, and (if need be) execute Justice against unjust or
rebellious subeuects, or evil children.


asked; Quo Iudice, did this appear to be so? Which question I asked, as not
thinking it equity that Protestants in their own Cause should be Accuers,
Witnesses, and Judges of the Roman Church.

I also asked; Who ought to judge in this case? The B. said: It is true, when
the Question is about the General Faith of the church, the matter may be made
most firm, if the church in a General Counsel with the full authority of her
chief Pastor, and all other Pastors (whom all people must obey ( Romans 13.
Hebr. 13.) decree, what is to be held for divine truth, by Visum est spiritui
sancto and nobis ( Act. 15.) and by adding Anathema to such as resist this
Truth. For if this be not firm and infallible, what can be so firm and well
founded in the church, which under pretext of seeming evident Scripture or
demonstration, may not be shaken, and called in question by an erring disputer?
For if all Pastors being gathered together in the name of christ, praying
vnanimiter for the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, making great and
diligent search and examination of the Scriptures, and other grounds of Faith,
and hearing each Pastor declare what has been the ancient Tradition of his
church, shall in fine conclude and decree in manner aforesaid, what is to be
held for divine truth: If (I say) the Council in this decree may err, and may
be controlled by every particular, or any particular unlearned, or learned man,
or church, pretending evident text of Scripture or clear demonstration (
supple, Test and Iudice seipsis;) what can remain firm or certain upon
Earth, which may not by a like pretense be co^trolled, or at least (by one or
other) called in question?

A General council therefore being lawfully called, continued and confirmed,
is doubtless a most competent judge of all controversies of Faith. But what is
to be done, when a General council cannot be called, as many times it cannot
by reason of manifold impedime^ts, or if being called, all will not be of one
mind; (As among Protestants and others, who admit no Infallible means, rule,
or judge beside Only Scripture, which each man will interpret as seems best
to his several private Judgment or spirit, it is scarce to be hoped that all,
or the mayor part will ever so agree, as to remain constant in one and the
same mind:) Has christ our Lord in this case provided no means, no rule, no
judge, which may Infallibly determine and end controuersyes, and procure unity
and certainty of belief being so necessary for the honor of God, and the good
of his church? Must people for want of such a judge, rule or means, continue
not only months and years, but whole Ages in uncertainty and disiunity of
Faith, and in perpetual Iarres about even maine matters of divine truth? There
is no earthly Kingdom that (in case matters cannot be composed by Parliament,
which cannot be called upon all occasions, and at all times) has not beside
the law-bookes, some living Magistrates and judges, and above all one visible
King, the highest Magistrate and Judge, who has authority sufficient to end
controversies, and procure peace and unity, and certainty of Judgments, about
all temporal affairs: And shall we think that christ the wisest King has
provided in his kingdom, which is the church, only the Law-bookes of Holy
Scriptures, and no living visible Magistrates and Judges, and above all One
chief Magistrate, and judge, so assisted with his spirit and providence, as
may suffice to end controversies, and breed unity and certainty of Faith, which
never can be while every man may interpret Holy Scripture, the Law-booke as he
list?


A General Council.

I told him, that a General Council (to wit of Trent) had already judged, not
the Roman Church, but the Protestant, to hold Error. That said the B. was not
a The chaplain says, that the B. said not only so, but that, it was no
General Council. I answer, that if the B. said so, it was only for want of
memory that the Jesuit did not relate it so: for the Exceptions which the B.
did or can make against the lawfulness or generallnesse of the Council of
Trent, may be made by Arrians against the council of Nice. It is not necessary
to the lawfulness and generallnesse of a Council that all Bishops of the
world be actually present, and actually subscribe or yield assent; but that
such promulgation be made as is morally sufficient to give notice that such a
Council is called, and that all may come if they will, and that a competent
number, at least the mayor part, of those which be present, yield assent to the
decree.


lawful Council, So, said I, would As Protestants do think that the council
of Trent is not lawful, for having (in their Judgment) departed from the
letter and sense of Scripture: so did the Arians think of the council of
Nice. And as Protestants do justify that some were sent from the Pope to
Tre^t, and that the Pope was President: So doubtless did the Arians mislike,
that at Nice the Pope had Legates, who did carry his messages, and one of them
in his place sat as President.
the Arrians say of the Counsel of Nice. The B would not admit the case to be
like, pretending that the Pope made Bishops of The Chaplain says, that the B.
did not say, that the Pope made Bishops of purpose etc. I answer, that the
Jesuit does not say that the B. expressly said to; but that (by insinuation) he
did pretend so much, which in effect the chaplain seems to grant, when he
says ( page 40.) the B. said, the Pope made himself a strong party in it. For
although these words may be taken in another sense, yet they may also be taken
in that sense which the Jesuit by the circumstances of the B. his speech) did
then understand, and express in his Relation: for that a great number of
Italian Bishops, which the Chaplain says the B. alleged as a proof, may very
well import, that the B. conceived the Pope to have made more Italian Bishops
then of other Countries, of purpose to have a strong faction. But this proof
was so weak, as the Jesuit might well say, it was no proof, nor worthy of
answer, or of looking into the book for it; it being only a surmise of
Adversaries, who are apt to interpret every thing to the worst. Italian
Bishops might be more, as being nearer, (as in Greek Counsels more Grecians
were present) without any factious Combination with the Pope, in any other sort
then all the Cath. Bishops in the world, who are as much united with the Pope
for matters of Faith, defined in the Council, as any Italian Bishop.

Neither can the B. prove, that any Catholic French, or Spanish, or of any
other Country, or the schismatic Greeks did agree with Protestants in those
points which were defined in the Council, especially, after it was confirmed
by the Pope. For they all, even Grecians, did, and do at this day unanimously
oppose Protestants, as appears by the Censure of Hieremias the Grecian
Patriarch. So as if such a free Council as the B. and others wished, were
gathered out of East and West, Protestants (doubtless) would be condemned for
Heretics, and their negative refutes and denialls of ancient Articles, for
Heresies, by more then the double mayor Part compared to those who would take
their part. For although (as all Heretics use to do.) Protestants persuade
themselves, Scriptures to be evident for their opinions, and that with evident
demon^trations they should be able to convince all the world, that they teach
truth, and nothing but truth; yet they would find innumerable others as learned
(to say no more,) and as well studied in Scripture, and skillful in making
demonstrations, who are of another mind.


purpose for his side: but this the B. proved not.

In fine, The B. wished, that a lawful I marvel, in what sort the B. will
describe such a General Council; and how it should be gathered; and what
Rules are in it to be observed, which are morally likely so to be observed as
to make an end of controversies, better then our catholic General councels.
General. Council were called to end Controversies. The persons present said,
The King was inclined thereunto, and therefore we Catholics might do well to
concur.

I asked the B. whether he thought, a General Council might err? He said, it
might. If a General Council may err, what nearer are we then (said I) to
Unity after a Council has determined? yes (said he) although it may err yet
we shall be bound to The Chaplain says, that the B. added a Caution (which
the Jesuit omitteth) saying: The determination of a General counsel erring,
was to stand in force, and have external obedience at least yielded to it,
till evidence of Scripture, or a demonstration to the contrary made the error
appear, and until thereuppon another Council of equal Authority did reuerse
it. I answer, that added Caution (which either was not then added, or not
remembered by the Jesuit) makes the B. his Answer far worse, then as the
Jesuit did relate. For whereas the Jesuit relates only thus, Although it may
err; this caution makes the case to be, that it does actually err. And
whereas the Jesuit relates, That we (not knowing whether it do err or not,
but only that it may err,) are bound to hold it till another come to reuerse
it; this caution does put the case so, as if the determination of a General
Counsel actually erring, were (not ipso iure inualide, but) such as is to
stand in force, and to have external obedience at least yielded unto it, till
(not only moral certainty, but) evidence of Scripture, or a demonstration to
the contrary make the error appear; and after the error appears, yet we
must continue this yiedling of obedience: And how long? Until thereupon a
Council (and not every Council, but) of equal authority do reuerse it, which
perhaps will not be found in a whole Age. Verily I can not believe, that the B.
upon better aduisement will allow this Caution, or give any thanks to his
Chaplain for setting it down, but will commend the lesuite for relating his
speech more truly, and at least less disgracefully.
hold it, till another come to reuerse it.

After this, we all rising, The La. asked the B. whether she might be saved in
the Roman Faith? he answered, She Here again the Chaplain taxes the Jesuit
saying, That the B. did not answer thus in particular. But the Jesuit is sure
he did; and it appears to be so by the Jesuits words who said to the La.
Mark that. Unto which the B. replied saying, She may be better saved in it
then you; which Reply shows that the B. had said, that she in particular
might be saved in the Roman Faith. Otherwise, if his first Answer had been as
the chaplain would now make, the B. should have said, The ignorant may be
saved in it, but neither you, nor she. But the Jesuit is sure that this
Answer of the B. and Reply of the Jesuit ( Mark that) was just as he
related, without any such addition, as now the chaplain does relate; and that
if such a Caveat were added, it was after the end of the conference, and not in
the Jesuits presence.

Out of this last passage the Chaplain observes that Catholics take
advantage, and make use of the argument drawn from Protestants granting, That
one living and dying a Romans Catholic may be saved; accounting it secure so to
live and die, even by confession of Adversaries. The force of which argument he
endeavors to weaken by saying, that although Protestants grant it to be
possible, yet they say withal that it is not secure, but hard etc. But he must
remember, that when Protestants grant, that in the Romans Faith and Church there
is ground sufficient, and consequently possibility of salvation; this is a free
confession of the Adversaries argument themselves, and therefore is of force
against them, and is to be thought to be extorted from them by the force of
truth it self. But when Protestants do say* that salvation is more securely and
easily had in Protestant Faith and Church, then in the Roman; this only is
their partial private opinion in their own behalf, which is of no weight,
especially when Roman Catholics far more in number, and far more spread
in place, and of much longer continuance in time, and for virtue and learning
at least equal, or rather much exceeding Protestants, do confidently, and
unanimously, and with authority and reason prove, that (according to the
ordinary Course of Gods providence) Out of the Cath. Roman Church, there is no
possibility of salvation. And therefore, who will not think it safer to adhere
to the Cath. Roman Faith and Church, in which all both Catholics and best
learned Protestants do promise possibility of salvation without doubt, then to
the Protestant Church, since all Roman Catholics do threaten damnation to all
who obstinately adhere unto it; and dye in it? The which threat, does not
proceed out of malice, or want of Charity, but is grounded in Charity; as are
the like threats of Christ our Savior, and Holy Fathers, who knowing that
there is but One True Faith, and One True Church, out of which there is no
salvation, do out of their Charitable care of our souls good, so commend to us
the belief of that Faith, and the cleaving to that Church, as they pronounce,
He that shall not believe, shall be condemned. ( Mar. 16.) and, He that will
not hear the Church, and have it for his Mother, is to be accounted as a
Heathen and Publican (Matthew. 18.) and cannot have God to be his Father;
accounting it more charity to fore warn us by these threats, of our peril,
that we may fear and avoid it, then to put us in a false security, and so to
let us run into danger, for want of foresight of it.

Those examples which the Chaplain gives of the Donatists giving true Baptism
in the opinion of all, and Protestants holding a kind of Real Presence not
denied by any, are nothing like our case. For in these cases there are annexed
other reasons of certainly known peril of damnable schism and heresy, which
we should incur by co^senting to the Donatists denial of true Baptism to be
among Catholics; and to the Protestants denial, or doubting of the true
substantial presence of Christ in the Eucharist. But in our case there is
confessedly no such peril of any damnable Heresy, schism, or any other sin,
in resolving to live and die in the Catholic Romans Church: and in case some
Protestants should say, that there is peril of damnation in living and dying
Roman Catholics; the authority of them that say there is peril, being so few
(in comparison of those who say there is none,) and so passionate and partially
affected men, who are in this their saying contradicted by their own more
learned brethren, ought not to be respected more then a Scarre-crowe. But the
authority of those who allow salvation to such as do live and die Roman
Catholics, being so many, so ancient, so virtuous, so learned, and some no
way partially affected, out opposite to the Roman Church, ought to be accounted
of exceeding great weight, and may worthily persuade any wise man that it is
most secure to live and dye a Roman Catholic, and consequently that in so
important a matter this most secure course of living and dying in the Roman
Church, ought in all reason to be chosen, and that so precious a Jewel as the
Soul is, ought not to be left to the hazard of loosing heaven, and falling
into hell, by relying upon ones ownes opinion, or the opinion of those few new
Protestant Doctors, who acknowledge that their whole congregation may err: and
much more therefore may they think that each member thereof may be deceived, in
following his own, or any other man's opinion.


might. I bad her mark that. She (said the B.) may be better saved in it, then
you. D. White Here the Chaplain taxes the Jesuit for falsely relating D.
Whites Answer, and says he has spoken with D. White, who auowes this, and no
other Answer: He was asked in the Conference, whether Papists errors were
fundamental? To this he gave answer by a distinction of persons, which held
and professed the errors; Namely, that the errors were fundamental
reductiue, by a reducent, if they who embraced them did pertinaciously adhere
unto them, having sufficient means to be better informed: Nay further, that
they were materially in the kind and nature of them* leaven, dross, hay, and
stubble; yet he thought withal, that such as were misled by education, or long
Custom, or ouer-valuing the sovereignty of the Roman Church, and did in
simplicity of heart embrace them, might by their general Repentance, and faith
in the merits of Christ* attended with Charity and other virtues, find mercy
at Gods hands. But that he should say, signanter and express, that none of
yours or your fellows errors were damnable, so long as you hold them not
against your Conscience, that he utterly disauowes etc.

To this the Jesuit answers; first, that he did not in this his Relation
say, that D. White did signanter, and expressly say these precise words, None of
yours, or your fellows errors are damnable. Secondly, he says, that D. White
did not signanter, and expressly make this precise Answer which now he makes,
nor scarce any part of it; as appears by the Relation of the first Conference
made by the Jesuit in fresh memory, and conferred with D. White himself, who
did not at that time contradict it in this point.

Thirdly, the reason which moved the Jesuit to say, that D. White had secured
him, as is said in this Relation, was for that D. White in the said first
Conference granted, that there must be one or other church, continually
visible, which had in all ages taught the unchanged Faith of Christ in all
points fundamental; and being urged to assign such a church, D. White
expressly granted that he could not assign and show any church different
from the Roman, which held in all ages all points fundamental. Whence the
Jesuit gathered his opinion to be, that the Roman church held and taught in
all ages unchanged Faith in all fundamental points, and did not in any age
err in any point fundamental. Whereupon the Jesuit asked, whether errors in
points not fundamental were damnable? D. White answered, they were not, so
long as one did not hold them against his conscience; which Answer he repeated
again to M. B. asking the same question. Out of all which, the Jesuit did
collect, that D. Whites opinion was, that the Roman church held all points
fundamental, and only erred in points not fundamental, which he accounted not
damnable, so long as one did not hold them against his conscience: and
thereuppon the Jesuit might well say, that D. White had given security to him,
who holds no Faith different from the Roman, nor contrary to his own
conscience.

As for D. Whites saying he could discern but small love of truth, and few
signs of grace in the Jesuit, I will let it pass as the censure of an
Adversary, looking upon the Jesuit with eyes of dislyke, which is not to be
regarded further then to return upon him (not a like censure, but) a
charitable wish, that he may have no less love of truth, nor fewer signs of
grace, then the Jesuit is thought to have, by those who know him better then
D. White does.


, said I, has secured me, that none of our errors are damnable, so long as we
hold them not against our Conscience, and I hold none against my Conscience.
The Lady asked, Whether she might be saved in the Protestant Faith? Upon my The
Chaplain notes, that the B. was confident, and had reason of his confidence.
For says he, To believe the Scripture and Creed in the sense of the Ancient
Primitive Church; to receive the first four General Counsels so much
magnified by Antiquity: To believe all points of doctrine generally received,
as fundamental, in the Church of Christ, is a Faith, in which to live and dye,
cannot but give salvation. And I would feign see, says the chaplain, any one
point maintained by the church of England, that can be proved to depart from
the foundation.

To which I answer, first, that if to say thus be a sufficient cause of
confidence, I marvel why the chaplain makes such difficulty to be confident
of the salvation of Romans Catholics, who believe all this in a far better
manner then Protestants do: neither can they be proved to depart from the
foundation so much as Protestants do, who denying infallible authority to all
the Pastors of the cath. church assembled in a General council, do in effect
deny Infallibility to the whole catholic church, which is bound to hear and
believe what is defined, and to practice what is prescribed by her Pastors in
a general council, and ordinarily does so believe and practice.

Secondly I ask, how Protestants, who admit no certain and infallible means
and rule of Faith, beside only Scripture, can be infallibly sure that they
believe the same entier scripture and creed, and the four first General
councels etc. in the same uncorrupted sense which the Primitive Church
believed? What text of scripture does tell, that Protestants who now live, do
believe all this, or that all this is expressed in those particular Bibles, or
in the writings of the Fathers or Counsels which now are in the Protestants
hands, or that Protestants do rightly understand the sense of all which is
expressed in their books according to that which was understood by the
Primitive Church, and the Fathers which were present at the four first
General Counsels? Or that all, and only those points which Protestants do
account to be fundamental and necessary to be expressly known by all, were so
accounted by the Primitive Church? I suppose, neither the B. nor the Chaplain
can produce any text of scripture sufficient to assure one of all this: And
therefore he had need to seek some other Infallible rule and means, by which
he may know these things infallibly, or else he has no reason to be so
confident, as to adventure his soul, that one may be saved living and dying in
the Protestant Faith.


soul (said the B.) you may. Upon my Here I note, that the Jesuit was as
confident for his part, as the B. for his; but with this difference, that the
B. had not sufficient reason of his Confidence as I have declared; But the
Jesuit had so much reason both out of express scriptures and Fathers, and the
infallible authority of the Church, that the B. himself then did not, nor his
Chaplain now does not, tax the Jesuit of any rashness: but the Chaplain
expressly grants that, There is but one saving Faith, and the B. did (as was
related) grant that the La. might be saved in the Romans Faith; which is as much
as the Jesuit did take upon his soul. Only the chaplain says, without any
proof, that we have many dangerous errors: but he neither tells us which they
be, nor why he thinks them dangerous, but leaves us to look to our own
souls, and so we do, and have no cause to doubt; because we do not hold any
new devise of our own, or any other man, or any thing contrary, but all most
conformable to scriptures interpreted by Union, consent of Fathers, and
definitions of Counsels.

Which being so, the B. and his chaplain had need to look to their souls,
for if there be but one saving Faith, as the Chaplain grants, (and he has
reason, because S. Paul says ( Ephesians. 4.) Vna fides, One Faith: and S. Leo, (
sermon. de Natiuit.) Nisi vna est fides, non est, unless it be One, it is not
Faith) and this One Faith was once the Roman, which also yet is (as the B.
grants) a saving Faith; (or else he ought not to have granted, that one may
be saved living and dying in it:) I see not how they can have their souls
saved without they entirely embrace this Faith, being the Cath. Faith, which as
S. Athanasius ( in Symb.) affirms, unless one hold entiere (that is every
point of it,) and inuiolate, (that is, believing all in right sense, and for
the true formal reason of divine revelation sufficiently applied to our
understanding by the Infallible authority of the Cath. Church proposing to us
by her Pastors this revelation) without doubt he shall perish for ever. In
which sort if the B. and his chaplain did believe any one Article, they
(finding the same formal reason in all, and applied sufficiently by the same
means to all) would easily believe all. But so long as they do not believe all
in this sort, but will, as all Heretics do, make choice of what they will,
and what they will not believe, without relying upon the Infallible authority
of the Cath. Church, they cannot have that One Soule-sauing Faith, which all
good Catholic Christians have, in any one article of Faith. For although they
believe the same truth, which other good Catholics do in some Articles, yet
not believing them for the same formal reason of divine revelation,
sufficiently applied by Infallible Church Authority, but either for some other
formal reason, or at least not for this reason sufficiently applied, they
cannot be said to have one and the same Infallible divine Faith which other
good catholic christians have, who do believe those Articles, not for any
other formal reason beside the divine revelation applied sufficiently and made
known to them (not by their own fancy, or the fallible authority of human
deductions,) but by the infallible authority of the church of God, that is of
men infallibly assisted by the Spirit of God, as all lawfully called,
continued, and confirmed General counsels are assisted.

Whence I gather, that although every thing defined to be a divine truth in
General counsels, is not absolutely necessary to be expressly known and
actually believed (as some other truths are) by all sorts; yet no man may
(after knowledge that they are thus defined) doubt deliberatly, and much less
obstinatly deny the truth of any thing so defined. For, every such doubt and
denial is a breach from that one saving Faith, which other good christians
have, in regard it takes away infallible credit from the church; and so the
divine revelation being not by it sufficiently applied, it cannot according to
the ordinary course of Gods providence breed infallible belief in us; for as S.
Paul Romans 10. says, How shall they believe unless they hear, how shall they
hear without a Preacher, how shall they preach (to wit infallibly) unless they
be sent, to wit, from God, and infallibly assisted by his spirit? And if a
whole General council defining what is divine truth be not believed to be
sent, and assisted by gods spirit, and consequently of Infallible credit, what
man in the world can be said to be of infallible credit? or if such a Council
lawfully called, continued, and confirmed may err, in defining any one divine
truth, how can we be Infallibly certain of any other truth defined by it? for
if it may err in one, why not in another and another, and so in all? or how
can we (according to the ordinary course) be infallibly assured, that it erreth
in one, and not in another, when it equally, by one and the same authority,
defines both to be divine truths? for if we leave this to be examined by any
private man, this examination not being infallible had need to be examined by
another, and this by another, without end, or ever coming to infallible
Certainty, necessarily required in that One Faith which is necessary to
salvation, and to that peace and Unity which ought to be in the Church? It is
not therefore (as the Chaplain would persuade) the fault of counsels
definitions (but the pride of such as will prefer, and not submit their
private Judgments) that lost, and continues the loss of peace and unity of
the Church, and the want of certainty in that one aforesaid soule-sauing Faith:
the which how far it does extend is indeed (as the Chaplain page 73.
confesses) no work for his pen, but is to be learned of that one Holy
Catholic, Apostolic, always Visible, and Infallible Roman Church, of which
the La. once doubting, rests now fully satisfied, that in it she may learn
all truth necessary to salvation, and that out of it there is no ordinary
means sufficient to teach her the right way of salvation. And therefore the
Jesuit might well say, as he did in the Relation, that the La. was by this and
a former conference, satisfied of the truth of Roman Religion.


my Soul, said I, There is but one saving Faith, and that is the Roman.

Upon this, and the precedent Conference, the Lady rested fully satisfied in
her Judgment (as she told a friend) of the truth of the Roman Churches Faith:
Yet upon frailty, and fear to offend the King* she yielded to go to The
Chaplain upon this last clause says, that he is sure she will be better able to
answer for her coming to church the^ for her leaving the church of England, and
following the superstitions and Errors of the Church of Rome* But he neither
proves, nor can prove that it is lawful for one (persuaded especially as the
Lady is) to go to the Protestant Church, which were to halt on both sides, to
serve two Masters, to dissemble with God and the world, to profess outwardly
a Religion in conscience known to be false; neither does he, or can he prove
any superstition or error to be in Roman Religion; but by presuming with
intolerable pride to make himself, or some of his fellows judge of
Controversies, and by taking authority to censure all to be superstition and
error, which suteth not with his fancy, although it be generally held or
practiced by the universal church, which in S. Augustins Judgment, is most
insolent madness.


Church; for which she was after very sorry, as some of her friends can
testify.

I beseech sweet Jesus, to give grace to every one that offends in this sort,
to see, repent, and get pardon of their faults past, and light of true Faith in
time to come; for obtaining whereof they had need to pray to God for it, and
with a great desire to seek after it, and with humility to submit their will
and Judgment to those whom God has appointed to teach it; To wit, such
Doctors and Pastors as by a visible continual succession, have without
change brought it from christ and his Apostles, even until these our days;
and shall by a like succession carry it along, even until the end of world.
The which succession not being found in any other church, differing in doctrine
from the Roman Church, I wish the Chaplain and his Lord, and every other man
carefully to consider; whether it be not more Christian and less brainsick, to
think that the Pope, being S. Peter's successor, with a General Council
should be Judge of Controversies, and that the Pastoral Judgment of him (upon
whom as upon a firm rock Christ did build his Church, Ephesians. 4. 11.
and for whose Faith Christ prayed, Matt. 16. 1^.
enioyning him to confirm his brethren, Luc. ^2. 3^.
and to whose care and gouernent Christ committed his whole flock of lambs,
(...) ^0. 18.
and sheep) should be accounted Infallible, rather then to make every man that
can read Scripture Interpreter of Scriptures, Decider of Controversies,
Controller of General Councels, and Judge of his Judges: Or to have no Judge
of Controversies of Faith, to permit every man to believe as he list, as if
there were no Infallible certainty of Faith to be expected on earth; The which
were to induce instead of One saving Faith, a Babylonicall Confusion of so many
Fayths as fantasies, or no true christian Faith at all. From which evils
sweet JESUS deliver us. Amen.

FINIS.

