The Rules and right ample Documentes, touching the use and practice of the
common Almanackes, which are named Ephemerides.

A brief and short Introduction upon the Judicial Astrology, for to
prognosticate of things to come, by the help of the said Ephemerides.

With a treatise added hereunto, touching the Conjunction of the Planets, in
every one of the. 12. signs, and of their Prognostications and Reuolutions of
years.

The hole faithfully, and clearly translated into English by Humfrey Baker.

To the loving Reader.
Josephus, the true Hystoriographe (gentle reader) has written in his first
book of the Judaical hystories y^ the first inue^ters of Astronomy, and the
inquisitours of the course and celestial mouementes have been the sons of
Seth who wylling to leave some memory thereof unto their children and
posteritye, did ordain and make two great pillars, the one of earth being
hard dried, and the other of Copper, in the which they did grave the
prynciples of the seven Arts liberal, and especially that of Astrology. And
they wrote the same in the said pillars, to the end that if the world should
perish by fire, or by water, (as they did understand of their good father
Seth: who had learned the same of Adam) that then one of the said pillars
should abide whole, and that the Science of Astronomy should not perish.
Some do affirm that Abraham did first find it, other say that it was Moses,
Dyodore Sicilian says, that the Egiptyans were the first Authors, and
Herodote writes that the Phenicians were the inuenters, but who so ever they
were, it little forces, let us therefore leave the inquisition unto the
curious and praise we God the creatoure of his divine grace, who has willed to
illuminate the understanding of them which have left us in writing the art of
Astronomy, to our great commodity and profyt. And saying that the people at
this present are daily more intentive, and inclined also to read and to have
understanding in arts and sciences, as some which do follow polletycke and
cyuell matters, do apply them selves to understand the laws of Cities, and
Regions, and of such things as apperteyne unto the feats of war. Other there
be which give the^ selves to read the holly scriptures according to the
understanding of holy Church, to the end that thereby they may be stirred and
brought to live more virtuously: and if there be any which other wise do, we
ought to pray unto God that he would in such wise amend them, that they take
not his holy word in vain: other there be which are desirous to read
Histories and Poesies, and some have affection to read books of Astrologye,
and to have knowledge of the celestial constellacions, and mouements, unto
whom this present treatise of the rules and documents of the common Almanackes
named Ephemerides (translated into english) shall be right expedient and
necessary, seeing yt these rules are the pathe and way unto the knowledge of the
said Ephemerides, for by the^ are found the course, and moueme^ts of the
lights and planets, with other necessary things of Astrology whereby to judge
and Prognosti eat of the whether, and of things to come, as by the table
following more plainly does appear. Take therefore in good worth (loving
Reader) these few rules, being my first traduction, and look shortly if God
spare me life for other works apperteining unto this worthy Art.

And this gentle Reader,
I most heartily the require
To examine well these Rules,
And thou shall have thie desire.
Finis.
The Table of the Rules and general things contained in this volume.
OF the things contained in the beginning of the Ephemerides.

2 Of the Eclipses of the sun and of the moon

3 For to know the quantity of the Eclipses.

4 Of the directions and retrogradations of the. 5. planetes.

5 Of the true mouementes of the lights and planetes and other things
contained in the second face of the said Ephemerides.

6 Of the equality and inequality of the natural days.

7 The manner how to bring the true place and mouement of the moon unto the
true noone stead or middaye.

8. To know the true place and move mente of the lights at every hour you
list, be it before or after middaye.

9. To bring the true mouement of the moon unto what meridian ye please.

10. Of the latitude of the.v. planetes, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Mercurye.

11. Of the latitude of the moon.

12. Of the aspectes of the moon, unto the sun, and planets, and other
things contained in the right and second face of the said Ephemerides.

13. How and by what manner ye may bring the new and full Moon and the
Eclipses unto what meridian you will.

14. Of the aspectes of the sun unto the planetes, and of the planets among
them selves, and of the dragon of the Moon

15. To know when the planets be oriental or occidentall.

16. To know the quantity of the day and of the night, and at what hour the
sun rises and sets.

17. Of the. 12. houses of heaven and of their nature accidental according unto
the judgment of the Astrologia^s

18. How you may erecte or calculate the 12. houses of heaven according un to
the Ephemerides.

19. Of the division of the Zodiake, and of the nature of the. 12. signs.

20. Of the nature and complexion of the lights and the. 5. planets.

21. Of the strength and accidentale nature of the aspectes.

22. The declaracion of the table of the fixed stars which are in the said
Ephemerides.

23. Of the. 28. mansyons or bidynge places of the Moon.

24. A declaracion of the table which is before the Ephemerides, touching the
force, dignity, exaltacion, and other terms or bounds of the planets and
every of the. 12. signs.

25. General rules and perticulers where by to judge of the mutacion and change
of the air.

26. Other rules and general doctrines whereby to judge more surely of the
varietee of the time and mutacion of the air by the coniunctio^s, quadratures,
and oppositions, of the sun and of the moon.

27. Of the aspectes and constellations which are to be observed and chosen,
to begin and end happelye all works and human business.

28. Of the elections, which are mete to be observed in the Flebotomie or
lettinge of blood.

29. Of Elections to take medecin.

30. Of Elections too sow and plant trees and vines.

The end of the Table general.
Hear after ensues the Rules of the Ephemerides, most amply translated into
English.
Of things contained at the beginning and entering of the Ephemerides The first
Rule, or Canon.
FOR to have clear, and easy understanding of the use, and practyse of the
Ephemerides, in leuynge all superfluous things and words, it is convenient
first to note that at the beginning: and entering of every Ephemerides, is
written the year for the which it serves, and apperteyneth, and after there
follows the common things of the ecclesiastical compost and calendar, that
is too say, the circle of the moon, called the golden nombre, the circle of
the sun, the Dominicall letter, and the Indyction Roman, called in latten
Indictio Romana, with the months and days, upon the which the mouable
feasts in that year may be celebrated according to their order.

Of the Eclipes of the sun and moan second Rule.
COnsequentlye are noted and figured the eclypses of the sun, and of the
moon, which shall appear the same year, and first is written the monthe,
day, hour, and mynute, of the mydle time of the said eclypses, that is to
say, when the sun or the moon, shall come into the most obscuration, or
darckenes that may then happen unto them, afterward is noted the half of
the time that the said eclipses shall endure, or continewe, that is to say
from the beginning unto the greatest obscuration abouesayde, or from that
darkness unto the end: thirdlye are noted the parts of the sun, or of the
moon, which shall be eclypsed, and they are called eclipty^^e points, as well
in the particular eclipses, as in the universal, and it is co^ueniente to
ymagen that the Diametre vysuall of the sun, and of the moon, (that is to
say, taken and ymagened according to the judgment of the sight (is divided
into. 12. egall parts, the which are brought back into the moon, in
retournynge toward the beginning of them, and they do make the nombre of.
24.

And it is to be noted y^ the sun can never be eclipsed universally through
all places of ye earth, nor yet of one like sort, quantity, or disposition, by
reason of diverse aspectes of the inahbitants, and although the sun do appear
at some times wholly eclipsed, it cannot be over al places, nor by any notable
space of time, by cause the eclipse of the sun does come by the
interposition of the moon, between the sun and us, and that the moon is of
a more sudden and swifter mouement the^ is the sun, and is more nearer unto
us and also lesser then all the earth, and the moon, and the earth are both
much less then is the sun, and for to say the truth the sun never loses
his light, as does the moon entringe into the shadow of the earth, when she
is Diametrally opposite unto the sun for the said shaddowe does then deprive
the moon of her light (which she receives of the sun. By the Interposition
of the said earth which is then between the moon and the sun.

For to know the quantity of the said eclipses. 3. Rule.
IN the eclipse then of the moon, if the eclipticke points be less then.
12. the eclipse shall be particular (as the same of the sun) according unto
the proportion of the said points unto. 12., and if the said points be
presisely. 12. the said eclipse shall be universal without during that is to
say that she shall suddenly begin to recover her light, but if the said
points be more then. 12. it betokens that the moon shall be wholly eclipsed
by some space of time, and so much the more, as the said points are, or
shall be in greatest nombre.

And to know then how longetyme the moon shall be wholly depreued of her
light, you shall take the said eclipticke points, and the mynutes if there
be any (for every point is divided into. 60. minutes) the which you shall
find in the Ephemerides, and you shall seek them at the left hand of the
table entitulid. Tabula more Lune in tenebris, tempore totalis ^^^^sdem
defectionis. For at the right hand you shall find the hours and minutes, or
the minutes only, of the said fatal obscuration. And if you find not the
mynutes of the said points eclypticke precisely in the said table, you shall
then take the most nearest, and it shall suffice.

Example.
AS is of the first universal eclipse of the moon, that came in the year
1551. you would know how long time the moon was in darcknes depreued
totallye of her light, you shall take the points ecliptycke of the said
eclipse, which are. 14. and. 12. minutes and those shall you find in the
above named table (in taking the. 10. minutes for. 12.) and at the right
hand ioininge to those. 14. points and. 10. minutes, you shall se one hour
and. ^. minutes so long time was the moon in full darkness.

Of the directions and retrogradacio^s of the. 5. planets the. 4.
Afterward does follow underneath the said eclipse, the time pr^fired of the
directions and retro gradacions of the. 5. planetes, that is to say upon what
day they do begin and end their said Retrogradacions, and consequentelye
how often times Mercury shall be retrograde the same year, for he by reason
of the fwyft mouement of his epicicle is more often retrograde then are ye
other planets, the which you shall find likewise among the mouementes of the
said planets which are noted in the left face of the said Ephemerides with
this syllable Re. which signifies the beginning of the retrogradacion and with
this syllable Di. which betokens the beginning of the direction of the same
planets. And furthermore the proper mouement of the said planets will show it
you, for when the mouemente does go increasing from day to day the planet is
direct, and when it does decrease the planete is retrograde. We do call the
planete direct, when the line of his true mouement goes after the order of
the. 12. signs of the Zodiake, and retrograde, when the said line goes
against the order of the said signs, notwithstanding the moon has no
direction, nor retrogradatio^, by reason that his epicicle goes contrary to
the others, and is of more hasty mouement: But she has only swiftnes, or
slownes, and is called hasty or slow.

Of the true mouementes of the lights and the planetes and other things
contained in the left face of the said Ephemerides. 5. rule.
THese things thus set forth, there follows after the. 12. months of the
year divided in two faces, of the which the left face conteyneth the name of
the month, with the noumbre of the days of the same, whereof the Son day is
named by the dominicall letter, which has course for that year. And if there
be any sestable day, it is likewise noted, at the leest wise according unto
the common use of the church. After there follows the true mouementes of the
lights and planetes calculated at nonetide of every day, which are divided and
set in. 8. collo^nes or spaces, of the which the first is of the sun, the
second of the moon, the third of Saturn the fourth of Jupiter the fifthe of
mars the sixte of Venus the seventh of mercury and the eyghte for the
intersection or seperacion of the circle of the moon, and of the Zodiake,
which is called Caput draconis, as the carecters or marks of the said planets
and of the said dragon (which are above the heed of every colompne do show)
of the which the interpretation follows.

The Sun The moon Saturn Jupiter mars Venus mercury The head of the dragon
The tail of the dragon


And it is requisite to note that every colompne has two orders of noumbers
whereof the lest is of degrees and the right of the minutes of the sign
whereof the carecter is nerest collocated or set over the head between the
said degrees and minutes: of which carrecters, here ensues the interpretacion.

Signs septentrionalls Aries Taurus gemini Cancer Leo virgo Signs
meridionales. Libra Scorpio Sagitta. Capri. Aquari. Pisces

And thus you have right against every day, in what sign, degree, or
mynute, is every one of the said planettes, and the said section of the head
of the Draggon of the moon, upon the point of noone, of the same day.

Of the equallitie, and vnequallitie of the natural days. the. 6.
BUt it is to be noted y^ the natural days are supposed to be equal the one
to the other in the said Ephemerides, although they be not so: and that for
by cause of the obliquitie, or crokednes of the zodiac, and of the mouement
irreguler of the sun about the center of the world, the time then, at the
which the sun departs from the Merediane (which is the true noonetide)
and goes into the occident under the earth, retournynge by orient unto the
said meridiane again: is the true quantity of a natural deye, and the time
at the which all the equinoctial circle is passed and reuoluted or turned
back under the said merediane, with. 59. minutes and. 8. secondes of a degree
more, is the measure of a natural day equal and measurable according unto
which are ma^e the supputations of the mean and reguler mouementes
astronomicalls. And although that there be difference between the true and the
mean or equal days natural above said, yet notwythstandynge there can follow
no notable error for the true place and mouement of the son and of the. ^.
planettes, which are of mouement slow enough, but only of the moon by reason
of the swiftnes of her mouement.

The manner too bring the true place and mouemente of the moon, unto the true
noonetide. The. 7.
When thou will then reduce, or bring the true place and moueme^t of the moon
unto the true vulgar or common noonetide at the which the true natural
days, do begin and end that is to say when the sun is ryghtely upon the
meridianc: thou shall do thr^ as follows. Take right with the day proposed,
the true place of the sun, and of the moon, then enter with the sygn^ and
degree of the said place of the sunn^ into the table entitled Tabula motus
lun^ in taking the sign over the head, an^ the degree at the left side of
the said table: and you shall find under the said sign, right with the
said degree, the nombre of minutes, which you must take away, and substra
from the true place of the moon taken in the Ephemerides for to bring them
unto the true noone tide proposed. And for by cause the degrees which are at
the left side of the said table do proceed from two unto two you shall take the
degree which shall be most nerest unto the said place of the sun, not having any
regard unto the minutes, in case they pass not. 30. and when they pass. 30.
you may then add* one degree, with out any error, for the said mynutes.

To know ye true place, and moueme^t of ye lights and planets, at every hour
that a man please: whether it be, before or after noone. The. 8. Rule.
ANd if it be convenient to have ye true place of the sun or of the moon or
of any planet, at what hour so ever it be, either before none or after, you
shall take his true place and mouement aunswering unto the nonetide past, and
also the same of ye nonetide following, as has been said before. After you shall
substra the mouemente from the greatest: and that which does remain shall be
the mouement of the said plan^^e answering unto the same natural day, from one
noone tide to the other, the which mouement you shall divide by* 24. in
resoluinge the degrees into minutes, and the minutes into secondes, if there be
need, then thou shall add so many times the. 24. part of the said daily
moueme^t unto the mouement of the nonetide past, as there be hours past since
the same nonetide, if the planet be direct. Or else you shall substra the same.
24. part so many times if he be retrograde, and if you have one quarter, one
third, or half of an hour more: you may likewise add or substraye the
fourth, or the third, or the half of the above said. 24. part of the said
daily moueme^t and by this mean you shall have that which you demand.

For to bring the true mouement of the moon unto what meridiane you please.
9. rule.
ANd although that the Ephemerides last imprinted, are calculated and reduced
unto the meridiane of a City of Almaigne called Tubinge, yet nevertheless it
is no need to reduce, or bring the true places and moueme^tes of the sun and
of the. 5. planetes (which are slow inoughe of mouement) unto any other
meridiane what so ever it be: except only the place of the moon, for the
swiftnes of his mouement. The which you shall do after this manner. Take the
name of your city, or of ye place most nerest to the same, in the table which
is called Tabula regionum, prouinciarum, et oppidorum insigniorum Europae. and
drawinge toward the right hand, you shall find under the charecter of the
moon the number of minutes, which must be added or substraed from the true
mouemente of the said moon, which has been calculated by the said
Ephemerides: according as the letter. A. or. M. being at the left hand shall
show you, for the letter. A. signifies that ye must add, and the letter. M.
that you must dimynishe or substra the said minutes, and therewith you shall
find al at once at the right hand of the said minutes, in the last columpne,
the degrees of the latitude, or eleuatio^ of the pole Articke of the said city
or region, of the which you may have to do withal as here after you shall see.

Of the latitude of the. 5. planetes..... and..
Furthermore under every columpne of the. 5. planetes, are noted their
latitudes (that is to say, how much th^^ decline from the eclipticke,
calculated only for the. 1. 10. and. 20. day of every month by the means of
the which, you may easily proportionate the latitudes of those planetes for all
the other days which are between both, of the which latitudes the
denominations are noted above y^ head of every of the said columns, by the
Capital letters which hereafter follow

S. A. which does signify the planet to be. Septentrional ascendant S. D.
Septentrional descenda^t M A Meridional Ascendant M. D Meridional Descendant

The which dominations when they do change are likewise noted by the change
of ye said capital letters put or set among the noumbers of the true
mouementes. As if over the head you have. S. A. and then you mete below
underneath in any of the colomnes, this letter. D. it betokens y^ the planet
which was septentrional ascendant is made septentrional descenda^t, so must you
understand if it chance contrary, and it you have over the head S. A. or S. D.
and then you mete. M. that denotes that the latitude septentrional is
converted into the meridionall, and contrary wise if after. M. there do follow
the letter. S. which is a thing right easy to be understand, we call the
planet descendant, when the center of his epicicle, desce^deth from the point
of the eccentrike the most farthest part of the earth which is called Axe
tree, toward his opposite which is the most nearest and is called ascendant,
when from the said point opposyte he mounteth toward the said point most
farthest of the earth.

Of the Latytude of the moon. the. 11.
THe latitude of the moon, is found in the said Ephemerides by his own
table entitled Tabula latitudiais lunae thus as follows. Take the true
mouement of the moon, and of the dragons head. of the same, at the day and
hour proposed as has been said hereto fore: and resolve the caracters of the
signs of the same moueme^ts into the nombers of the said signs which are
these that follow.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Then substra the true mouemente of the head of the dragon of the moon, from
his own proper and true mouement in adding. 12. signs if the substcaction ca^
not be otherwise made) and that which rests, shall be the true argument of
the latitude of the moon, with the which argument you shall enter the table
of the latitude of the same in taking the noumber of the signs of the said
argument at the head of the said table, and the de, grees at the left side,
in the line entitled linea numeri, which proceed in descending from the top
downward or else in taking the number of the signs at the foot of the said
table, and the degrees at the right hand in the line which amou^teth from
beneth vpwarders: for in the place at the which y^ lines of the no^bers of the
said signs and degrees do agree together, you shall find the latitude of the
moon in degrees and minutes, the which latitude shall be called
septentrionall, if you have taken the nombers of the signs at the head of the
table, or else meridionall if the said signs have been taken at the foot of
the table. And further the moon shall be called ascendant if the nu^bre of the
signs of the argument of the latitude be. 0. or. 1. or. 2. in the head, and. 9
or. 10. or. 11. at the foot of the said table And if the said nombre of
signs above said be in the head. 3. or. 4. or. 5. and at the foot. 6. 7.
or. 8. she shall be named descendant as the titles and inscriptions of the said
table does declare, being secur y^ head and foot of every colu^ne of the same
And if it happen that your argument have any nombre of minutes over and besides
the degrees, it behooves to enter the said table two times, and to take first
the latitude which answers unto the degrees precedinge immediatlye the said
minutes, and then the latitude aunswering unto the degrees which next do follow
the said minutes. After it is convenient to take the difference of both the
latitudes in substraing the least from the greatest. That done put. 60. for the
first nombre, and the nombre of the said minutes for the second, and the said
difference for the third: and multiply the third no^bre by the second, and
that which comes of the multiplication divide by the first and you shall have
the fourth noumbre proportional, the which you must add unto the first
latitude, if it be less then the second: or else substra the same from the said
first latitude, if it do surmounte the second latitude for that which comes or
remains thereof shall be the true latitude of the moon answering unto the
minutes of the said argument.

And who that would make short, there is no danger if he leave the said
minutes if they be less then. 30, or else to add one degree unto the degrees of
the said argument, if the said minute do excede or pass 30. and then to
find the latitude as above has been said.

Of the aspectes of the moon unto the sun and planetes, and other things
contained in the right and second face of the said Ephemerides the. 12. rule.
Consequently in the right and second face of the said Ephemerides, are
comprehended the aspectes of the moon unto the sun, and unto the. 5.
planetes, and from one of the planets unto the other: as the superscription of
the said face does show. And first of al is declared the nombre of the year,
and the nombre of the monthe and underneath the same, the nombre of the days of
the said month joining unto the said noumbre, are noted the conjunctions,
oppositions, quadratures, trines, and the sextiles aspect of the moon unto the
son: then from the moon unto Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, as
it appears by the caracters of the sun and of the said planets being set
above the head of the. 6. colompnes and the said aspectes are noted by their
figures and caracters, where of the interpretacion and diffinicion follows.

signifies conjunction, that is to say when, 2. planettes are under one like
degree according unto the lo^gitude of the Zodiake.

Signifies opposition, that is to say, when two planets are diametrallye
constituted, distante. 6. signs the one from the other.

. Signifies quadrate aspecte: which is made, when. 2. planets are distant the
one from the other by. 3. signs, which make the fourth part of the. 12.
signs of the Zodiac

. Sygnyfyeth trine aspecte: which happenethe when two plannettes are distante
the one from the other by four signs, which do make the third part of the
said. 12. signs of the zodiac.

. Signifies sextile aspecte: which is caused, by the distaunce of two signs
between two planettes. And it is so named, by cause two signs do make the
syxte part of the. 12. signs of the said zodiac, and it is too be noted,
that the number set after the character of eueri aspecte shows the hour in
the which the said aspecte shall happen in reckenyng from the noonetide of
the same day righ^^ with the which is noted the said aspecte. Except the
conjunctions and oppositions of the moon and of the sun, that is to say the
new and full moons of the which not only the hours, but also the mynutes
are written for the first nombre after the carrecter of the conjunction or
opposition of the sun and of the moon, do signifye the hour: and the
second and right nombre, the mynutes that the said conjunctions, or
oppositions shall fall upon.

How the new and full mones, and eclypses, may be reduced unto what
meridiane you will, differynge from the same of the Ephemerides* The. 13.
FOr so much that the said new and full moons, and the eclypses of the sun
and of the moon, which happen in them, are calculated in the said
Ephemerides for the meridiane of the before named city of Tubinge in Almaigne:
it is conueniente ^^ reduce, for the least, the time of the said conjunctions,
oppositions, and eclypses of the sun and of the moon unto your meridiane,
wytheoute having care of the other aspectes the which you shall easelye do
by the table entitled Tabularegionum, prouinciarum, et oppidorum insignioru^
europae thus as follows.

Take the name of your City, or of the place most nearest to the same, in the
table above said, and you shall find at the right side under this tittle
Tempus, the hours and mynutes, or the mynutes only, which you must add, or
substra from the hours and minutes of the said conjunctions, and oppositions,
and eclipses of the sun and of the moon: as the ^ettre A. or M. written at
the left side of ^he said hours and mynutes shall show you.

Of the aspectes of the sun unto the planettes, and of the planettes among
them selves, and of the dragon of the moon. The. 14.
Afterward there follows upon the right side of the said face of the
Ephemerides, the aspectes of the sun unto the planettes, and of one planet
unto a another, which are figured as well by the carracters of the said
plannettes, as by the characters of the said aspectes, of the which the
interpretation has been heretofore declared. Consequently among the said
aspectes is noted when the moon is in the head or in the tail of the dragon,
which are their intersections or divisions of his circle and of the Zodiake,
as we have said a^ fore. When she is in the head, she is thus figured... and
when she is in the tail she is figured after this manner...

When the planets are oriental or occidental. 15. rule.
FInally is noted over the head of every columpne of the. 5. planets, under
their propre charecters, when the said planets are oriental or occidentall by
these sillables. or. and. oc. and it is to be noted that saturn, Jupiter and
mars, are oriental whiles the sun departs from them after the couiunction
of him and of the said planets, coming unto the opposition and occidentall,
from the said opposition in approchinge him self nere unto them, until the
conjunction next ensuing. But Venus and mercury are called oriental, when
they do precede* the sun from the east part, and are seen before the sun
rising and occidentall, when they do follow the sun from the west part, and
are seen after the sun is set.

For to know the quantity of the artificial day and of the night, and at
what hour the sun rysethe and sets. 16. rule
ANd too the end that all men may know, if they can see the eclipses of
the sun or of the moon which happen nere unto the horizont about the sun
settinge, or the sun risinge, it is necessary to know the quantity of the
days and of the nights artificial, and at what hour the sun ryseth and
sets. There is than before the table of the Ephemerides, a table entitled
Tabula quantitatis dierum, that is to say a table of the quantitye of the
days: the which conteyneth in the hedde the latitudes, or eleuations of the
pole of al places upon the earth, from. 36. degrees, until. 55. degrees: and
at the left hand there are. 6. signs of the zodiac and other. 6. at the
right hand, which are distributed from. 3. degrees to. 3. in the mids of
the said table are comprehended the hours and mynutes of the half of an
artificial day, which are from the sun risyng until noonetide, or from
noonetide until the sun setting, when the sun is in the signs
septrentionalles: or eles the hours and minutes of half of the night which
are from the sun setting until mydnyghte, or from mydnyghte until the
sun rysyng, when the son is in the signs meridionalles, know then in what
sign, and degree the sun is, and how much the poole is elevated above your
horizont, as before has be^sayd. And take the said sign and degree at the
right, or left side of the above said table, and proceed rightly in the
same table, until that you be ^ustelye at the nombre of your pole: and there
you shall find the hours, and minutes of the half of the artificial day if
the sun be in the septentrionall part of the zodiac: or else of the haife
of the night, if he be in the meridionall part: what signs are
septentrionalles, and what meridionals has been declared in the fifte Rule.
The which is likewise evident by the said table, by these words, Sig* Bor.
fig. Aust. If you double then, the said hours and minuttes of the half of
the artificial day, you shall have the whole day: and if you do substra them
from. 24. hours, there rests the night. Or if you double the hours and
mynutes of the half of the night, you shall have the night wholye: and if
you substra them from. 24. hours, there restethe the artyfyciall day, and by
this means you may know at what hour the Sun rysethe, or settethe every
day in the year.

For the day artificial dureth from the sun risinge to noone, until the
sun setting: and the night artificial, from the sun setting unto midnight,
and so until the sun rising. And the natural day of. 24. hours does
comprehend them both.

Of the, 12. houses of heaven, and of their nature accidental according unto
the judgment of the astrologians. 17. rule.
FOr to gather any sruyt of the things abouesayd according to the ability
that god has given unto me^ it is convenient, to treat of the. 12. houses of
heaven, and of their accidentiall nature and how they must be distingued and
erected in all regions. In leauinge then a heap of superfluous and
unprofitable words, which are in the latin rules of the Ephemerides and the
varietis of the opinions of the Astrologians touching the said houses, I will
declare the opinion and manner how to do them, according unto the which, the
Tables are calculated which are in the Ephemerides, and that all men do
commenlye use now adays. To come then unto the point you must note that as
the sun and the moon and the. 5. planettes, making their revolution by
their propre mouementes under the Zodiake, do cause diverse effects and
sensible mutacions in earthly things, according unto the diverse proiection of
their beams and diverse dispositions of natural things here below, in making
their peregrinacion from sign to sign, and according unto the nature
accidentale, of the 12. signs of the Zodiake: likewise the said lights and
planetes, in tourninge round about the earth by the first and universal
mouement of all the world, from the orient by the south into the accident,
within the time and space of. 24. hours (which we call a natural day) do
cause again every day of the year diverse and particular effects, according as
they be in the orient or occident, and notably elevated or depressed under y^
earth, and y^ they have more strong or weak irradiacio^ upon the said
things here below on earth. For this cause the Astrologians have distingued
all the roundnes of the universal world into. 12. parts (after the nombre of
the said. 12. signs) which are called houses, of the which there are 6. above
the earth, and. 6. underneath parpetually and in all regions, in the manner and
form as follows.

First it is to understand, that the meridian circle and the Horizont, do
divide them selves into 2. halfes, and with right angles toward the South and
North, and they divide the Equinoctial into 4. quarters, whereof there be. 2.
above the earth, and 2. underneath: two likewise toward the East, and 2. toward
the West. And every. 4. portion contemeth. 90. degrees. You must the^ imagen
every of the said quarters of the equino. to be divided into 3 egal parts of 30
degrees, every one of them and by the points of the said deuisions to pass.
4. great circles, proceeding from the foresaid intersections of the meridian
circle, and of y^ horizont, by this menes the said 4. circles with y^ said
meridian and horizont (which do make together the nu^bre of. 6.) do deuid the
equl. and all the sphere of the world into. 12. parts, which we call the. 1^.
houses of heaven: the which are or dained and distributed according unto the
succession of the 12. lines of the zodiac and of the propre mouement of the
lyghtes and planets, contrary unto the first moueme^t universal, as it does
somewhat appear by this figure folowinge.



Mine opinion notwithstanding is, that the said. 4. circles ought to pass
by the deuisyons of the Circle vertycall, which does deuyde the meridian
circle with right angles and not by the equinoctial (if it be not in the right
Sphere) for many good causes and invincible reasons as is noted in the
Cosmographie or Sphere of the world, publysshed by Orentius, and in the. 12.
Chapter of the second book of the same.

The first house begins then in the orientale part of the horizont, and
ends in the next half circle which is under the said horizont, the which
house is named the angle of orient, or ascendaunt, and horoscope: and it is the
house to judge of all the beginninges of life, and the beginninges of all
works. For because the first and universal mouement begins at the east
part, and rayseth the sterres and planets above the earth in such wise that
from the orient comes all virtue and the heavenly goodness.

The second house follows after, under the said horizont. The which is the
house of substance as well of necessary things to the life, as of other
goods, of marchandises, of byinges, sellinges, administrators, and helpers.

The. 3. house folowinge ends at the part of the meridiane, which is under
the earth, and bath signification upon brothers, and sisters, cousynes,
neighbors and friends, and upon small and short viages.

The. 4. house begins at the said part of the meridiane, which is under
the earth. The which is called the angle of the point of the earth, or of
midnight and of same the bottom or depth of heaven. And it is the house for to
judge of divisions and heritages, of treasors hide and of all things immovable

The. 5. house follows after, the which is the house of children, of
frendshippe legates and messengers.

The. 6. and following house, is ended at the occidentall part of the horizont
and has signification upon sickenesses, lordeshippes, members of the body,
upon servants, prisoners, and domestycall beasts.

7. The seventh house begins at the said horizonte occidentall drawing
toward the south, called the angle or point of occident, opposite unto the
ascendant: which begins to descend under the horizont. And it is the house
to judge of women, marriages, debates and contentions, of the one half of the
human life.

8. The. 8. house follows after approaching toward the South. The which is the
house of death, and interfection, and of the end of life.

9. The. 9. and house following is ended at the part of the meridiane which is
above the earth and has signification upon long vsages, peregrinations,
faith, religion, wisdom, and dreams.

10. The tenthe house begins at the said meridiane vertical above the
earth the which called the angle or point of the south, or of the mids of
heaven, opposite unto the fourth house which is the angle of the earth, and is
the house royal, imperial, of exaltacion, and honor nobleness, and good
renoume.

11. The eleuenthe house, follows affer, drawing toward the East, the
which is the house for to judge of hope, co^fide^ce and the fortune of man.

12. The twelfe and last house, endinge at the orient is the house of sadness,
envy, malice, deception and craft.

And by this manner there be four angular and principal houses, that is to
say the first, the fourth, the seventh, and the tenth. And four which are
named succedinge, that is to say. The second, the fyfthe, the eight, and the
eleventh, which do follow the other four abouesayd.

The other four which come next after the succedinge houses, are called
falling or coming after, which be these. The third, the sixth, the ninth, and
the twelfth Of the which houses this is the figurefolowing, after the
judgment of our Astrologians, and as they are accustomed to use them and to
put them in platfourme.

The Figure of the xii. houses of heaven, after the Judgments of the
Astrologians.
The first house the Angle of Orient. The second house succedinge. The third
house falling. The fourth house the Angle of the earth. The fyf^e house
succedinge. The syxte house falling. The vii. house the Angle of the Occident.
The viii. house succedinge. The ix. house falling. The x. house the Angle of
the mids of heaven. The xi. house succedinge. The xii. house falling.




And it is conueniente finallye, to note that the lyghtes and planettes do
reioise, and have certain power, and accidental virtues, in some houses more
then in other, as does heareafter follow.

Saturn does rejoice in the xii. house, Jupiter xi. Mars vi. the sun ix
Venus v Mercury i the moon iii

How to erecte and distyngue the. 12. houses of heaven, after the order of the
said Ephemerides. 18. rule
TO erect the^ or caculate the. 12. houses of heaven is no other thing but to
find the points of the Zodiac, which are noted and distingued by the six
circles abouesaid: the which you shall do by the tables of the Ephemerides
thus as follows. You must the^ first note, y^ there are in the said
Ephemerides 5. tables perticulers, sufficient for all Europe, calculated for
the latitude or elevation of the poole of. 42. 45. 48. 51. and. 54. degrees.
And although that there be difference of. 2. degrees, between every of the
said eleuations or latitudes: yet can there follow no notable error of the
same. If for the degrees left out you do use of the table which is calculated
for the next degree. For the table of. 45. degrees shall serve principally for
the said. 45. degrees: and without any notable error for. 44. and. 46. and
the same of. 48. shall serve for. 47. and. 49. degrees and, so of the other.
Coming then to the effect, you must consydre the time, at the which you will
erect he said houses of heaven, to know if it be precisely at none, either
before or after.

The first part or difference, when the time is precisely at noone
LEt it be proposed that you would erect the said houses at the hour of
noone, preciselye, you shall then take the true place and mouement of the sun
at the said hour of none by your Ephemerides. Then you shall take the sign in
the which is the sun above the head of the said table of the houses which is
made, or may serve most commodiously for your latitude or elevation of the pole
and the degree at the left hand of the said table: in the column or line of
the above said tenth house, for ye degree is the beginning of the 10 house.
Right with the which degree, in drawing toward the right hand, you shall find
incontinent the degrees orderly of the. 11. 12. 1. 2. and. 3, house at the said
hour of noone. The which degrees are of the signs, whose characters are
nerest noted above them. And if it happen that the true place and moueme^t of
the sun have any nombre of minutes as most often it does happen then may you
leave those minutes if they be less then. 30. or else add one degree, if the
said nombre of minutes do excede. 30. without any error, or notable interest.

The manner how to proportionate the said houses when the true place of the
sun has minutes.
ANd if you will have the said houses more curiously: you shall do thus. Take
right against the whole degrees of the sun, which are before the minutes,
the houses which you shall find at the right hand as I said before. And at the
left hand of the said houses, take the time, that is to say the hours and
minutes, which you shall find under this title Tempus a meridie.

Then take the difference of the said time next ensuing (in substraing the
lesser from the greater, and note the same a part under the same time, Likewise
take the difference of every of the said houses already noted and of the next
houses following, and note every difference under his propre house. After this
done, enter into the table entitled Tabula proportionu^ ad 60. minuta celi
domicilus fabricandis satisfaciens.

And take at the left side of the said table the minutes of the true place of
the sun which are over and besides the degrees, and at the head of the same
table take the nombre of the minutes of the said difference of time, and you
shall find right with those minutes, the parts proportional of the said
difference in secondes, or else in minutes and secondes together. The which
part proportional, or the nearest to the same, you shall take at the left side
of the table following the abouesayd, which is entitled Tabula quatuor
minutorum temporis and the difference of every house (the one after the other)
at the head of the said table: and youshall find right against the said
nombre the minutes, or the degrees and minutes together, the which you must
add unto the degrees of the house, out of the which was taken the said
difference, and there as the said houses have not the difference, you must
add nothing unto them. By this means you shall have the precise
justification of the said houses more curious then necessary. Example. And for
to have of all more easier understanding, I have here given you an example,
calculated for the middaye of the last of Jnue. 1540. and for the latitude of.
48. degrees, as is the same of Paris. At the which time I did find the sun
to be in the. 17. degres and. 40. minutes of Cancer. And then I did execute and
follow the rest, as above has been said, and I have taken in the said table
proportional at the left hand the. 40. minutes of the true place, and the 4.
minutes of the difference of time at the head of the said table, and right
against those I found. ^. minutes and. 40 secondes: which is the part
proporcionall of the said difference of time, which was found of the. 4.
minutes, under such reason as have the. 40. minutes unto 60. minutes of one
hole hour. Afterward I did take in the said table quatuor minutorum
temporis, the said. 2. minutes and 40. secondes at the right side, and the
difference of the howses (which is but of one degree, at the head of the said
table: and I did find right with them. 40. minutes to be added unto every
house aunswering unto the 17 degrees of the su^ne: The which 40 minutes have
such reason unto one degree (which are worth 60 minutes) as have the 2
minutes and 40 secondes, unto the above said 4 minutes of the difference of
time), and by this means you do anoide a multiplication and division by the
said table proportional, and as much by the table quatuor minutorum
temporis, besides the reductions which should be made.

The rest is clear enough by the discourse, and supputation of the said
example proposed* of the which here follows the true description.

The order of the six houses oriental. The time from m today 10 11 12 1 2 3
hou. m. ^ g m g m g m g m g m g m 7 14 0 17 0 24 ^ ^^ 0 14 0 7 ^ 8 ^ The houses
aunswering unto 17 degrees. 4 0 ^ 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 ^ The differences. 7 18 0
8 0 25 ^ 22 0 14 ^ ^ 0 8 ^ The houses aunswering unto 18 degrees. 2 40 ^ 40 0
4^ ^ 40 0 0 ^ ^^ ^ ^ The parts proportionals. 17 4^ 24 ^0 21 4^ 14 7 4^ 8 ^
The houses justified.

The second part or difference, when the time proposed is after none.
ANd if the time proposed be after none* you shall take the sign and degree
that the sun is in, by the eight rule, and you shall enter into the table of
the houses of your region, as before has been said, taking the degree of the
sun under the sign in the column of the tenth house, and note apart the
hours and minutes of the time, which you shall find at the left side of the
said degree. And if there be minutes besides the degrees, you shall take the
difference of the said time, and of the time next folowinge, and the part
proportional of the same difference, by the abouesaid table, entitled, tabula
proportionum ad 60 minut^. etc. with the said difference, and the minutes of
the sun. The which part proportional you shall add unto the said time
which was taken right against the degree of the sudne. Then afterward unto y^
time so justified, you shall add your time which is past after none, the
minutes with the minutes, and the hours with the hours, in addinge for 60
minutes one hour unto the said hours, the which hours if they do pass 24,
you must substra them, and note the rest. Likewise as many times as you shall
have 6 hours after noone, you shall add unto the said time one minute, by
this means you shall have the time iusti^ied for to find your houses. Then
take the said time at the left side of the table of the houses, under the
title, tempus a meridie, or the most nearest unto it (if you find not the same
precisely) and you shall find at the right hand of y^ said time the 6 houses
orientalles above said, as you may se by the example which follows,
calculated for 8 hours after none of the said last day of June 1540, and
for the above said latitude of 48 degrees, the sun being then in the 17
degree and 59 minutes of Cancer.

The houses aunsweringe to the said time proposed.
hour mi. 10 11 12 1 2 3 The time aun^ring unto the ^e of the sun 7 18 ^e
time after ^e 8 0 gr gr gr gr gr gr ^e time iusti^^^^. 15 19 22 9 25 21 11 28

The third part or difference when the time proposed is before none.
IF the time proposed be before none, there shall be no difference or other
difficulty to calculate, except that you must substra the time that you do
add when it is after none. Then after that you shall have taken the true place
of the sun, and have proportioned the time aunsweringe unto the degree of the
sun, as before has been said you shall substra from the said time, the
distaunce of the time proposed until none, and as many minutes as the said
distaunce shall have of times 6 hours, (in puttinge thereunto 24 hours, if the
said substraction cannot otherwise be made) and with that which shall rest
of the said time, you shall find the said houses by your table in the
fashion and manner as has been said before of the time after none. And if you
do not precisely find the said time, you shall then take the most nerest, or
else if ye will be so curious that you will have the extreme certainty, you
shall take the houses which are right with the time that is next lesser then
yours, and then with the minutes which do rest, and the difference of every
house, you shall take the part proportional in minutes, or in degrees and
minutes, by the above said table quatuor minutorum temporis, as it has been
declared and done of the time of the just none. The which parts
proportionals you shall add unto the said houses, for to have them more
precisely. And for the more better understanding, you may examine the example
which follows, calculated for 8 hours in the morninge, which are four
before none of the above said last day of June 1540, and for the said
latitude of 48 degrees, the sun being then in the 17 degree and 21 minutes
of the sign of Cancer.

hou. mi. The six houses orientals. The time aunswering unto the degrees. of
the sun. 17 15 10 11 12 1 2 3 The distannce of the time proposed until none.
^ ^ The time justified which rests. 2^ 14 g m g m g m g m g m g m The lesser
time most nerest. 23 12 17 0 2^ 0 1^ 0 14 0 5 0 23 0 The difference. 2 1 0 2 0
1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 The part proportional. 0 30 1 0 0 30 0 30 0 30 0 30 The six
houses justified. 17 30 26 0 13 30 14 30 5 30 23 30

Of the six houses occidentals, opposites, or contrary unto the six goinge
before.
VUhan you have the six honses orientals above said, by one of the three rules
or differences aforesaid, you shall have then forthwith the six houses
occidentalles, by the signs and degrees opposites, for because that every
great circle deuideth in the sphere all other great circles, into two halues,
or equal parts. As if the.x. house begin at the xvii. degree of Pisces, the
fourth house (which is his opposite, and divided by a like circle) shall
begin at the. xvii, degree of Uirgo, which is opposite unto the said sign
of Pisces, and so it is to be understand of all others, by means where of no
man does describe in the tables any other but the six houses orientalles. For
it suffiseth to take the parts opposites for the six houses occidentalles, as
we have said here above. The houses and signs opposites be hear noted to
the end you may have the more easy understanding and use of y^ things above
said.

The signs septentrionalles. The signs meridionals oppos. The six houses
orientales. 10 11 12 1 2 3 Six houses occide^tals opposi. 4 5 6 7 8 9

These things thus declared, you shall make the figure of the. xii houses at
the hour proposed, and you shall put at the beouer all humayne members, are
such as do here follow.

Triplicite cholerike.
Aries Are hoate and dry, of the nature of the fire, masculines, of the day;
orientalles, and of the humayne members they do rule, the head Leo the back
and sides. Sagittar. the thighs*

Triplicite sanguine.
gemini* Are hot and moist, of the nature of the air, masculines, of the
day, and occidentales, and of the humayne members they do rule. The shoulders
arms and hands Libra the navel and lower part of the belly. Aquar. the
legs.

Triplicitie flewmatike.
Cancer Are cold moiste, and watery, femenins, of the night, septentrionales,
and of the humayne members they do govern. the breast, stomach, and lou^gs
Scorpio the privy parts. Pisces the fete.

Triplicite melancholic*
Taurus Are cold and dry, of the earth, femenines, and of the night, me
ridionals, and of the humayne members they do rule. the neck* virgo the belly
and in ward parts Capricor the knees.

Likewise the said signs have other affections, and accidental natures,
seruinge to the mutation of the air, for

Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus are moveable, Taurus, Leo, Scorpius,
Aquarius, fyxed, Gemini, Virgo, Sagietarius, Pisces, comune, or mean,

Of the nature and complexion of the lights, and of the.v. planetes. The.xx.
rule.
AFter this it is necessary to have the complexion, virtue, and nature, as
well of the sun and of the moon as of the.v. planetes: the which is such as
foldweth here in orde^.

The Sun is hot and dry, loving, geuynge life, and light unto all natural
virtues. And of the members humayne he rulethe the brain, the marowe, the
sight, the syuewes, and generally all the members of the right part of the
body.

The moon is cold and moist, loving, of whom the effects are manifest,
having dominatton over the stomach, the bellye, and of the mother of women,
and generally over the members of the left part of humayne body.

Saturnels cold and dry, enemy of nature, malicious and envious, destroyer
of life, and of the body he governs the right ear, the milte, and the
bladder: and of humors the inclancholye, and part of the fleume.

Jupiter is hoate and moiste, louinge, sanguine, having regard over the
langes, the sides, the gristels, and of the sede or natural humor of man.

Mars is hot and dry, cruel: and of the human body is attributed unto him
the left ear, the veins, the genetories, and of the humors, the choler, and
after the opinion of some men, he governs the liver.

Uenus is cold and moist, louinge, flewma^ike, and of the body humayne he
governs the back bone, the buttockes: the lower parts of the bellye, the
matrice with the moon, and the fa^te and the sede, with the sign of Leo.

And it is to be noted, that Jupiter and Uenus are called good and fortunate,
but Jupiter is the greatest good fortune and Uenus the least.

Saturn and Mars are called unfortunate, or evil fortunes, but Saturn is the
greatest unfortunate, and Mars the least.

The Sun and the Moon are called means, or between both, that is to say,
neither fortunate nor unfortunate, but indifferent.

Nevertheless, Mercury takes part always of the nature of the Planete, with
the which he is cont^yned, or nearest unto: for with the good he is good,
principally when he beholds him with a trine or sextile aspecte. And with the
evil he is evil likewise, when he is opposite or comoyned with them, or when
he beholds him with a quadrate aspecte.

Of the force and accidental nature of the aspectes. The. 21. ^ ule.
FOr somuche that the lights and planets do change their influence according
unto the variety of the asectes, which have been declared in the 12. rule, it
is convenient to note the goodness and malice coming of the said aspectes, in
the fashion and manner as follows. First as touching the conjunction (which
properlye is no aspecte) you must note that although the coninnctio^ be defined
to be one, when the planetes are under one like degree of the zodiake,
according unto the longitude of y^ same, nevertheless in matter of influence,
one planete is said to be conjoined with the other, when the one is entered
under the beams of the other, although that they be not in one like degree, and
foreseynge that the distaunce of the one unto the other be less the^ 12
degres. And the moon or planet so conjoined with the Sun, is said to be
combuste by the beams of the Sun, and such conjunction is not proprely a
conjunction. And it is to be noted, that when two good planetes are conjoined
together, the same denotes manifest amity and good will of the one unto the
other, and encreasemente of their goodness. And the conjunction of the good with
the evil, diminishes the malice of the evil planete, and weakeneth somewhat
the goodness of the good Planete.

As touching the opposition, it is an aspect of manifest discord and inimitie.

The quadrate aspect is hate and vnper fite inimitie.

The trine aspect, signifies perfect and manifest love of the Planetes.

The sextile aspecte, is of hid and secret benevolence, and imperfect amity.

A declaration of the table of the fixed sterres which is in the Ephemerides.
The. 22. rule.
FOr to know the aspectes, not only of the one planet unto the other, but
also of the said planetes and fixed sterres, you have before the Ephemerides a
table entitled, tabula stellarum fyxarum insigniorum. That is to say, the
table of the most notable fixed sterres, rectified in the year. 1499. The
which contains first of al at the left side the names of the most notable
fixed sterres, after the members and dominations of the images and con
stellatio^s in the which they are brought. The afterward does contain their
lo^gitude. that is to say, their true place, and distau^ce from the beginning
of Aries. After the which longitude, there follows the latitude of the said
sterres, which is the deuiatio^ and distau^ce of y^ same fixed sters from the
zodiake or Ecliptike li^e, or toward the part meridionall. Consequentlye
follows the declination of the said sterres from the equinoctial circle, and
the difference or denominatio^ of the said declination, that is to be known
if she be septentrionall by this lettre S. or if she be meridionall by this
lettre M. Afterward follows the right ascension of the same sterres, that is
to say, the arche of the Equinoctial, beginning at the division of the
spring time, and head of Aries, ascending above the horizont with the said
sterres in the right sphere, and under every merediane. For all m^r^dianes are
every one as a right horizonte, and every right horizont, is that which
passes by the poles of the world: finally is noted the greatness or magnitude,
and then the nature of the said sterres referred unto the Planetes, as the
titles, inscriptions, and characters of the said table does show plainly
enough.

Of the 28 mansions or abidinge places of the moon. The 23. rule.
COnsequentlye is to be noted, that even so as the sun does pass the 12
signs of the zodiake in 365 days and almost 6 hours (which makes the whole
year) does cause here below upon the earth diverse effects, according unto the
nature of the 12 signs, the diverse protection of his beams, and the
disposition and variety of inferior things, so likewise does the moon, as
touching his influence, passinge the said Zodiake in 27 days, and almost 8
hours, according unto the metinge together of her, with the fixed sterres,
which are principally in the 12 signs of the Zodiake, for she causes diverse
alterations, and mutations in the elementall region. By menes of the which, and
to discern and know the effects abouesaide, the aunciente Astrologians have
divided the same time of 27 days and 8 hours into 28 egall parts, whereof
every one comprehe^deth 2^ hours and 25 minutes and almooste 43 secondes, and
to every one of these said 28 parts, do answer 12 degrees, 51 minutes and
almoost 26 secondes, the which are called the 28 mansions of the moon, of the
which the distinctions, and beginninges justified in our time, and unto the
ninthsphere, with their natures and properties, ar brought (for more ample
ease) into the form of a table thus, as follows.

Hear follows the nature and quality of the 28 mansions of the moon, with
the elections depending of the same.
The 28 mansions of the moon.
^^e or^^^ of ye ^^ man^^^^s. The nature and quality of ye said mansi^^ The
distinction and beginning of every mansion. The properties and accidental
effects which the moon causes in every mansion. S g m ^ temperate 19 26 It is
good to journey to ta^^ medicine, to put on new apparel, and naught to hier
servants. ^ temperate 2 17 It is good to sail upon the water, and to bye
tame beasts. ^ moist 15 9 It is good to bye and sell, to bye tame beasts, and
not good to make companies. ^ cold, moist 28 0 It is good to sow, to put on new
apparel, and naught to attempt marriages. 5 dry 10 52 It is good to (...)
medecin, to atte^^^ marriages, good t^ ^^tre children in sco^^^ and to cease
from tra^^^^ 6 temperate 23 43 It is good to m^^^ war, nough^^^^ sow, or to
begin (...) good thing. 7 moist 6 15 It is good to (...) to labor, to pu^
(...) new apparel, naught to take (...) neye. 8 temperate 19 26 It is good
to (...) medecin, to sha^^^ wear on new a^^^rell, and to iour^^^ by water
only. 9 dry* ^ 2 17 It is vnme^^ (...) sow, to^ take a ^^^^ney, and to putt^
^^ new apparel: (...) to borow wheat^ 10 moist 15 9 It is good to tempte
marriage (...) not good to iour^^^ and to change ^^parell. temperate 28 0 It is
good to sow, to plant, and not good to release prisoners. moist 10 52 It is
good to build and edify, to plant, and sow, and good to make marriages.
temperate 23 43 It is good to sow to labor, to take journey, and to make
marriages. temperate 63 5 It is good to marrye wives, to take me decine, to
sow, and to plant. moist 19 26 It is good to delue wells, and springes, and
naught to take iourneye. moist 2 17 It is not good to take iourneye, nether to
take medicine, ne to bye or sell, nor to wear new apparel. 17 moist 15 9 It
is good to beasts, and to (...) them to pasture. 8 dry 28 0 It is good to
(...) lands, to build (...) to receive digni^^^ 19 moist 10 52 It is good to
(...) causes, to assie (...) ties, to take iou^^^^ and not good to (...) 20
moist 23 43 It is good to (...) tell, and very (...) captives. 21 temperate 6
35 It is good to (...) edifices, to buy (...) and to sow. 22 moist 19 26 It
is good to (...) medecin, to ta^^ ^^^^ney, to put on n^^^ ^^parell, and
nau^^^^ attempt maria^^ temperate 2 17 It is good to take medecin, to put
on new apparel, to take journey, and naught to make wagers. temperate 15 9 It
is good to take medecin, and to conducte men of war unto battle. dry 2^ 0
It is good to make noise, debate, and war and to iourneye toward the regyon
of South. dry 10 52 It is not good to begin any thing whatsoever it be.
moist 23 43 It is good to sow, to use marchaundise, to make marriages, and
naught to lay wagers. temperate 6 35 It is good to use marchaundise, to sow
to make marriages, and naught to make wagers.

A declaration of the table which is before the Ephemerides, touching the
force, dignity, exaltation, and other terms or bounds of the Planetes in
every of the 12 signs. 24 rule.
FOr so much that the influences as well of the lights as of the planets, are
augmented, when they be in those signs, in the which they have their force or
dignity as when they be in their propre house, exaltation, triplie^tie, face,
or term prefixed. There is put in the Ephemerides, after the tables of the 12
houses, a table of the 12 signs, of the dignity, force, and strength of the
said planetes in every sign and degree of the Zodiake, of the which table,
the interpretation is manifest and plain enough by their titles, inscriptions,
and subscriptions of the same. For first of all joining unto the degrees of
every sign, you have toward the right hand, the deep degres called in latin
putei. noted by the letter P. then the degrees fortunates by this syllable For.
and the degrees of weakness and defection of the human body, caled Asemene by
this leter A. Then follows the triplicities, faces, and times prefixed of the
planetes* marked by the propre characters of them. Consequently are noted the
degrees masculines, by this lettre M. and the feminines by this letter F. The
dark and cloudye by this lettre T. The brighte and clear by this lettre L.
and the void or emptye by this lettre V. and last of all at the end and
right side of every sign, are noted the degrees of the dignities, of the
lyghtes and planetes by order, beginning at Saturn unto the moon, and unto the
intersections or deuisions of and, that is to say, of the head and of the
tail of the dragon of the same, as well by their proper characters, as by the
nombre of the said degrees. And underneath every sign, is noted the house and
the degree of the exaltation and detriment of the said lights and planetes,
which are things necessary and worthy to be noted of al such as do practice
the judgment of the sters.

General and particular rules, for to judge of the mutation and change of the
air. The 25 rule.
TO understand and to know more easelye how to judge of the chaungement of the
time or wether, and the mutation of the air, it is first requisite to know
the quality and disposition of the four ^artes and seasons of the year,
which are such as follows. The spring time is hot and moist, sanguine, and
begins when the sun enters into the sign of Aries. The somer is hoate
and dry, cholerike, and begins when the Sun enters into the sign of
Cancer. Harueste is cold and dry, melancholic, and begins when the Sun
enters into the sign of Libra. The winter is cold and moist, fleuma^ike, and
begins when the Sun enters into the sign of Capricornus. Afterward
must be known and understand the natures and affections of the 12 signs of
the Zodiake, here before expressed in the ninetenth rule. For y^ the planettes
(yea those that be of a hot nature) do behold the one the other, or be
conjoined together in hoate and dry signs, they shall cause heat and excess
of drougth in Summer, or else temperaunce of air in Winter. And contrary
wise, if the said aspectes and conjunctions of the planetes abouesayd, do
happen in cold and dry signs, they will cause in winter great snowes and
yet, and in summer moderation of the ^eate, and in hoate and moiste signs,
great abundance of winds. And if this happen in waterye signs, they will
cause then great haboundaunce of rain, which will make the air very
intemperate in winter, and of a moderate heat in so^mer. And so is to be
understand, and to judge conformablye of all like things, according unto the
nature of the planets and signs, and the* quality of their aspectes. Also
having regard with the same, unto the nature of the* fixed sterres likewise
of them which are most n^^est unto the Zodiake. And that not only in all
elections, but also in the mutation of the air likewise, as shall be
perticulerlye recited hereafter.

Particular rules of the aspectes of the planetes among them selves.

First the conjunction of Saturn with Jupiter diligently observed in hoate
and dry signs, cause the great drougth many days before, and many days
after the said conjunction: and in moist signs, continual inundation of
waters, and particular floods, because they abide long together, for the
slowenes of their mouementes.

Likewise the opposition, quadrature,,
or sextile aspecte of the said Saturn, with Jupiter, is the cause of great
mutations in the air, and enge^dreth raynes, hayles, and winds many days
before, and many days after the said opposition or aspect. Also there follows
great mutations of wether, at altimes, and as often as there is sextile aspect
of Saturn with the Sun, or of Jupiter with Mercurye, or trine aspecte of
Mars with Uenus, or contrariwise, the which aspects are commonly called of the
astrologians the openinge of the gates of heavens, for so much that they do
move and trouble the air, and do cause notable change of weather.

,, with
The conjunction, opposition, or quadrature of Saturn with Mars, in moist
signs, engenders rain, hayle, and tho^dre* with tempests ^ days before,
and as many days after the said conjunction.

,, with
The conjunction* quadrature, or opposition of Saturn with the Sun, chiefly
in cold signs, engenders hail, rain dark wether, thunder, and cold days,
and notable mutasion of the air.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturn with Uenus in winter
engenders cold and rain, principally in watery signs. And in summer
mit^gation of heat.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturn with Mercury in moist
signs, brings rain, in hot and dry signs, causes droughte, and in Somer
thonder, lightninges, and tempeste.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Jupiter with Mars, in moist
signs, causes raynes, lightninges, and thunders, in Winter show and cloudy
weather, and in hoate signs and dry^* causes excess heat.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the said Jupiter with the sun*
causes great and most vehemente winds, dryuinge away all raynes.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature, and opposition of Jupiter with Uenus, in moist
signs, caiseth cold and mislinges, and that more cer^at^^elye, in case there
happen any conjunction* quadrature, or opposition of the moon, but when they be
co^^o^ned with other signs, causes fair wether and winds.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Jupiter with Mercurye, causes
great winds, and alteration of wether.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars with the Sun in fyrye
signs, causes drougth, in waterye signs thonder and rain.

, with
The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars with Uenus in moist signs,
causes rain and tempest.

, with
The conjunction quadrature or opposition of Mars with Mercurye in hoate and
dry signs, causes great heat and drougth, in waterye signs rain, some
times thonders and lightninges, with so dayne fierce winds.

,,
The conjunction of the sun with Uenus in moist signs by means of the
opposition or quadrature of the moon* causes raynes.


The conjunction of the Sun with Mercury, in moist signs, causes rain, and
in wyndye signs, as are Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius* do engender winds*

, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Uenus with Mercury in moiste
signs, causes rain, in case they be not ^et by any other evil planete. And
in ^ommer they provoke tempeste, the more if they be in watery signs. And note
that ^ll the Planettes above said, have great force, when the moon is in
conjunction, opposition, or quadrature with them, and according to the
variety of the nature of the signs, and the quality of the houses of the
said moan.

Note also what is said of the conjunction, quadrature, and opposition, the
same is meant likewise of the sextile, and trine aspect, but they are of less
signification.

Particular rules by the aspectes of the moon with the planetes.
,, with
THe conjunction, quadrature, or oppositio^ of the moon with Saturn in moist
signs, brings a cloudy day, and cold air, according unto the nature of
the sign: And if the Moon do go from Saturn unto the Sun, by conjunction
or otherwise, hard wether ensues.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opsition of the moon with Jupiter, in the
signs of Aries and Scorpio, shows fair wether, with white dispersed
clouds. And if Mars be disposed to the same by any aspecte, it causes
thunders and lightninges, or else great winds. After the which conjunction,
if the moon come unto Mercurye, there follows great winds, the which are
mittigate, and laid by the opposition or quadrature of the said moan with
Jupiter, but if the planetes which be of slow mouement be not disposed
thereunto, the abouesayde conjunction shall bring fair weather.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the moon with Mars, in watery
signs, causes rain, and if the moon be separate from Mars, and comes unto
Venus, there follows notable change of wether, but in hot signs causes
diverse coulered clouds all over the elemente, in summer often thunder,
bringinge with them sometimes small mislinges, principally if the planetes be
in aspects disposed thereunto.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the moon with the Sun in moist
signs, brings raynye weather, the more if the moon go from the Sun unto
Saturn.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the moon with Venus, cheiflye in
moist signs, rain follows: the moon going from Venus unto Mars by opposition,
quadrature, or sextile aspecte, be to keneth great variety of weather.

,, with
The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the moon with mercury in moist
signs, shows great rain and winds to ensue, the more if she go from
Jupiter and come unto the said Mercury, or if Saturn and Mars be in
opposition or quadrate aspecte duringe the said conjunction.

Wherefore you must note in all conjunctions of the moon with the planets, The
conjunctions and quadratures of them, and likewise of the fixed sterres after
their nature abouesayde.

And when the moon is without any aspect in moiste signs and mansions, the
same denotes rain, wherefore he that will judge more perfitely, and more
surely, it is convenient in all and every of the things abouesayde, that he
considre diligently the nature of the signs, and of the mansions of the
moon, and the disposition of the four times and seasons of the year at their
first entering.

Other rules, and general doctrines, for to know better and more surely to
judge of the variety of the time and weather, of the alteration of the air by
the conjunctions, quadratures, and oppositions of the sun and of the moon.
FOr as much as the mutation of the air is one of the most necessaryest
things, as well for the fruits of the earth, as for the health of the humayne
body, and besides that, one of the parts of the judgment of Astrology, more
apparent and likest true, I have set here all at ones over and besides the
things abouesayd, some lessons and notable rules, for to know the better and
more sbrely how to judge of the said alteration of the air.

First you must diligently note the sinifications and general rules which we
have declared in the rule goinge before, for somuche that the general
significations do change and surmount the particular virtues, by reason that
the greatest virtue draws unto him the lesser, and the lesser does obey unto
the greater, and with this, the particular virtues are not of so great virtue
and strength, as be the general.

It is then necessary for all men that will judge of particular things, to
consider, and behold first the things which be universal and general. As
if you will prognosticate of the quality, and disposition of any day proposed,
you must diligently consider thestate or disposition of any day proposed, you
must diligently* consider the state or disposition of the time, in the which
the said day proposed shall chance or happen. Of the which estate and
disposition, you shall judge by the lord of the conjunction, quadrature* or
oppositio^ preceding of the Sun and she moan, and of the sign where she is
made. The which Lord of the said conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, you
shall know by the figure of the auen, that is to say of the twelve houses, and
places of the planetes iustlye verefied at the* hour of the same conjunction,
opposition, or quadrature. Then when you shall have the figure of heaven well
justified for the time above said of the conjunction, quadrature, or
oppositio^ of the sun and of the moon, you shall first consider in which of
the 12 houses, and in what sign shall fall the said conjunction, quadrature, or
opposition, and the sign and degree ascendent, with the signs and degrees of
the other angles. For the* planet which shall have in the said places more
prerogative, force, and domination, shall be principal lord of the said time
and figure, and that which shall have least, shall be participant in the said
lordeship, and dominatio^. And it is to be noted, that the planet which has
most dominatio^ upon the place of the said conjunction, opposition, or
quadrature, and upon the sign and degree ascendant, does surmount all the
others, and ought to be in this place preferred. Look then of what nature the
planete is which shall rule in the said figure For the universal disposition of
the time shall hold the quality of the said planet. As if at the time of the
said conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, Saturn be found lord, the time
shall be cold and dry. And if it be Uenus, it shall be moist, and so of
others, after their nature, and quality, except the sun and the moon: for
the best astrologians, do never choose the sun nor the moon in this place for
Lords nor rulers, for because that they do esteem the 5 planetes to be the
only moderatours of the time and weather, that is to say Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Uenus, and Mereurye. And not wtoute a cause, in the coniunctio^ they do
choose the Lord of the place of the said conjunction. And in the oppositio^, the
lord of the place of the same of the lights which shall be above thearth, or in
thorient precisely, for there is in this place most greatest virtue. Likewise in
judging almost as much by the place of the quadrature of the said lights, for
they take the place of the same light which is above the horizont, if the
other be underneath. And if they be both above, or both underneath the said
horizont (as it chances often times) they take then for the place of the
said quadrature, the place of the same light which is found to have most
force and dignity. As if one of the planeties were in one of the angles, or
houses succedinge. and the other in the house falling, the same which is in
the said angle, or hoose succedinge, shall be preferred before the same which
is in the fallinge house. The which force, dignities, and other witnesses of
the planetes, you shall extra out of the table, which is expresselye put in the
Ephemerides, for the same cause, the which has been sufficiently declared in
the 24 rule. Then when you shall have the Lord and dominatoure at the time of
the conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the lights, you shall first
note his nature and quality. For most often times the disposition of the time
shall resemble the same. Secondlye you shall considre the sign in the which
is the said lord and dominatoure, for the time shall be disposed unto the
quality of the said sigue. Furthermore, you shall have regard unto the sign
which is then ascendant, and unto his nature, and of what mansion of the moon
he is, with out forgettinge the lord of the said sign ascendant. Afterward you
shall take heed and se which planets are in the angles: for those which do
occupy the middeste of heaven, or the ascendant, shall be better and more
stronger then they which shall be in the angle of the 7 or 4 house.
Consequentlye you shall mark, with which of the planetes the moon comes to
be conjoined, or in aspecte after the ^^y^d conjunction, quadrature, or
opposition. Likewise you shall note with which of ^he planettes, or notable
fyxed sterres, the lord of the said figure i^ conjoined, or beheld with any
aspect. These things thus considered, you may bring to effect, and perfectly
judge as follows If the said lord of the conjunction, quadrature, or
opposition, be of a moist nature, and the places above said and planettes being
in them likewise moist: and with this the said lord being conjoined, or in any
as^^^^ with any moist sterres or planettes. And if the moon after the said
conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, come to be conjoined, or in aspect with
some moist planet joined thereunto that the qualitye of the time be disposed
unto moystnes: if all the things aboutsayd or the most part of them do tend
unto humiditie, you may gather and judge that the time shall be may, and if
they tend unto drouthe, that it shall be dry, and if unto heat that it
shall be hot: and if unto coldness, that it shall be cold: and if there be as
many witnesses for the one quality, as for the other, the time shall be
indifferent, having then known the general disposition of the time (as now
presently has ^ene said) you shall discretlye entremingle the applications of
the moon unto the planettes and of the one planet unto the other, for to indge
more certeynly of the particular days. And to make an end of this matter, you
shall yet note these.ii. lessons, whereof the first is. that the sygnyfycation
of the time thus found as has been said above, his effect principally shall
appear, and come forth, when the moon after the conjunction, quadrature, or
opposition, abouesayde shall be conjoined or comme unto some strong planet, with
the sygnificatour of the said time.

The second is that when the moon shall come unto the sign ascendant, during
the said conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, the time shall be disposed un to
the nature and quality of the said sign. And this suffiseth for the
disposition of the time and change of the weather.

Of the aspectes and constellations which must be observed and chosen for to
begin and end happelye all works and humayne business. The.xxvii. rule.
THe dysposition of the heavenly bodies do grea^lye inclyne the inferior
things to be happily done or begone, and does advance theyn: or else make
late their coming to perfection, and their full and hole effect to comme
forth, for this cause are here set forth by order the elections which must
be observed or avoided in these places beginning at Saturn and then at the
other planettes in order.

Saturn being with the moon in Conjunction Causes an evil unlucky day
for all matters, and principally it is not good to have to do with aged
people, ne with rural folks nor laborers. sextile aspect It is good to have to
do with old folks and of good counsel, to edefy castelles and houses, and to
erecte things that are in ruin, to plowe, to plant, and naught to require the
love of women. quadrature* You must beware and keep your self from old
folks, and from laboring. or planting, it is naught also to journey and leave
to accomplish thy desire especially if it be euel. trine aspecte It is good
to have to do with aged people, to labor y^ earth and vines, to sow and to
plant trees, to fortfye castelles, and to make the foundation of cities and
towns opposition. It is neither good to sow nor to plant, nor to beginune any
matter what so ever it be, and it is requisite to avoid y^ co^uer satio^ and
meting with old folks.

Jupiter being with the moon in conjunction. It is good to be conversant with
noble men, with religyous persons and lawyars, and to give supplications, and
requests, and to demand right and justice. Sextile. Aspect. It is good to
speak unto judges, and ecclesiastical and religious persons, and to begin all
good works. quadrature* It is a mete time to study in philosophy, to mete
with judges and religious persons, and to require right and justice. Trine
aspect It is good to beginn all good matters and to have to do with lawyars,
judges, religious persons, and their prelates, and to require of theyn: the
thing which they would obtain. Opposition, It is a mete time to study in
philosophye and to have conversation with ecclesiastical persons, and with
noble men and to go before Judges.

Mars being with the moon in Conjunction It is good to avoid warriors, and
all noises, debates, and strife. sextile aspect It is good to lead and
encourage men of war unto the battle, to have to do with princes and
captains, to buy horses for the wars, and things of read color, and to
finish all fiery works. quadrature* It is an unmeet time to mete with
gentlemen, and knights and to work in fiery works. trine aspecte It is good
to be with warriors, and to devise of things perteininge to the wars, to buy
beasts, and to make fire for the alch^mye. opposition. It is an unmeet time to
treat of love, and frendships, to take servants, and to begin any thing
whatsoever that it be.

Sol being with the moon in conjunction. It is good to finishe hidden
matters, and secret counsels, that one would not have to be known, and naught
to do any other thing. Sextile. Aspect. It is good to have to do with kings,
princes, wise me^ and of counsel, and good to require right, offices, and
dignities. quadrature* It is not good to mete with princes, and noble men.
Tsine aspect It is good to mete with kings, princes, counselors, people of
estate, and to require of them right and justice, and that thing which a man
would obtain of them, and to seek love and friendship of princes. Opposition*
It is a very unhappy day for all matters, therefore at tempte nothing, ne
any manner of suit, neither plant, build nor iourneye.

Venus be judge with the moon in ^oniunction It is good to take a wife, to
treat of love, to have cohabitation with women, and good to take servants.
sextile aspect It is good to attempt marriage, to seek the love of women, to
put on new apparel, and to speak unto noble men. quadrature It is good also to
take a wife, good to woo and to obtain suits of womenne, to comb the head,
and to put on new apparel. trine aspect. It is likewise good to take a
wife, to comb the head, to seek the love of women, to be conuersaunte with
them, and to put on new apparel.

Mercurye being with the moon in eomunction. It is good and a lucky day to
bye and sell, to iourneye, to give accomptes, good to enter children in
liberal arts, and to demand benefices. sextile aspect It is good for the
versifier, to plead causes, to give accomptes, to iourneye, to bye and sell,
to use marchaundise* and good to enter children to learning. quadrature. It is
good to calculate, and to render up accomptes, to send embassage, good to have
to do with pen men and writers, to bye and sell, and to iourneye.
Opposition. It is good to meet with writers, to bye and sell, to use
marchaundise, to send embassage and messengers, and ^good to set children to
study and learning.

Likewise when the moon after her conjunction with any fortunate planette
shall be notably removed far from the said planet, the day shall be
unfortunate and when she shall be notablye removed far from her conjunction
with any vnfortunace planet, it is the good to work in all matters,
especially the moon being in the sign of Cancer, Taurus, Pisces or
Sagittarius, or in the house of the Sunnne, having Trine or Sextil e aspect
with the said Sun.

Besides this the moon has certain and propre effects in every one of the.
xii signs, in case she be not then let by any strong signification or
constellation. The which are such as follows.

Aries, It is good to begin that which a man would have sone ended, and naught
to begin any thing that a man would have to be firm and stable, and to
have to do with kings, and rich men, good to bathe, and naught to clippe
hear, and to scarifye the skin with cuppinge, of such as have disease in
their neck and ears. Tau. It is good to begin such things, as you would
have to be firm and stable, good to sow, and to plant trees, to labor the
vines, to build, to be glad and merye, to comen with women, and to bye
bulls and beues. Gemi It is good to begin the things which should be of
little duraunce, good to put children to learning, and not mete to let blood.
Ca^cer It is good to journey, to make vyages, and to take electuaries. Leo. It
is good to begin such things as shall be of long duraunce, and stable, and
naught to take medecin by vomit and to shape and put on new apparel.
Virgo It is good to put children to be instructed in learning, to seek the
love of young maidens, and not good to marrye. Libra It is good to begin
things of small duraunce, te ionrney, to bye and sell, to have to do with
religious persons, and not good to have copulation with women. Scorp It is an
unlucky day for to begin any matter of goodness. Sagit. It is good to learn to
shote in the bow, to use marchaundise, to be conuersaunte with judges, and men
of law, and to have copulation with women. Capri. It is good to be in company
with aged people, to plowe the fields, and to deck gardens and vines. Aqua.
It is good to edefie towers and cities, and to buyld houses, to plant trees and
deck vines. Pisces. It is good to iourneye and to go a fysshinge.
And here you must note, that when the moon is in a moveable sign, it is then
good to begin the things, where of ye desire sone to have an end, and in a
fixed sign, that which you desire to be of long duraunce. And in common
signs, the things which ye will have of little duraunce.

And when the moon is co^ioyned with the fortunate sterres, the aspecte is
fortunate, and contrariwise unfortunate.

Likewise when the moon is in the section or division of the head of the dragon
thus figured, she is fortunate, and in the section of the tail of the dragon,
thus marked unfortunate.

Of elections which are to be observed in the plylebotomie or lettinge of
blood. The. 28. rule.
Who that will consequently know when it is good to let blood, he must take
good head unto the aspectes which follow. First, if the moon be in
coniunctio^ with Jupiter in a mete sign, or in trine aspecte, or in opposition
with him, or in in aspect with Venus: it is good then to be let blood. The
signs mete are Aries, and Sagittarius, for the flemmatikes, and the first
part of Libra, for the melancolickes, and for the cholerickes Cancer Pisces,
and the signs disagrei^ng unto the Phebotomy are Leo. the second part of
Libra, and the first part of Scorpius. Likewise is to be noted that al ye hole
course of the moon is divided into four quarters which must also be be
observed.

The 1 is from the new moan until. the first qu^rter. good for young people, 2
the first ^uarter the ^ull moan young and myd^e aged 3 ^he full moan the. ^i.
quarter. middle aged and old. 4 the seco^ quar^er the new moan. old folks
o^elye.

Likewise you must cut no vain, nor touch any membre withany iron ^oole what
so ever it be, the moon being in the sign which beholds, and has
domination upon the said membre. What members are subject unto every sign
has been declared in the.xix. rule.

And on the other part, it is not only euel to let blood, when the moon is
in the section of the head or of the tail of the dragon (thus marked...) but
also by (...)

(...) with Mars, Saturn, or Jupiter. And this shall satisfy you for me decinal
rlections.

Of elections for to sow, and to plant trees and vines. The.xxx. rule.
FInally as towchinge the most apt and mete time, for ^o sow and plant
trees, and to dec^e vyn^^, it behooves to note that there are* v. months* in
the year deputed and most ^ete for the same, that is to sa^^, March,
Apryll, May, Septembre and Octobre* But in all times, you must take heed of the
evil aspectes of Saturn and of Mars. And to keep the aspects and places of
the moon which do here follow

If the moon de behold Saturn with trine or sextile aspect, being in the sign of
Taurus, It i^ good to plant trees and vines* Cancer. to ^ow^ generally. Virgo.
to sow fielde^. Libra. to sow and to garden. Capricor. to sow generally.
Aquarius to plant trees and vines.

And especially if the moon do behold Venus or Jupiter (which are the. ^^.
best fortunates) with Trine, Sextile, or quadrate, Aspect. And it is good to
plant trees at the last quarter of the moon.

Conclusion of the Author.

And this suffiseth for the declaration use and practice, of the matters,
contained as well in the Almanackes, or Ephemerides, as in y^ Latin rules of the
same. In the which I have not followed the letter word by word, but only
the meaning and doctrine in chaunginge, addinge, and substrainge that which I
thought worthy to be changed, added, and substrayed, because of the more
perfect and easter erudition, desyringe my lord god with all my power to
satisfye you herein, and all them which be lovers of this science.

Finis.
Virescit vulnere virtus*
Here follows a singular treatise of Astrology touching the conjunctions of
the planettes in every of the twelve signs, and of their Prognostications in
the reuolutions of years.
IF you desire to know every year* what things shall be dear, and what good
cheap, or of a mean price, sie what sign is ascendant above your horizont,
at the hour that the sun enters into the first minute of Aries. For the
planet which shall be then in the said sign. shall be Lord of the said
year.

Let then be made the figure of heaven in the which let be ordained the 12
houses, according unto the said ascendent, and let be ordained the 7 planetes
in the said houses, as by their mouement precisely justified they shall be
found to be then in heaven. And this done, se and co^sider^duly the natures of
the 12 signs* and of the sterres being in them. And according as by the
industry of your spirit you may esteame and inuente, so judge of things to
come the same year, as hereafter I shall show, for you may judge to the
verity.

Of the significations of the planetes in every of the said signs and houses.
FIrst then if Saturn be in the ascendant in the first house or sign, or in
the 10. Then all wightie and black things, as azur, iron, lead, and woollen
cloth of black ^^^er shall be dear the same year. And if the said Saturn be in
the fourth, ninth, and twelfth house, the said things shall be somewhat dear,
and not much.

But if he be found in any of the houses falling, as is the third, six^,
nynthe, and twelfth, the said things shall be neither dear nor yet good cheap,
but of a mean price.

So say we and must judge of other planets and things upon the which they
have their signification, of the which planetes the significations, for to
make short, are such as follow. Jupiter signifies oil, cotton, honey, and
silver. Mars signifies pepper, targettes, and all other armours. The sun
signifies gold that is vnforged, and that has not been wrought. Venus
signifies al greases, oyntmentes, spices, white odorifera^t wood, perles and
the ornaments of women. Mercury signifies all small grains, all manner of
silk works, as well tisshues as others, nuttes and things of like quality.
And the moon signifies sweet encence, milk, cheese, and other like things.

Of the signification of the coniuntion of the planets in the sign of Aries.
When you shall have the^ made the figure, and found Saturn and Jupiter
conjoined together in the sign of Aries, or the one of them near unto the
other, they signify some new sect to come. But if in the said sign of Aries
are found to be Jupiter, Uenus, Mercury, the sun, and the moon, or for the
least three of them, there shall be great plenty of all things, people shall be
inclined to goodness, and there shall be great raynes, and hayles, writers and
scriueners shall much profit Cattle shall be at a low and vile price. And
the fresshe Rivers and waters shall aboundantl^e increase. And if Jupiter and
the moon be found in one like degree of the said sign of Aries, in the
oriental or east part, it signifies then that the king shall do justice and
right judgment in his realms and that his kingedome and lordeshippe shall
prospere. But if Saturn, and Mars, or Mars and Jupiter, or Mars and Mercury,
or the said Mars and Uenus be found in the place abouesaide, and oriental
part, there shall be war, and great effusion of blood among the Arabians in
their countries, and they shall be destroyed, and their men of war taken and
separated into diverse countries.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planets in the sign of Taurus.
If Uenus and Mars be found conjoined in one like degree of the sign of Taurus,
then women shall move seditions against men, hopinge to be violated by them,
and there shall be a great death of catel. But if Mars be in the sign of
Taurus, there shall be war toward the South part, and such vehemente
winds, that the fruit shall fall from the trees and the most part shall perish
by drouth. And if Mars, Jupiter, Uenus, and the moon, or three of them be
found in the place and part abouesaide, men shall lightely make lies, and there
shall be great noyses and tumult among them selves, and that year shall die
the most beutiful creatures, for Jupiter and Uenus do signify the fairest, and
Mars joined and abidinge with them in the said sign and degree, shall slay
them. And besides this there shall be great raines, and abundance of waters
as well of the sea as of the floudes and rivers. And at the sonth part people
shall rise and rebel, desiringe to slaye their Lord, but they can not do it.
And if Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, be in the said degree of Taurus, then the
emperors and kings* shall los^ their realm, or being astonished with overmuch
fear shall die. And the men of religion, as chanons and monks, shall leave
their habites, or else shall dye. But if Saturn and Mars be only in the same
place* and sign as above, women shall have diseases in their ^eates, in the
throat and in the privy parts, and the men in the general parts, and in the
bladder.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planetes in Gemini.
If the Sun, Uenus, and the moon are conjoined in the sign of Gemini, the
scriueners and writers shall gain but little that year, and servant shall
rebel against their Lords and masters, but there shall be great abou^daunce of
corn upon the earth, and the high ways il assured, because of the abou^daunce
of thieves and robbers. And if Mars and Saturn, or mars and Jupiter be
conjoined in the said sign or degree, there shall be great wars in the land
of Armenia in Asia, for their enemies shall run upon them, and the moabites
shall move war, and shall slay their preistes, and they shall go into the
mountains, trusting in the judgments of their deuines and prophets. And from
the east part shall come a merueilous great wind.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planetes in Cancer.
If Jupiter, Mars, the sun and the moon, be conjoined in the sign of Cancer,
then terror and fear shall compass them, who do stir up and provoke the other
by offenses, and among the men, the one shall molest and grieve the other. And
there shall be seen many signs in heaven as comets, and fires flienge, in the
air, with earthquakes, the waters shall wax dry, the fruits shall be corrupted
and marred, the sailers shall perish upon the sea, the cities, castles, and
towns being edified hard or nere to the sea side, shall be troubled with
great fear, and the north wind called boreas shall do much damage the same
year.

Of the coniunctio^ of the planets in Leo.
If Saturn, Jupiter, mars, and the moon be found conjoined in the sign of
Leo, the people dwellinge east wards, shall make wars within them selves,
and me^ shall be vexed and grieved with pains of the bellye, of the stomach, and
of the privy parts. But if Jupiter, mars, and the sun be in the said sign,
the merchaunts shall fear to have wrong of their Lord, the wind shall be great
from the east part, and the Arabians shall not be without fear.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planets in Uirgo.
If Jupiter, Mars, and Mercurye, be conjoined in the sign of Uirgo, all the
fruytes of the earth shall perish, almost all wholly by the great abundance
of Locustes and greshoppers. But if Saturn and the sun be there found
conjoined and eclipsed, and the head of the dragon with Mars be there at the
same time, or nere thereto, then in the land of the Nubians, and in the South
part, shall be engendered sedicion among the poor and rich people. And if
Saturn and Jupiter be in the said place, there shall follow great rain, and the
wind shall proceed from the South part, and all things, especially Corn and
wine, shall be dear the same year.

Of the signification of the coniunctio^ of the planets in Libra.
If Mars and Jupiter be conjoined in the sign of Libra, the heaven shall be seen
to be read, which is a sign of diseases to come upon men, and of effusion of
blood But if the Sun, Jupiter, and the moon, be in the said place, there
shall follow mortality of women, and great raynes. And if Mars and Saturn be
in the same place, there shall follow wars, and the thieves and robbers shall
fall upon men by the way to rob them.

Of the signification of the coniunctio^ of the planetes in Scorpius.
If Saturn, Mars, and Uenus be conjoined in the sign of Scorpius, they
signify that the king shall die of poison, and the Lords shall use
detractions, and shall have envy the one against the other. And if the moon be
there, with any of these three, there shall be such great rain, that it shall
seem that the world would perish^ by water, as in the time of Deucalion. But
if Jupiter and Saturn be in any degree of the said sign, then it is
convenient to understand generallye in all sorts, that there shall come false
prophets, bringing in new sects.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planets in Sagittarius.
If Mars and Jupiter be conjoined in y^ sign of Sagittary, there shall be made
wars alonge the sea side. But if Saturn, Jupiter, mercurye, and the moon be
there, the sea and floudes by the great inundation of waters shall so increase,
that the whole world shall almooste perish by a deluge. The scribes,
physicians astrologians, and preistes shall be multiplied and honored of the
people. And if Saturn and Mars, be in the said place, the thieves shall rob
the rural people, and the^ of villages, and the pirates shall rob the sailors
upon the sea. But if Mars and Uenus be in the place abouesayd: y^ harlottes and
strompetes shall rauishe their children and daughters, and shall by force bring
them into captivity.

Of the signification of the conjunction of ye planets in the sign of
capriconus.
IF the Sun Mars and Mercury, be in the sign of capricornus: many great
lords shall die, and there shall be great in firmities and diseases. The me^
shall burn the houses and the barnes with corn, and there shall reign
mer^eilous great winds, in such wise, that small store of corn shall be
gathered. And if saturn and Mars be in the said place: there shall not then
follow so much euel, but the wars shall be great, and mankind shall much fear
god.

Of the signification of the conjunction of the planets in the sign of
Aquarius.
If Saturn, Mars, and the moon be in the sign of Aquarius there shall be
little rain, and great drouth, but yet the waters of springes and fountains:
shall sufficientlye abound: the goers by the ways shall be assailed by
thieves, the air shall be sore troubled and cloudye, and yet shall give no rain.
And then shall be borne a man of whom the people shall much rejoice, and unto
whom many nations shall be subject: The monest aries and monks shall greatly
abound, and shall be men fearing god.

Of the signification of the coniu^ction of the planets in the sign of Pisces.
If in the sign of Pisces be Jupiter, the religion shall be greatly observed
amo^gs men* who then that would give judgment of things which should come in
any year it is mete that he do examyne witte^y the coninnctions, conplexions,
and significations, of the planets, as well by the things here above written as
also by the subtlety of his understanding in taking head unto the nature of
the signs, in the which the said planetes shall be. And this doing he may give
certain judgment of things to come by the will and grace of god.

Finis.
Virescit vulnere virtus,
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.


