ON WINGS OF FEAR, Finch Flies away. One pair of legs
is worth two pair of hands:
Whirre:

ALAS Poor Will, He Is forced to stay. I Would try the conclusion,
were I out of these bands.
Heigh-ho.


1.
REader, I know thou can not choose but smile,
To see a Bishop tide thus to a ring?
Yea, such a Princely prelate, that ere-while,
Could three at once in Limbo patrum fling;
Suspend by hundreds where his worship pleased,
And them that preached too often; by silence eased.
2.
Made Laws and Canons, like a King (at least)
Devised new oaths; forced men to swear to lies?
Advanced his Lordly power 'bove all the rest;
And then our Lazy Priests began to rise?
But painful Ministers, which plide their place
With diligence; went down the wind apace.
3.
Our honest roundheads to, then went to rack,
The holy sisters into corners fled;
Cobblers and Weavers preached in Tubs; for lack
Of better Pulpits; with a Sack instead
Of Pulpit-cloth, hung round in decent wise,
All which the spirit did for their good devise.
4.
Barnes, Cellers, Cole-holes, were their meeting-places,
So sorely were these babes of Christ abused,
Where he that most Church Government disgraces
Is most esteemed, and with most rev^rence used.
It being their sole intent religiously
To rail against the Bishops dignity.
5.
Brother, says one, what do you think, I pray
Of these proud Prelates, which so lofty are?
Truly, says he, mere Antichrists are they.
Thus as they par^e, before they be aware,
Perhaps a Pursivant slips in behind,
And makes 'em run like hares before the wind,
6.
Down tumbles parson prick-eares, chair and all,
Making a noise, which frightens all the rest.
Here two or three stand quivering close to th'wall.
There half a score lie crammed up in a chest,
And though the Candles all extinguished were,
A blind man easily might have smelt their fear,
7.
Thus still the Bishop kept the Brownists short,
And oftentimes was caught beyond his bounds;
But if he were what man durst tax him for it?
His very breath the silly wretch confounds:
He quel'd 'em all; to no man he would show favor;
But now he is bound (ye see) to's good behavior.
8.
A year a gone 'tad been a hanging matter;
T'avewrit (nay spoke) a word against little WILL;
But now the times are changed, men scorn to flatter:
So much the worse for CANTVRBVRY still,
For if that truth once come to rule the roast,
No mar'le to see him tide up to a post.
9.
His High Commission kept us once in awe;
There men paid fees before they knew for what.
Honest Lamb and Ducke could make it good by law,
To squeese men's purses, when they looked too fat.
But now your Master's caught, run Lamb fly Duck;
See, see, his Court's pulled down, and he is chained up.
10.
By wicked counsels, feign he would have set
The Scots and us together by the ears;
A Patriarks place, the Levite longed to get,
To sit bith' Pope, in one of Peter's chaires.
And having drank so deep of Babels cup,
Was it not time do you think to chain him up?
11.
'Twas time, 'twas time; this is the general cry;
And who alas can swim against the stream?
His corner Cap, me thinks stands all awry;
His sleeves have lost both whiteness and esteem:
All Is former honor's vanished, he displaced.
Thus is his grace, for want of grace, disgraced.
12.
But stay what Bird's that, flies away so fast?
O, it is a Goldfinch; let him go I pray,
Something has frighted him, he makes such have,
Perhaps some snare was laid, to take away
His life; if so, wisely he did to fly
On wings of safety, danger being so nigh.
13.
It Is thought he was a good Astronomer;
And did a storm fast coming on foresee?
Which made him, when the clouds began to appear?
Into another place for shelter flee.
O subtle Finch, it is well he escaped is,
His singing else had been quite spoild ere this.
14.
But here is the spite; one sheep breaks through th'hedge
And makes a gap, to let out all the rest:
Finch flowne, our other birds grew quickly fledge;
And all that could fly, thought that way the best.
The Finch indeed lost more then all that fled,
But who'd not part with his purse, to save his head.
15.
Oh, had the Bishop been as wise as he,
He might have found a way to cure his care.
Now sure he vexes, frets, and fumes to see
How like a wretch he lies in sorrows snare.
And how his running friends eschew'd the danger.
Whilst he stands tide up like an Ass toth' manger.
16.
In this fine Finch my Lord took great delight,
Ere now they have sung harmonious notes together.
But ^un shine days are clouded often ere night
So theirs; and now none cares a pin for either:
Thus I conclude and pity it is I say,
Though one be tied that the others flowne away.
No mas^ no mass will we allow.
To keep it down, w'ave ropes enough.
He that in England thus desires to do,
Must swing-am, swang-am, thus, a turn or two.
And if that cure not his ambitious hope,
Let me be next that capers in a rope.
Be warned by him who thus has cracked his credit,
Qui antea non caveat post dolebit.
I. C. V. B. poor CANTVRBVRY in a tottering state;
A. P. O. P. you sought to be, now it is too late.
R. V. Y. Y. before their eyes that are among you:
V. R. A. K. if that you say that they will wrong you.
S. C. O. T. some say was he which brought all this to light.
I. C. V. R. in some great fear your Lawne sleeves are not white,
G. R. E. G. swears certainly that he shall have the Miter.
H. E. A. D. and all for me, but you will fall the lighter.
FINIS.

