A SHORT DISCOURSE Of the excellent Doctor and Knight, master Leonardo
PHIORAVANTI BOLOGNESE upon Chirurgerie.

With a declaration of many things, necessary to be known, never written
before in this order: whereunto is added a number of notable secrets, found out
by the said Author.

Translated out of Italyan into English, by John Hester, Practicioner in the
art of Distillation.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR E^ VERTV I QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE

Jmprinted at London by Thomas East. 1580.

Jacobius Boraston me juxe tenet

VERO NIHIL VERIVS


To the Right Honorable his singular good Lord and Patron, EDWARD DE VERE,
Earl of Oxenforde, Viscount Bulbecke, Lord of Escales and Bladesmore, and
Lord great Chamberlain of England: John Hester wishes health of body,
tranquillity of mind, with continual increase of most godly honor.
TRY, AND THEN TRUST, says the old Adage: but I must hope for trust without
trial: because as I can compare you, (Right Honorable) to none more fit, the^
to ALEXANDER the Macedon: So must I humbly request your good Lordship, to
imitate that famous worthy: who being sick, was advertised by letters, that
his Physician would empoyson him. The good Prince notwithstanding being offered
the medicine by the accused, first took it, and drank it up, and then gave
the Physician the letter of his accuser to read: but perceiving no alteration
of countenance in the man, he took good courage, and by that same medecin
(although extreme in operation) presently recovered his former health. In like
manner (Right Honorable) having translated and gathered together this
compe^dious and short way of Chirurgerie, as I thought none so meet, to whom
I might consecrate these fruits of my travails: So must I most humbly desire
your good Lordship to peruse it, and then to make trial of the contents
thereof: which being devised and practiced by a worthy and famous Captain,
called Signior LEONARDO PHIORAVANTI of Bolognia, does show both the names and
natures of each wound, with the order and manner to cure them in half the
time which is or has been used heretofore, by either ignorant or arrogant
Professors and Practicioners of that noble and profounde Science, which as they
more esteem a great gain to themselves, then a little ease to their
pacientes, and a long protracting of the cure for a large payment: So I know
although I ease the rich, relieve the poor, and teach the ignorant: yet are
there such, which being more wilful then skillful, will bear me a private
grudge for this public commodity, and will attempt more then either they can
or are able to answer: the which to avoid, I most humbly crave your Honorable
patronage, that according to your name and poesy, your name and property may
be to protect the truth: So shall both the Translator the less doubt his foes,
the Book benefit more his friends, and they both most rejoice of so worthy a
Patron. Whose life God prolonge with health and increase of honor, and after
the course of this pilgrimage finished, enstall you among his chosen, to reign
with him in eternal felicity.

The most affectioned of all those, which owe your L. dutiful service, John
Hester.

To the gentle Reader.
ALthough diverse learned men of no less Judgment then Practice, have here
before translated and set forth sundry books, containing the most wholesome
and profitable precepts of Physic and Chyrurgerie, where-in they seem to have
opened and at large declared al such things as seemed necessary and expedient
to be had and known, in this our vulgar English tongue: yet nevertheless, I
calling to memory the notable sentence of Cicero: That every man is not all
only borne for himself, but chiefly to profit his native country, then his
parents, afterward his children and friends, seeking a means where-by I might
profit this my native country, thought it best to translate this little
treatise upon Chyrurgerie, gathered out of the works of the most famous Knight
and Doctor, both in Physic and Chyrurgerie, Master Leonardo Phiorauanti, and
have applied my whole labor and dilyge^ce to set ye same forth as truly and as
nigh the Authors mind as I could, notwithstanding but there do some faults
remain therein, because of diverse terms of the Art, the which I am not
practiced in: of the which if instructions be given, they shall the next
impression be amended.

Therefore gentle Reader, take this book in good part, for therewith thou
shall profit more then of any other that has been set forth heretofore,
because it is only the mere troth, and pure practice approved by experience,
and heere-with I make an end, committing thee and us all to almighty God, who
prosper us in all our works.

Gentle Reader, ye shall understand that if GOD prosper me in health, I mean
to set out all the works of this Author: which are.24. books, comprehended
in eight volumes. In the which are contained the whole art of Physic and
Chyrurgery, to the honor of God, and the profit of my country.

From my house at Paul's Wharfe, the. 23. of Iannuary.
The names of the books of this Author.
A discourse upon Chyrurgerie, being this book. Caprici medicinalle. Il
compendio dei secreti rationalle. Il spechio del scientia vniuersalle. Il
Regime^te de la peste. being set forth already, and is entitled, The
joyful Iuel. Il Thesoro de la vita humana. La Chirurgia del Phiorauanti. La
Phisica del Phiorauanti.
The Table of the contents of this Book following.
WHat Chyrurgerie is. fol. 3. What wounds are. eod. Of Ulcers, and what they
are. fol. 4 Of Impostumes and their kinds. eod. Of Fistoloes and their kinds.
eod Of all sorts of scabbes. fol. 5. Of Formicola and his effects. fol. 6. A
discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores. eod. An order to use in
healing all manner of diseases apperteining unto the Chyrurgian. fol. 7. Of
medicines to be used in all kind of wounds outward, with ease and brevity.
fol. 8. To help ulcers of all sorts. fol. 9. The order to be used in curing
Impostumes of diverse sorts. eod. The order to cure all manner of Fistoloes.
fol. 10. To help all manner of scabbes. fol. 11. To help Mal di formica. eod.
Of the Tow which is laid upon wounds of common Chyrurgians. fol. 12. Of the
disgestiue with the which they dress wounds after the aforesaid Towe. eod. Of
the mundificatiue unguent, wher-with they dress the wounds after they are
digested, to mundifie them. fol. 13. Of their incarnatiue wher-with they dress
the wou^d after it is mundified. eod. A rare secret the which this author did
send unto a very friend of his, being the in wars in Africa, the which
helps all wounds, either by cut thrust, galling with arrows, or hargabush
shot, or otherwise. 13 Of those Unguents that Cicatirze wounds. fol. 14. A
remedy to help a wound with great speed of our invention. eod. An excellent
secret to heal wounds of Gunshot or Arrows, without any danger. eod. A
discourse upon old wounds that are not yet healed and their sovereign
remedy. eod. To dissolve a broose in short time, when it is new done. fol.
15. To help a wound quickly that is in peril of any accident. eod. To stop
the flux of blood in wounds with great speed. eod. An other remedy to
stay the flux of blood in wou^d. fol. 16. Of our Cerote magno, that helps
against all sorts of sores and wounds. eod. Of our magistrall Unguent that
helps diverse sorts of sores. eod. To make Oil of Frankencense. fol. 17. Of
Oil of Wax and his effect. eod. To help the tooth ache that is caused of
rotten teeth, or that comes of a dissentio^ of the head. fol. 18. Against a
stinking breath. eod. To help those that have a great cough in the stomach.
eod. To help those that can-not hold their water. fol. 19. To help those that
can-not make water. eod. To help those that have great burning of their urine.
fol. 20. To help those that have great pain of the Gout. eod. A remedy
against the pestilence, that preserves those that use it. fol. 21. To help
Pellaria, that is a disease which causes the hair and beard to fall away.
eod. To help a Carnositie in the yard. eod. To help a white Scall. fol. 22.
To help those Caruolli that come upon the yard, and their causes. eod. A
discourse of those sores that come of the Pockes, and how to help them
quickly. fol. 23 The cure of one that had the Pocks in his head. eod. The cure
of a wound in the head and the hand. fol. 24. A great secret particular for
the Flux and Dissenteria. eod. The cure of one that was poisoned with Arsnick.
25. The cure of an vlcerated leg. eod. The cure of the Gout on a certain
Gentleman. 26. Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may help it eod. A
most excellent remedy to help the Flux of the body, with a certain
discourse there-on 27. A discourse as concerning Corns in the feet or else
where, with their remedies. eod. Of an Infirmity of importance, that comes
upon the extremity of the Toe, upon the nail. eod. A discourse upon the
Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most excellent medicines of our
invention. fol. 27. A great secret to help those that are burst or have the
Rupture. eod. A rare secret and divine, to help those that are troubled with
the Spleen. fol. 28 An other great secret to help the Spleen with great
speed. eod. The cure of a certain Spanyard called, Carabasull di Cordonet,
the which was troubled with the Pockes. eod. The cure of the Stiche in the
side with retention of vryne. eod. A cure of a certain Spanyard wounded in the
head in Naples. 29. The cure of a certain Gtntleman, that had Mal di formica.
eod. Certain cures that his Author did, when he travailed into Afryca. eod.
The cure of the Flux, wher-with I help the Army of the Emperor in Afryca.
fol. 30. A goodly remedy found out by me, for wounds in the head. fol. 31. The
cure of one that had his Nose cut off, and set on again. eod. The cure of an
Arm of S. Giordano Vrsino. fol. 33. A great chance that happened at the
assault in Afryca. eod. The cure of wounds being poisoned, and of other sores.
eod. A remedy found out by me, against the poison of a Fish. fol. 34. Of the
taking of Afrika and his destruction. eod. The cure of a great wound on tht
head. fol. 35. A very strange thing that happened in the aforesaid year.
eod. The cure of a Fistoloe in the lower parts. eod. Of many that I cured in
Naples. fol. 36. A cure of Vlcera putrida, the which was in the Arm. eod. The
cure of Ethesia in the beginning. fol. 37 The cure of a certain man, wounded
in thirteen places. eod. Of remedies that help many diseases. fol. 38. Here
begins the order to make diverse and sundry medicines of our invention, never
found out before by any man. And first to make our Petra Philosophalla, that
helps against all manner of diseases that happens unto man or woman, or any
other animal terrestryall. eod. To make our Balm artificial, with the order
to use it, and wherefore it serves fol. 40. To make our Aromatico, the which
helps against all manner of infirmities, of what quallytie so ever they be.
fol. 41. To make our Electuario Angelico, and the order to use it, and in what
diseases. eod. Of the vigitable Stone, of our invention, to transmute a body of
one complexion into an other, and to make him sound for ever. fol. 42. Our
solyble Siroppe with the order to use it. fol. 43. Our Siropo magistrale
Leonardo, the which serves against an infinite number of diseases, and is a
rare medicine. eod. Our Syropoe against the melancholyke humor, and specially
where there is ventosity in the stomach. fol. 44. Our Potion of Lignum
Sanctum, the which is myraculous to dyssolue crud, and malygne humors, with
the order to use it, in the French Pockes, and such like diseases. eod. A most
marvelous Water and rare, to cause a man to avoid the Grauel in urine, and to
mundifie the raynes. fol. 45. To make the water of Lignum sanctum, most
wholesome against the Pockes, with a new order. fol. 46. Our Dystillation for
the Etesia, the which is of meruaylous virtue, and wyth-out comparyson, with
the order to use it. fol. 47. Our vigitable Siroppe, the which is miraculous
and divine. fol. 47 An Electuarye that helps the cough, with great speed and
ease. eod. Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purges the body without
any grief, and is miraculous in his operation. fol. 48. An Electuary against
the evil disposition of the Liver and Stomach. eod. Our magistrall Electuary
of Sulfure the which serves against diverse fortes of infirmities. fol. 49. Our
Electuario of Consolida magore that serves for many diseases inwardly. eod.
Our imperial Electuary for the Mother. fol. 50. Pylles against poison the which
are of meruaylous virtue. eod. Vnguento magno Leonardo. eod. Oil of Hipericon,
the which is most miraculous for wounds and bruses. fol. 51 To make our Oleum
benedictum, the which heals wounds divinely. eod. A magistrall Water, the
which preserves the sight a long time, and mundifieth the eyes of all spots.
fol. 52. To make Oil of Vitrioll compound, the which preserves nature in his
strength. eod. Oleum philosophorum de termentiua and cera. fol. 53. Our magno
licore the which is of great virtue. eod. Pillole Angelica, the which euacuat
the body without any impediment, and are most profitable. 54. Pillole Aquilone
of our invention. 55. Our Quintaessentia solutiua, the which is of marvelous
operation in diverse matters. eod. Our Siroppe of Quintaessence, the which is of
marvelous virtue eod. Pillole magistrale, the which is good against diverse
infirmities. fol. 56. A compound Aqua vitae, the which serves against all
cold diseases of the stomach. eod. A compound Oil against poison, the which
is of a meruaylous virtue. eod. A meruaylous Soap that helps those which
can-not spit but with great pain. fol. 57. To make the Quintaessence of Hunny.
fol. 58. To make our Elixer vitae or Aqua coelestis. eod. To make Aqua Reale
vel Imperiale, the which makes the teeth white presentlye, incarnateth the
goumes, and causes a good breath. eod. A kind of Pille most convenient for
the eyes, and comfort the stomach. fol. 60. A discourse upon a composition
that preserves a man or woman in health a long time. eod. A marvelous Water
to be used of all Chirurgians in curing of their pacientes. fol. 61. To make
our Causticke. eod. To make oil of Antimony. eod. A precious Licour above all
other. fol. 62. A secret of marvelous virtue. eod. Our secret of marvelous
virtue in act and strength. eod. To rectify and preserve the sight of those
that are weak sighted. eod. Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it. fol. 63.
To calcine Tutia, and to bring it into a salt. eod. To precipitate Mares, and
to bring it into a red powder, called Crocus martis, the which serves for
diverse purposes. eod. A secret of Turpentine of Ciprus. fol. 64.
FINIS TABVLAE.
HOW THAT OUR PHYSIC AND Chyrurgerie is better, then that, the which the
Ancients have commonly used.
THere is no doubt, but that our new Physic and Chyrurgerie, is better then
that, ye which the Ancients have used: because it helps the sick with more
ease and speed, and much more safer, and to show the troth, the Auncie^ts had
never knowledge of our Dia Aromatico, nor of Electuario Angellica, nor of our
Pillole Aquilone, nor did not make our siropo solutiuo, nor yet our magno
licore, with a number of other medicines found out by me, the which are written
in the end of this book, with the which I have done wonderful cures, as thou
may read in my Thesoro de la vita humana, and truly most necessary for all
professors of this Art, because therein thou shall find so many goodly
experiences, and it would cause the world to wonder thereat. But to turn to
our purpose, I say that the Ancients the which had not knowledge of our
remedies, they wanted also knowledge of the true Physic, and Chyrurgerie, as
by ye experience thou may see, I say not this to speak evil of those wise
ancient Doctors, that were inuentours there-off, but I say it to say the
troth, and many shall be my testimony of this troth. Because in many countries,
where our work that are Imprinted are come, they begin to practice after our
order. And this order of curinge: I repute it not to my science, but a work
that God would reveal unto the world, through my means, and to show the
troth, there has been none, that has found the medicines for wounds with so
much ease and brevity as I have done.

Who has ever found the true Remedy for the Gout, for the Ouartain, for
Fluxes, and all sorts of Fevers, as I have done? or what is he yt ever brought
the whole Art of Physic and Chyrurgerie into.viij. small volumes, as I have
done? What is he that ever writ of the Pestilence, and of his qualytie and
remedies and orders to be used in the same, as I have done. And if there be any
that does not credit me, let them make experience of all that I have said,
and I promise you and swear as I am a true Knight, they shall find more truth
then I will write at this time, being as I have said, a work given of God, for
a universal benefit of all the world, and forasmuch I exhort every one of the
professors of Physic and Surgery, to follow this our truth, because they
are of so great experience, yt it seems miraculous unto man, as I have seen
many years ago, to my great honor, and satisfaction of the people of the
world, and thus doing and working, thou shall come to know yt our Physic and
Chirurgerie is more better and wholesome, then ye which has been used of the
Ancients until this present time.

Certain remedies, for all Capitaines and soldiers that travel eitherby water
or land.
THere are.3. infirmities, that offend the soldiers in the camp above al ye
rest, the which are these, Fevers, Wounds, and Fluxes of the body, the which
thou may help in this order following, with these medicines, that is our
Quintaessence of wine, our Balsamo, Magno licore, Quintaessencia solutiua, and
Specie Imperiale, and the order to use the^ is thus. When any has a fever or a
flux, then presently when ye disease begins, let him blood in one of the.2.
veins under ye tongue, cutting it overthwart, and this thou shall do in ye
evening, the^ ye next morning, take a dose of our imperial powder mixed with
wine, and this ye may do without any diet or straight order, that being done,
give him.3. mornings together, half an ounce of our Quintaessence solutiue
with broth. But if it be a flux, and that the Patient is not cured, let him
stand in a cold bath of salt water of the Sea.3. or.4. hours or more, and he
shall be perfectly help.

Then as concerning wounds, as well cuts as thrusts, and as well gallings with
arrows, as hargabush shot, and other sorts, thou shall cure them thus. The
first thing that ye shall do to them, is to wash them very clean with urine,
and then dry them well, then put there-in our Quintaessence of wine, and
presently join the parts together, and sow or stitch them close, then put
there-vpon 5. or.6. drops of our Balsamo, and upon the wound lay a cloth wet
in our Magno licore, as hot as he may suffer it, and this ye shall do the first
day: Than the next day follow this order: First put thereon our Quintaessence,
and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very hot, and never
change that medicine, and thus doing the wound shall heal with great speed,
and in a quarter of the time, that the common Chyrurgians is able to do it, by
the grace of God.

A short discourse of the most excellent Doctor and knight, Master Leonardo
Phiorauanti Bolognesse, upon Chirurgerie, with a declaration of many things
necessary to be known. Never written before in this order, where unto is added
a number of notable secrets found out by the said Author.
The Proheme.
IT is to be understood, that when the Almighty creator had made ye world,
he also created all manner of beasts, as well on earth as in the water, with
other fowls, after which says the holy Scripture, he created man after his
own Image and similytude, and to him gave power over all things created, and
with the same, grace and reason. Through the which he was apt to rule and have
knowledge of all through the spirit of God, as to have knowledge of al things
whereunto he gave his mind and understanding, as it is at this present to be
seen among men in the world that have knowledge of diverse and sundry
things, all necessary for those that will live in the world with honor: For
some understand the art of husbandry, which was the first art used in the
world, for so much as without it we cannot well live as it is plainly seen.
There are other that have knowledge in keeping beasts of all kinds apt or meet
for man's body, as Goats, Kyne, Hogs, Hens, Geese, Horse, Mules, and such
like. There are other that have knowledge in Navigations, without ye which also
the world would be vnperfet, as it is seen by experience. There be other that
have knowledge in Cosmographie, whereby they know diverse parts of the world
whether men may travail. There be other that have knowledge in the art of
wars, whereby they may help to defend their Prince and countries, in
executing of justice. There be other that understand Astrology, by the which
they know ye course of Planets and their effects: Other understand the
Mathematica, whereby they measure land and all other things: Other study
Music, to accord voices together, and other understand Physic to help the
diseased bodies of human creatures, and also annymales of diverse and sundry
infirmities. There be other that understand Chyrurgerie, to help al manner of
sores yt happen unto men: upon which Surgery, we will write a brief discourse
and pleasant reason, and will leave apart the science yt is doubtful, because
there is no science in the world wherewith a man may do good if therewith be no
practice or experience, as a man may say. The which experience is master of all
things, as it is plainly seen, and therefore we will give you to understand
which of those parts be best or most necessary in this Chirurgerie, either to
help those that are hurt, or the science, or experience. And we will show the
mere troth without any dissimulation or fraud, as I have always done in my
works which are Printed, and at this present do intend to do, if almighty
God give me grace, and quicken my spirits or wits in writing that which shall be
to his honor, and profit to the world.

TO THE Reader.
Having taken upon me to write a brief treatise of Chirurgerie, in the which I
will write the mere verity, and that with as much brevity as may be, because
the troth occupies but little room, for the Philosopher writes that the
troth is such a light as all men do hide, covering it with diverse abuses, as
the Poets many times do: for when they write one of their tales they go about
to hide it, and thus to our purpose. Those that write great volumes cannot
choose many times but hide the troth, for in much matter there enters both
good and bad, and therefore I will write no more then is necessary, declaring
what Chirurgerie is, and in what order it should be used with all his
accidents, showing what wounds are, with Impostumes and ulcers, how they
engender, and when they are engendered, how to cure them and disolue them. A
discourse which will please many because it is only troth, and of great
importance: Let every one therefore know that science with experience do apeare
to be one thing, and at this present every one is certain thereof, that the
experince of Physic as well as of Chirurgerie, cannot be good without science,
or Method, as a man may term it. But I say that experience is better then
Science, in these two arts, that is in Physic and Chirurgerie, for science
only shows the virtue the which may be done with practice that has no
theorike. Of which I have written sufficiently in my Capricy medicinalle,
Imprinted at Venice, and that this which I write is troth, I will prove it, for
I say, that noe can help with the only Method, but always it is necessary
that there be some experience or practice therefore those that do delight to
understand, let them follow this my short treatise, in the which I will
entreat of things most necessary to be known, and will show how easy it is
to work in that art, declaring all the dificult matters, so that every one may
see and perceive it plain, and afterward I will show how to make many new
medicines, as well for wounds, as for the other sorts of sores, which have not
been used neither of old Doctors, nor of new: the which remedies are of such
virtue and strength, that the world will wounder at them for their notable
quick working, and hereafter I will write what Chirurgerie is.



WHAT CHIRVRgerie is.
CHIRVRGERIE is both Science and practice, and to say the troth he that will
know the composition of man's body, must of necessity have some science, and be
Anatomist, although the same Science be a thing to be learned by practice,
for I have seen many times those which were unlearned to be expert in the
Anatomy of man's body, and those were paynters and drawers, the which was
necessary for the^ to know to frame their figures accordingly: and therefore I
take not that for science but practice, for science is only that wherewith
the causes of every infirmity is found out, and is of small effect to our
purpose, because Chyrurgerie helps not only the cause, but also the effect
after it is known, and therefore I may say that Chyrurgerie is no other then a
pure and mere practice, and that it is only necessary for the Chyrurgian to
know how to stich a wound well, to mundifie an ulcer, and to keep it from
putrefaction, and keep it from alteration, so that there run no evil humors
unto the place offended, and to know all kind of Unguents that are apt to
heal al kind of wounds and ulcers, which thing must be known by practice.
And likewise to make all manner of Unguents necessary for Chyrurgerie, and for
that cause I conclude most truly, that our Chyrurgerie is only practice or
experience. And that which causes me to believe it, is, that I have always
seen the most part of Chyrurgians, when they should have any case in
Chyrurgerie, they knew not what Unguent would help the sore, cut many times
they prove this, and that, and so continue until they have found one, that is
convenient for the sore, whereunto it is applied, and therefore this is a
certain sign, that they know not by Science there medicines to help the
sore, but with experience they search it. Therefore if it be so, it is a sign
that I have said the troth, and so conclude that Chirurgerie is a practice to
help sores on men's bodies, and also on beasts, when occasion shall serve.

What Wounds are.
Wounds are those which in Latin is called Vulnus, and of the vulgar Vulnere,
and they are of two kinds, that is, simple and compou^d. The simple are those
that are only in ye flesh, the compound are those where are cut sinews,
veins, muscles and bones, and these are of diverse and sundry kinds. And the
difference that is among them is, by the variety of the place where they are
wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt, for some
go right, some ouerthwarte, some long, some broad, some are thrusts or
stocate, that offend diverse parts of the body. The simple are of small
importance, because if ye keep them clean and close shut, nature will heal
the^ without any kind of medicine. But those where veins are cut, have need
of some Art or practice, with the which they may stop the blood, and in any
wise not to suffer ye wound remain open, but to sow it up very close, so
that the vein may heal. Also those where sinews are hurt are of great
importance, and would be healed with great speed, so yt the sinews may join
with more ease. But those where bones are hurt, are of greater importance,
for if the bone be separated from the other, of necessity it must be taken
^^rth, before the wound be healed. So that by this means every one may know
what wounds are, and their kinds.

Of Vlceres, and what they are.
Ulcers are of diverse and sundry kinds, and are engendered of many causes, as
hereafter I will show. But first I will write of those kind of Ulcers that are
caused of wounds. You shall understand that wounds in what part of the body
soever they be, being impostumated, or cancrenated, they change their names,
and are no more called wounds, although the original was a wound. For when it
is cancrenated, it is called Vlcera corasiua, because it goes eating and
creeping on the flesh. But when the wou^d is impostumated and full of matter,
it is called, Vlcera putrida, that is putrified, and it is because it is
filthy and stinketh. But when it is neither cancrenated nor yet apostumated,
but that through some evil disposition the wound is closed, and that there
comes in it evil qualyties without alteration, then it is called Vlcera
sordida, because therein is evil qualytie, and it appears but a little, but it
is evil to heal. There be other sorts of ulcers also, the which are caused of
diverse and sundry kinds of tumors, and the most evil and mischeuous, are
those that are of tumors caused of the pocks, for unto those there runs
abundance of evil humors that augme^t the ulcer, and they be the worst sort,
for they can not be healed by themselves, except the body be well purged and
euacuated of all the humors that are offensive. There is another kind of ulcer
the which comes of an Impostume, as well hot as cold, and those are more
gentle and easy to be helped, if ye know the medicines that are apt to help
and dissolve those kind of ulcers.

These are the three kind of Ulcers that commonly happen unto men and women
through diverse causes, as it is said before, so that these are the principal
causes of those malign ulcers.

Of Impostumes, and their kinds.
IMpostumes are a certain kind of tumor that is called in diverse manners,
because they come in diverse places of ye body, as those sorts of Impostumes
that come in the groyne, which in Venice is called Pannoche, in Rome Tencone,
in Naples Dragonselly, in Spain Incordi, and the Ancient called them Buboni,
and some with other names. There are other that come in all parts of the body,
and when they come they cause great pain, and then they ripen and break of
themselves for the most part, and these in Naples are called Autrax, and in
Rome Chicolini, in Venice Un nasito, in Lumbardie Un bungo, and in Spain Un
nacido mui viliaco. There is an other kind of Impostume, that is ingendered of
a contusion or broose, and is properly called Apostumato pro Amacatura. In the
head there grow certain kinds of sores that are called Talpa or Topinare, ye
which are of small importance, for they may be healed in short time, as it
is seen in childrens heads yt are often troubled therewith, and also in their
throats, and for the most part about the ears.

Of Fistoloes, and their kinds.
ALl manner of sores that do not cicatrize perfectly and have communication
with the inward parts, are called Fistoloes, and we term them in Italian Sofio
or Spiraculo, as ye may see by experience, and this is perilous when a
Fistoloe closes, being in the body and specially those fistoloes that are in
the fundament, for Nature her self does engender it for ease. But these
fistoloes that come in diverse parts of the body are troubleso^e, but not
perilous, also al such sores as tarry long before they be incarnated come to
fistoloes, and many times it comes through long curing, by tenting with their
tents, the which are cause that nature makes a Callow and leaves the sore so
hollow, that it will never be filled with flesh, but so remain hollow, as it
is seen easily by experience. There be other sorts of fistoloes in form of a
sore, and they be those sores that most commonly come on the legs, the which
do purge a long time, and are also very hard to heal, because if ye heal one
of them presently, there will rise another hard by it, and that is a kind of
fistoloe. There is another kind of fistoloe that is caused of those sores that
are upon the bone, the which by his continuance do break and consume the skine
and the bone, and these many times remain fistolated, but who so takes away
the cause of the sore, nature it self will prevail mightily and heal it, as
may be seen daily by experience, in those that be so troubled. The fistoloes
that come in the eyes, are called Fistola Lacrimosa, and they have some
communication with the inward parts, and are evil to be healed. Because first
the cause must be taken away inwardly, and then nature will heal it by it
self, as I have seen by experience, so that these are the kind of fistoloes
most known unto all men, and the causes of these fistoloes are two: and for my
part I am fully persuaded it is so. The first is of wounds evil healed, that
remain Fistolated. The second cause I find to be of sores caused of the pox,
and to show a troth, ye shall cure them of the Pox, and their fistoloes will
heal of themselves without any other help, as it is daily to be seen:

There may be many other causes the which as yet I know not, but these two are
a sufficient reason, and to be considered of the professors of this art, if
they desire to come to any excelencie: and therefore I will reason no more of
the matter, because the science and my experience will reach no farther.

Of all sorts of scabbes.
THere be diverse kinds of scabbes, but I will only entreat of those in
which I have had most experience, and will set them forth as plain as I can,
that every one thereby may have profit. The first kind of scabbe is that
which is caused of Riplexione of the body, by eating much meat of great
nourishment, and then not to digest it, so in that cause nature to ease it
self, sends forth that humiditie, and when it joins to the skin it
ingroseth and causes an Impostume, and passing to the outward parts it is
already corrupted, and so causes the Pustules, as by experience may be seen,
and this kind is a viscous and fat humor with great humiditie. There is
another kind of scabbe that is always dry with readnesse, and is small, with
great heat and itching, and the same in my judgment is caused by much heat
of the Liver and adustion of blood, and may be healed easily. There is another
kind of great scabbe, that has a great dry crust on them and they grow
big, and the same is of the french pox being new taken. There is another
kind like serpigo that goes creeping, and has a dry crust, and has no
matter under it: and the same is also of the french pox Inueterated. There are
also diverse other kinds, the which I will leave at this time, because they are
of small importance, and may be helped with those medicines which are fit for
the kinds aforesaid.

Of Formicola and his effects.
THose kind of ulcers that are commonly called Maldi formica, are so called
because they are a kind of maling Ulcers and corosiue that goes creping upon
the flesh, and makes many holes that are lifted up on the sides and are red,
and these for the most part are caused of the pox as may be seen by
experience, and those sores are evil to be healed, because thereunto runs
abundance of humors, the which cannot be resolved but with inward medecines,
that is, with exquisite purgations that purify the blood, and that cutteth
away the evil humors that run thereunto, and cause great alteration with
burning. This kind of sore comes many times in the head, and when it
comes in that part, it is called Tigna, or the white scalle, and to show
that this is the troth, ye may see that those medecines which heal Formicola,
does also heal the white scalle, for this is a kind of the pox, as by the
effects ye may plainly see, for if any should say the contrary, I would
answer him again that this may well be, because the same infirmity may be
taken in the mothers womb, or as soon as the child is borne it may take it
of the Nurse that gives it suck, if she be infected with that disease, so
that I conclude it may be so. But there are a number of that kind of disease,
which I let pass because I have seen no experience of them.

A discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores.
Wounds that are within the body, as in the stomach or belly or in
Testinalles, in the bladder, raines, or guts: The Milt, Liver, Lungs, Heart
or other muskles or Arteres, as there be a number, I confess to know nothing
therein, and I will show you the reason, you shall understand that when a
wound does offend the interior parts, the Physician, or Chyrurgion or great
Anatomist what so ever he be, cannot know all those parts offended in the
body, for after the weapon is with-in the body, it may turn and with the
point hurt other parts a far off the wound, and offend diverse particular
parts one different from the other, and therefore I beseech you excellent
Chyrurgions, when such a case comes, how do you know or discern which parts
are hurt, but to say yt troth, I believe in that case they know al alike, but
what should I say of ye cure of such a wound, if the Chyrurgion know not where
it is, nor of what importance, but works by imagination, and if that nature
does prevail, and that the wound does heal, it is by the good fortune of the
physician, so yt for wounds inwardly I conclude no other at this time, but will
leave it to those that know more then I, and hereafter I will discourse of
ulcers and impostumes inwardly what they are and how to cure them with our
order: ye shall understand that there are a number of kinds of ulcers and
impostumes that may engender inwardly, but it seems to me so hard to
understand, that I can determine nothing that were true, and the cause is this,
that we have seen an infinite of Physicians and Chyrurgions that have visited
one Impostumated or Vlcerated, and the Physician could not know the place,
and particular of that impostume or ulcer, if that the patient do not tell him
and show him, and cause him to feel with his hand, and this is most true, and
therefore if one cannot resolve him of outward things that he may see and feel
with his hand, how can he resolve him when one of those accidents is within
the body, where the patient knows not himself, which is grieved. Truly I
would gladly know what judgment they would give of that matter, for because if
there be any Impostume or ulcer in any part of the body, the sick shall feel
great offense and pain, nevertheless he cannot tell where it is, nor what part
is hurt, so that I conclude, if that the Patient know not, much less the
Physician knows, and of this I have made a large discourse in Caprici
medicinalle, for as I have said before, in this case I know nothing.
Nevertheless when it shall come to his place, I will write a discourse of the
order to cure the most part of Ulcers and Impostumes, but touching wounds, I
will promise no more the^ I have said before. Also I will write excellent
remedies of great experience, with the which all wounds, so they be not
mortal, may be helped and healed, and also the reasons convenient in that
matter.

An order to use in healing all manner of diseases apperteining unto the
Chyrurgian.
Wounds and all other sorts of sores, are of sundry and diverse kinds, as is
aforesaid, nevertheless the order to help them is not much different one from
ye other, if we should say only the troth without abuse. For ye shall understand
that Nature is the master of al things created, and the Physician and
Chyrurgian are helpers of that Nature, as the Ancient professors of the Art
have affirmed. Than seeing this is so, what need we to make so much ado,
having Nature that works so gently, if it be not hindered by the minister,
and therefore if we will speak of wounds, I say that the minister has three
operations to do, and no more, and the rest leave to nature that works gently.
The three operations that the Master has to do, are these: To defend the
wound so that there runs no humors to it, and that it putrify not, and to
keep it clean, and when the minister has done that, letto Nature work that
which she will work well, and if any desire to see if it will be so in effect,
ye may see by a dog, for if he has a great wound upon his body, he heals
it without any medicine, only with diet and keeping it clean with his tongue,
and this is most true, that those which do help wounds by inchauntment, do
nothing but keep the wound clean, and cause the patient keep a diet, and so
nature works as well on man as on a dog, therefore let none marvel of this
authority of a dog, although I approve the like of a Christian. But for so
much as it would be good to help Nature, that it might work with more
speediness, as husbandmen do and gardeiners, who because they would have
Nature to work the better and quicker in their ground, do cast there-on
diverse sorts of dounges, etc. The which is done only to help Nature to work
the quicker, and to conclude, I say that the Chyrurgian should do the same in
helping of wounds. But as for ulcers of diverse sorts, it were necessary to
find out the cause, because they come of diverse causes, for when ye cause is
found, it will be more easy to be helped, because ulcers cannot come but by
great distemperaunce of nature in our bodies, as by great heat or cold, or by
replexions of ye body. Therefore in this case it is necessary to purge the body:
first, to ease Nature which is offended, and to extinguish the superfluous heat
or cold that is in the body: That being done ye minister or helper of Nature
has three things to do. The first is to mortify or kill ye sore, the second to
mundifie, and the third to incarnate, and then nature will cicatrize it, and
these three operations are to be used in ulcers. Also Impostumes are caused of
diverse accide^ts, in the which it is also necessary to seek out the cause,
where-by to know what purgations are fit to purge ye body of the superfluous
humors, and then the minister has.3. things to do in yt case. First to bring
it to maturation quickly, then when it is ripe and broke to mundifie it well,
and thirdly to incarnate it, and these are the.3. operations that are to be
done in an impostume to help nature to work well, and so following this order
thy work shall prove well and go ye right way, as hereafter I will show in his
place ye operatio^s to use in ye effect with ye order to help the^, and also
to make thy unguents, showing their qualytie and virtue, and will prove by
reason those things that are doubtful, so that every one shall be satisfied in
that matter.

Of medicines to be used in all kind of wounds outward with ease and brevity.
Having declared what outward wounds are, it is also necessary to show ye
order how to cure them, with as much speed and ease as it is possible, and
therefore I will begin first with simple wounds yt are only in the flesh, without
offense of veins, sinews, or bones, although these need no help, but only
to join ye lyps close together, and if need be to stitch them close, and then
let nature work, ye which in short time will heal them, but if thou by Art
wilt help nature, thou shall anoint them with oil of frankencense once a
day. But wounds where veins are cut, have need of present help, and
artificial means and sufficient remedies to help it with as much speed as
may be, so that the veins cut may join again together, without any great
offense of the wou^d, and that is done in this order. The first thing is to
join the parts close together and stitch it well, not as the common Chyrurgians
do, but as they do use to stitch bags, and when it is stitched close,
annoint it only upon the wound with our Magno licore, and lay there-on a
cloth wet in ye same Oil very warm, then take Hipericon with the seed,
Millefolli, Viticella, Ana, and make theroff a powder, the which thou shall
strowe upon the wound being dressed, and round about it, for this medicine does
assuttiliate the matter that runs unto the wound, and takes it forth with
great ease and without pain of the wound, for this is the most suffereigne
medicine in that case, that Nature with Art may make, and has been proved a
thousand times by experience in diverse places. But those wounds where bones
and sinews are hurt, have need of great artificie and cunning, because they
be of importance. But when the sinews be only offended, it were necessary to
stitch them presently, as I have said of those where veins are cut, but not to
dress it with Magno licore, but in steed thereoff to take our Oleum
benedictum, and Oil of frankencense, of each a like, for those Oils do
exceedingly comfort the sinews that are cut, and when it happens that a
sinew has a puncture or is cut half way, in yt case it were necessary to cut
it ouer-thwart, because it shall bring no Spasmus to the wound, but if so be
than that the bone be hurt, and that there be any part to come forth: it were
necessary to leave the wound open, until the bone comes forth, and then to
incarnate it, and this thou shall do with our artificial balm, for the same
(...) for wounds, and lay thereupon the Cerote of Gualtifredo di medi, the
which heals it with speed, and so with these orders thou may help all the
aforesaid sorts of wounds, and the defensive to use in these wounds is this.
Rec. Aqua vitae made of pure wine and that will burn all away, and put therein
Hipericon, Millifollie, Viticella, Betonica, and then wet a cloth in that
infusion and lay it for a defensive round about the wound, and so thou shall
have thine intent to the great satisfaction of the patient. Wounds in the
head, are helped as those are, where the sinowes are offended, there are also
diverse other sorts of wounds which are helped with the aforesaid remedies.

To help ulcers of all sorts.
Seeing that ulcers are of diverse and sundry kinds, it were necessary to
know of what kind and quality they are, so that thou may help them in form
and order convenient, and first I will write of the corosiue vlceras of a wound
Cancrenated, mal di Formicola, and other sorts of ulcers that go creeping
upon the flesh. The cure of these kinds of ulcers is to apply quickly our
Caustike to mortify the evil, the which thou shall do thus, wette a little
bumbaste in our Caustike, and therewith wash all the sore, and then leave it so
open 24. hours without binding it fast, and when 24. hours are past, wash
the sore with strong Vinegar and water, of each a like quantity, with charge
that there remain none of the Caustike in the sore, then lay thereon butter
washed, with a coleworte leaf until the asker or dead flesh fall away, then
take our Cerote Magistrale, with a little Precipitate strawed thereon, and
their annoint it with Magno licore, and lay it upon the sore* for this (...)
helps al manner of coraliue ulcers without any other help, and every
plaster will serve three or four days, taking them off, every 24. hours,
and make them clean, and then lay them on again, and as for the filthy ulcer
that I have showed off in his Chapter, ye shall dress them only with our
Vngento magno. The which without any other help will heal them quickelye: But
ye must every four days touch them with Aqua fortis, drawn from
Precipitate, the which watter draws forth the offensive matter, and leaves
it purified and clean, and in all other sorts of Ulcers, our Balm
artificial, our Magno licore, Oil of Wax and Terpentine, the black Cerote
of Gualtifredo, di medi, our Cerote Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to
help, be they never so evil.

The order to be used in curing Impostumes of diverse sorts.
THere be many sundry kinds of Impostumes that comes to man's body, that
are caused, of diverse sundry accidents, and therefore must be cured by diverse
orders and with sundry medicines according to his kind, because some
Impostume is caused of a contusion or bruised flesh, some are certain grieves,
that Nature would discharge her self off, and so sends forth that matter,
some are caused of cold, other of melancholic humors, and other are caused
of corrupsion of the Pockes, and these are the kinds of Impostumes that
commonly come, and hereafter I will show the order to cure them, one after
another.

And first of those that are caused of a contusion because it is bruised flesh,
for every contusion must be putrified and brought to matter, therefore make a
Maturatiue and bring it to supperac^^^, and when you know there is matter,
presently lance them and dress them with this medecin as well within as
without, the which without any other help will heal any great contusion. But
you must make the Unguent fresh every day, and with new Eggs, ye shall mix
the youlke of an Egg with our Magno licore, and therewith dress them. And as
for those Impostumes that come by indisposition of Nature, are certain,
Sboryne, a word so called in Italian, by the which nature would prevail, it
were necessary to let those have their cures according to Nature, until they
break of themselves, and when they are brooken dress them within with this
Unguent. Rec. Oil of Roses, ounc. 6. Litarge of gold in fine powder, ounc. 2.
Storax liquida ounc. 1. Terpentine, ounc. 2. yellow Wax ounc. 3. mix them and
boil them on the fire until it be black, and if it be to hard put thereto
more oil of Roses, and make it in form of an unguent, and therewith dress
those kinds of Impostumes, and lay thereon the Cerote Diapalma, and therewith
will be wrought miracles. Also for those Impostumes caused of cold, ye shall
use hot medicines and ^tractiue: the Cerote of Oxicrocij is excellent in those
kind of impostumes, our Balm artificial, or the water, and such like things
as are temperate by Nature. But those Impostumes that have their Original of
the french pockes, are evil and maling, because their cause is ^^a^ing and
evil, and therefore their cure is with great purging, and to let the impostume
ripe of himself, and when ye lance it, dress it within, with our vnguento
magno, mixed thus. Rec. vngue^to magno, ounc. 2. magno licore ounc. 1.
precipitate ounc. s. mix the^ well together, and therewt dress yt impostume,
ye which will heal quickly and well, and lay thereon our Cerote Magistrale,
with this charge that in all the cures aforesaid ye purge the body well, so
that the humors run not unto the place offended, and use defensiues
according to the kind of Impostume, as Oil of Franke^sence, of Terpentine, of
wax, of hunny, Aqua vitae, al these are excele^t defensiues by themselves,
annoynting them round about the Impostume.

The order to cure all manner of Fistoloes.
FIstoloes as I have said before, are of diverse kinds, and caused of diverse
accidents, and so likewise they have need of diverse medicines, and first I will
write of those fistoloes that come of wounds evil healed, and that have made
a callowe in that order that nature cannot scicatrise and so remain
fistolated, and ye cure of these kind of fistoloes is to put therein a Rupture
that does cut and mortify the callow, and causes it to fall away, and then
with incarnating medicines, incarnate them and scicatrise them and this is the
true cure of these fistoloes. But those kind of fistoloes that nature causes,
to ease her self of some accident, commonly do come in the lower parts about
the fundament and they be very perilous, and not to be healed as they before
were. But they must be with purging the body, stomach, and head, the which
is to be done thus. First purge them x. or xij. days with our Magistral
Syrope, then give them our Aromatico, and drink thereon a little white Wine,
then purge the head with a perfume made of Mirra, and Cynaber, after these
things be done ye shall rectify the Liver with some decoccion fit for
that purpose, as of Lignum sanctum, or Salsa peryllia, or such like, that work
effect, for this medicine does also help Fistola lacrimosa, that commonly
come about the eyes, or ears. There be other Fistoloes in form of a sore,
which must be helped with purging, and lay upon the sore our Cerote magistrale
with Precipitate and anoint it with Magno licore, for with this Cerote only
may all fistolated sores be healed, for it does mundifie and afterward
cicatrize it, there be also diverse such like matters that are cured easily, if
ye apply thereunto those medicines that are appropriate.

To help all manner of scabbes.
THe kinds of scabbes be many, and caused of diverse causes, and their cures
are also diverse ways. Those that are caused of replection of the body and of
gross blood, ye which is caused by eating abundance of such meats as are of
great nourishment, ye which if thou will cure them, it were necessary to purge
them with our Siruppe Solutiuo.x. or.xij. days, then give him or her one dram
of our Aromatico in ye morning fasting, and drink ther-on a cup of sweet
wine, then let him sweat three or four times, and after anoint him with our
Vnguento magno two or three times, and it will heal him of those kind of
scabbes.

Now to cure that kind of scabbe that is red and small, and causes great
itching, you shall make a decoction of herbs that cool the liver and purify
the blood, as Borage, Buglosse, Endive, Mayden-haire, Liuer-wort, Hart's-tongue,
Agrimony, Citrach, Succory and such like herbs, then purge with Aloes, the
juice of Elder roots, Iera pigra solutina, and such like as does cool the
liver and blood, and then anoint them with Vnguento di Litargirio, and therwt
you shall help all those kind of scabbes. There be also certain great scabbes
over all the body, the which are very thick, and those are a kind of the
Pockes, the which may be helped with giving the^ our Pillole contra il mal
Francese, the quantity is according to the discretion of ye Physician, and
these Pills ye shall take three times every third day, and then annoint them
with our Vnguento magno, and he shall be helped. There is an other kind of scabbe
that goes creeping with a dry crust like unto petigine, and those are the
mere Pockes inueterated, and the order to cure them is thus, give them our
Sirop against the melancholic humor, because it purges the blood and cools
the liver, and dissolueth that viscous humor that ingendereth that crust, that
being done give them our Aromatico, and anoint them with our Magno licore, and
he shall be perfectly helped in shortt space. There are other kind of scabbes
that come through great cold, and those are healed only with annoynting them
with Oil of Frankensence three or four times.

To help Mal di formica.
THose be certain ulcers which go creeping in the upper part of the flesh and
have many orifices or mouths, and these are caused of the Peckes being
inueterated, the which are cured in that order that the Pockes is; and that is
this. First, purge the body with* our Electuario Angelica, the which purges
away gross and malign humors, and euacuateth the stomach of cholar and
fleame, this being done, cause the patie^t to sweat, for that will a subtiliate
the humors, and cause them to come forth, that being done, take our Cerote
magistrale and stroe there-on Precipitate, and then annoint it with our Magno
licore, and lay it upon the sore, and there let it lie.24. hours before ye
change it, then make it clean and lay it on again, for that Plaster may
serve four days, making it clean every.24. hours, and when the Plaster will
draw no more matter, you shall use our Vnguento magno, the which will help it in
short time. But if it do happen that this order do not cure the^, then it
would be necessary for them to be anointed with the unction for ye Porks, and
to annoint them so long til the mouth be sore, and when that sign does
appear, annoint them no more, for he will spit or vaper at the mouth, for
twelve or fifteen days, and as soon as he vapoureth, make a Bathe and wash
him well, and wash the mouth with wine and without all doubt it shall help
him God willing, now hereafter I will write of certain things which are
used of common Chyrurgians, with a brief discourse upon them.

Of the Towe which is laid upon wounds of common Chyrurgians.
THe pleggits of Tow which is laid upon wounds when they are first stitched is
made in this order. Rec. The white of an Egg, Salt, and Rose Water, and beat
them together, and when the wound is stitched, they lay it ther-on, because the
blood should stint, and the wound remain shut, so that it may be helped with
more ease. Now touching this, I will show the reason why they use it in their
first cure, ye shall understand that every like desires his like, to succor
him or keep company with him, and therefore the Ancient, our ancient
professors of Art, willed the white of an Egg to be occupied in wounds,
because it is a substance of flesh like unto the other flesh, and to declare
the troth I will prove it by natural reason, for ye shall understand that the
white of the Egg is that part which ingendreth the flesh, the skin, and the
feathers of the hen, and the yolke engenders only the guts and other
entrayles of the animal, then seeing the white is that which ingendreth the
flesh only, it is like unto flesh, as it is said before, then the salt is a
material which preserves al things from putrefaction, as is seen by
experience daily, and for that consideration it was put in this composition to
preserve the flesh, the Rose Water by nature is cold and dry, and by his
coldness defends the inflammation, and by his dryness is repercussiue and
mitigateth, so that these are the reasons why the said Tow is laid upon wounds,
but I would to God that such things were used as by their excellent operations
would help and heal from the beginning to the latter ending, and to leave of
such trifling orders.

Of the disgestiue with the which they dress wounds after the aforesaid Towe.
AFter that the tow is taken away from the wound they dress it with a
composition called disgestiue, because it disgesteth ye wound although this
medicine be some what scrupulus and against science, and the reason is this, ye
shall understand that when a man is wounded, the place before was sownde, and
therefore being wounded, our true duty is to help ye same wound and not to
digest or rotte it, as commonly all Chyrurgians do, for by rotting of it in
that order, it is perilous, and more dangerous to be cured, as is daily seen
by experience, and this no man can deny. But now I will follow our regiment
in showing what this disgestiue is, the which is made thus.

Rec. The youlke of two Eggs, Terpentine washed ounce 1. Oil of Roses ounce s.
mix them in an Unguent, and this is the disgestiue wher-with they dress it
until the sore have made quitter or matter enough, and then they use to dress
it with medicines much differing from the same, but I marvel much at the
diversity of this matter, that this disgestiue being applied to a putrified
ulcer, works diverse effects, for it heals it divinely: and moreover, ye
shall understand that if it be applied unto when they be incarnated, it will
scicatrise them meruailously, for truly these are things worthy to be
known, and he that understands the reason I account him to be wise, for if
this disgestiue be laid on fresh wounds it putrifieth and rotteth them,
again being laid on a filthy sore it does mundifie and heal, and then if it
be applied on a wound incarnated, it Scicatriseth it and heals, for this I
have done diverse and sundry times, the which is to be woundred off.

Of the mundification unguent wherewith they dress the wounds after they are
digested to mundifie them.
WHen wounds are come to digestion and that they purge, always they change
unguents, and they apply Vnguentes that have virtue to mundifie the wound and
make it clean, so that it may the better incarnate, and that unguent is called
properly a mundificatiue, the which is made of Barley flower and is the
mundificatiue they use 8. or 10. days to-gether for if the wound were not
well mundified, it would never incarnate-well so that this unguent is most
necessary in that operation in respect of the ingredience.

Of their incarnatiue wherewith they dress the wound after it is mundified.
WHen that the wound is mundified, so that, thereunto comes small quantity
of matter, than it is necessary to apply vnguentes that incarnate, so that they
may cicatrize with more ease, and this kind of incarnatyue is in the most use
among the common Chirurgions, the which is made of Terpentine, Wax, and
Franckenscence, and a little Oil of Roses mixed of the fire, and this is their
incarnatiue.

A rare secreate, the which this author did send unto a very friend of his,
being in the wars in Africa, the which helps all wounds, either by cut,
thrust, galling with arrows, or hargabush shot, or otherwise.
THe first thing that ye shall do is to wash the wound very clean with vryne
and than dry it very well, then put there-in our Quintaessence of wine, and
presently join the parts close together, and stitch or sow them well, but in
any wise sow nothing but the skin, for other-wise it would cause great
pain, then put thereon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the
wound lay a cloth weate in our Magno licore, as hot as he may suffer it,
and this do the first day, then the next day follow this order, first put
thereon our Quintaessence and a little Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very
hot and never change this medicine until he be whole*

Of those unguents that Cicatrize wounds.
THe unguents that cicatrize wounds after they are incarnated be of diverse
kinds, although they work one effect in cicatrizing or causing a skine. The
digestion that is written off before, being applied upon a wound incarnated,
it does cicatrize it with speed, the like does Diachilon and vnguentum de
tutia. The Cerote called Gratia dei, although these be sundry compositions one
differing from another, yet in effect they serve all to this cicatrization as
ye may see by experience, and this they do because they be temperate and of
good qualities and so they help nature to work more quielitier, and they are
called helpers of nature. But these kind of unguents that work by
themselves, as Vnguento Apostolorum, the Causticke, Aegyp^^atum, the rottery
and such like unguents as work with violence, and suppress nature, and do
that which nature cannot do by it self without help, but all those vnguentes
that are not violent, neither in heat or cold, are apt to cicatrize wounds,
and all sores, that are mundified and incarnated.

A remedy to help a wound with great speed, of our invention.
Wounds of diverse and sundry forts are very perilous of life, but to help
them quickly because the patient may take no harm, ye shall use this secret,
wash the wound with our water of balm, and cleanse it well, and lay thereon
clothes wet in Oil of Frankencense made by distillation, and therewith thou
shall heal any great wound in short time, as I have proved diverse and sundry
times, in sundry causes.

An excellent secreate to heal wounds of Gunne shot or Arrows without any
danger.
IF thou will help the aforesaid wounds it were necessary first to join the
parts close too, and wash it with our Aqua celestis, and lay thereon our
Oleum balsami, and therewith thou shall save the lives of many wounded persons.

A discourse upon old wounds that are not yet healed and their sovereign
remedy.
WHen that wounds are euel healed and that they impostumate, and that the
arm, or leg, or other parts where they were wounded is indurated and full
of pain, thou shall use this secret of our invention never known before of
old nor new writers, for it is of great virtue and many times proved: first
ye shall wash the wound well and make it clean round about, then wash the
wound with our Quintaessence, and make it to fume, because our Quintaessence
does open the powers, and asuttiliateth the matter, and causes the humor to
come forth, that being done, annoint it al over we our Magno licore, and thus
doing, before three days end he shall feel great ease, and in short time it
shall be helped because this medecin takes away the hardenesse and heals
the wound, and comfort the place offended.

To dissolve a broose in short time, when it is new done.
THese are called contusions, unto the which nature sends quickly great
quantity of humiditie, and in that place, it causes Impostumation: But if our
Chyrurgians would be dilygent and quick, all contusions might be helped with
great ease in short time, and therefore if thou will work miracles in yt cure,
use this our means, and it will turn to thy great honor, and the remedy is
this.

Rec. Lyquid Vernish, pound.3. Yeolow wax, ounce. 4. Common ashes, ounce.6.
Aqua vitae rectified, pound. 2. Put all the afore-sayd matters in a Retort of
glass, and distill it with a gentle fire until all the substance be come
forth, the which will be Oil and water, the which ye shall separate, and
keep them, and when occasion serves, annoint the broose therewith and lay
ther-on a cloth wet in ye same, for this is a miraculus medicine experimented
and proved by reason, for an experiment without reason is as a man without
clothes, and therefore if thou will know great and rare secrets never written
before, look in my Spechio del scientia vniuersalli, and in my Thesoro del
vita humana, and there-in thou shall find strange things, proved by reason
and experience, the which books God willing, I mean to set forth in the
Englsh tongue to the profit of my Country.

To help a wound quickly that is in peril of any accident.
Wounds in some parts of the body are very dangerous of life, and specially
where sinews be cut or pierced, or veins or muscles hurt, or bones broke,
and by an infinite of other particulars, which being open or evil healed, the
patient may be in danger of life, because the wind enters in, and they
cause paintes and inflammation, and therefore to avoid all these afore-sayd
matters, so that the wound shall have no detriment, use this remedy. First
join the parts close together, and put ther-in our Quintaessence, and lay
there-on a cloth wet in our Balm, and bind it falt that the air get not in,
for it is very hurtful, ye shall understand that these are two of the
excellentest medicines that may be found, because our Quintaessence does
assuttiliate the blood, and takes it forth, and takes away the pain, and
the Balm does warm and comfort the place offended, and will not suffer any
matter to run thereunto by any means, for this is most true, as I have
proved diverse and sundry times, and always have had good success.

To stop the flux of blood in wounds with great speed.
When there is any great flux of blood in wounds by reason of some ^^eyne that
is rut, and that the Chyrurgians would shop it, it were necessary to stitch it
well, but not as the common Chyrurgians do with wide stitches, but stich it
very close and hard, and put ther-in our Quintaessence, and upon the wound
strew the blood of a man dried in powder, and lay upon the blood a cloth wet
in our Balm artificiaill, very warm, and upon that bind the wound with
ligaments very straight, and every day twice, wash it with our Quintaessence,
and round about annoint it with our Balm, and also cast ther-on our secret
powder for wounds, and that do morning and evening, every day without opening
of the wound, and in that time the wound will remain well, and the-veynes will be
in a manner healed so that they will not bleed, giving you charge that the
wounded man-keepe no diet, because ye virtue being weak, ^elaueth the veins,
and that causes the flux of blood.

An other remedy to stay the slux of blood in a wound.
WHen there is a great slux of blood in a wound, the perfectest remedy, is to
stitch it very close, then take man's blood being dried and made in powder, and
cast it upon the wound, and bind it somewhat straight, and so let it
remain.24. hours and when ye unbind it, take heed that ye remove nothing,
and cast on more dried blood upon the wound* anoint it round about with our
Oleum Philosophorum de Terpentina and Caera, and bind it up again other 24.
hours, and then bind it gently, and annoint ye wound with Oil of
Frankensence, and so in short time it will be whole, giving, thee great charge
that ye put in no tent or such like, and then thou shall see miracles.

Of our Cerote magno, that helps against all sorts of sores and wounds.
THis Cerote is of great virtue, and heals all manner of sores and wounds if
it be spread on a cloth and laid there-on, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Galbanum..1. Ammoniacum..2. Oppoponax..2. Aristolochia longa..1. New
wax.. 18. Five Mirrha, Olibanum, Verdigrese, ana..1. Bedellin..2. Gum of the
Pr^in^ tree.. ^. Lapichemarites..2. Terpentine, Frankencense, of each.. 4. Oil
of wax.. 3. Beath all those that are to be beaten, and searce them finely, and
keep every one by himself, then dissolve the gummes in distilled Vinegar,
according to Art, and then vaper away the Vinegar again, and strain the
gummes through a cloth, then take the wax with as much sweet oil and melt them
on the fire, and when they are melt, put thereunto ounce.2. of Litarge of gold
finely searced, and stir them continually until it be boiled, the which ye
shall know by this token. Put a feather there-in, and if it be boiled enough,
it will burn straight ways, or else let it boil until it burn it, then take
it from the fire and let it cool a little, and than put in the gunns and stir
them well together, and set it on ye fire again, and it will rise with a great
noise, and therefore let it boil until it do fall down again, that take it from
the fire and put thereunto all ye aforesaid powders, and stir it until it be
cold, and therewith thou shall work meruaylous cures, if it be made well,
according to Art.

Of our magistral Unguent that helps diverse sorts of sores.
THis Unguent is appropriate for many kind of sores because it comfortech the
sore and takes away the pain and draws the matter from the lower parts or
bottom of yt sore. The which matter is cause of the pain, it keeps it also
from accidents, giving you charge that it be made artificially, for other-wise
it will not be of so much virtue, and this is the Unguent.

Rec. Litarge of gold, ounce.4. Oil of Roses, pound 2. Boil them in a Copper
pan so long, as if ye put a feather there-in, it will burn it, then it is
sodde, then put there-to of new Wax, ounc. 6. Storax liquida, ounce 2. common
bunny, ounce 3. then let it boil a while until they be well incorporated, the^
take it from ye fire, and put ther-to Olibanum, Mirra, Mercury Precipitate,
Oil of Wax, Oil of Terpentine, Oil of Frankensence, ana ounce 2. mix them
well till they be incorporated, then put thereto pure rectified Aqua vitae,
ounces 4. and mix them well, and then it is ended: and this is of my
invention, wherewith I have done very strange cures.

To make Oil of Frankensence.
TAke a retort of glass, well luted, and fill it half full of Frankensence,
and for every pound of Frankensence put thereunto ounces 3. of common Ashes
finely serced, then distill it in sand, and the first that comes forth will
be water, the which will be clear, then increase the fire, and there will come
forth an Oil of the color of a Rubye, the which keep close in a glass,
the first water is of merueilous virtue in diverse operations, but one
myraculous experiment I will not leave to write off, because it is a thing
very necessary, and is this. For those that have chilblanes, or kibes, or
chophes in the hands or feet that comes through cold, ye shall first
perfume the parts that are sore over the fume of hot water, so that they may
sweat, then dry them and wash them with the aforesaid water, and put on a
pair of gloves, and in short time they shall be whole, it helps also the
white scall and scabbes, and such like things. The Oil serves in many
operations, and specially in all cold diseases, if they be inwardly, give
thereof every morning one scruple to drink, and if they be outward annoint.
Also it helps all manner of wounds be they never so great.

If ye annoint them therewith, and keep them close from the air: And in any
wise use no tenting to keep them open but wette a cloth therein, and lay it
thereon, and in short space they will be healed, also it dissolueth a broose in
short space if ye annoint it often therewith, this oil serves also for
painters to make vernish.

Of Oil of Wax and his effect.
THis Oil of Wax is merueilous excellent, for so much as it serves for the
most part against all diseases: which Oil Raymond Lulli does approve to be a
more heavenly and divine medecin then human, and is most rare for wounds,
but it is not good for common Chirurgions because it helps a great wound in
x. or xij. days at the most, but as for small wounds it heals them in 3. or
4. days annoynting only the wound therewith, and lay there on clothes wette
in the same. Also this oil works miracles against diverse diseases inwardly,
if ye give theroff one drame with white wine, and as for those whose heaire and
heard do fall away it is a rare thing and of great profit, and the order to
make it is thus.

Rec. A retort of glass well luted and put therein what quantity of Wax you
will, so that it be not half full, and for every pound of Wax put thereunto
4. ounces of ye powder of bricks, then set it in a forneyes, and give it gentle
fire until all the substance be come forth, the which oil will be congealed
hard, the which is his perfection, for if you will distill it so many times
that it congeale no more, it will be too hot and sharp, and not to be used
within the body in any wise, but the first distillation you may use safely
inwardlye and make Vncions for any kind of disease where need shall require,
and always it will be good, and do no hurt in any wise in any disease, and
therefore this Oil ought to be had in great regard of all men.

To help the tooth atch, that is caused of rotten teeth, or that comes of a
dissension of the head.
THe teeth being rotten or corrupted always causes great pain and many times
it comes of a dissension from the head and such like humors as Cattars,
Erisipella, but let it come of what cause it will I will show a remedy of
great importance, and it is very short, ye shall take our Aqua realle and hold
it in your mouth a good white and then spit it out again, and this ye shall
do for three days together every day once, then afterward it were necessary
to wash your mouth in the like manner with our Aqua balsami for the space of a
month, and so the tooth atch shall be taken away with ease, for this is our
secret and may be used in all times of the year.

Against a stinking breath.
THe breath may stincke through many causes, as by ulcers in the mouth or by
corrupt and rotten teeth, and sometime it comes of the stomach, and that is
evil to be helped, and therefore if thou will help these thou must use diverse
remedies, and first to help those that have their mouths vlcerated, ye shall
give them a quantity of our Pillole aquilone, and then let them wash their
mouths with our Aqua realle, and so the ulcers shall be helped, and the mouth
shall not stincke. But when the stench comes of rotten teeth, use the
aforesaid remedy or medicine that is written, for the tooth atche, the which
will make the teeth as white as snow, and will acke no more, but when the
stincke comes from the stomach, it were necessary to purge the body with our
Sirope Solutiuo, six or seven days, and then to take our Aromatico, that
being done, take rectified Aqua vitae and ye water of hunny and Oil of
Terpentine of each a like, mix them well together, and every morning drink
thereoff, ounce s. fasting, for the space of a month or there about.

To help those that have a great cough in the stomach.
THe cough does come of diverse and sundry causes, but let it come of what
cause it will, it always offends the stomach and the head, for always
when the stomach is offended of necessity the head is offended, because it
has communication with the stomach, so that the stomach is cause of the
pains in the head, and therefore it is necessary to help the stomach first,
and that thou shall do with our Pillole aquilone the which is written in this
book following, and if so be you cannot take pills, take our Aromatico, this
being done, if there be no fever, give him every morning 1. ounce of our
electuary magistrale per la toss, and every night annoint his stomach with
Magno licore, and also his head and nostrelles, but if it happen that the
aforesaid things help it not, then take blood of the Liver vain, and purge
the body with our Sirope against the melancholic humor, and so by the grace
of God they shall remain healed.

To help those that can-not hold their water.
THis proceeds of two causes principally, the first is of superfluous heat of
the body, through ye which heat, nature does assuttiliate too much that humid
part, and continually does send it down into the bladder. The second cause is,
that the powers are too much relaxed or opened, by the which operation the
urine does pass without retention, and these are the two causes why the urine
can-not stays, and this comes commonly to young children, because they are
very hot of complexion, and the order to help them, is this.

Give them our Pillole Aguilone three times, the quantity is from one dram, to
one and a half: that being done, ye shall make them a decoction of Hisop of
the mountain, and put ther-in sugar, and this they shall use.x. or.xij. days
at the least, for this mundifieth the place offended, and disposes it to
solution. Then after this is done, ye shall give him for.x. days together
half a dram of Masticke with a little Plantaine water, for this is hot and
restringeth the powers, and ingrosseth the Vryne, and so the Patient shall
remain whole of that infirmity, by the virtue of the afore-sayd three
medicines, and it is a very easy cure and sovereign for that purpose. But
some-time there happens a flux of vryne somewhat like this, and it is not of
the afore-sayd causes, but of causes much different from them, for this is in
men and women of age, and this I find to be caused of the Pockes that causes
the flux, and they void certain threads which some call Gonorea, and the
remedy there-off is only with great purging and sweating, and then to anoint
them five or six nights with our Vnguento magno, and keep them warm in bed
until ye have ended to annoint him, and then go to the stowe, and he shall be
helped of that infirmity.

To help those that can-not make water.
THe vryne is stayed through diverse and sundry causes, and the principal are
three, of the which one is the stone that inge^dreth in the bladder, for
always it hangs down in the neck of the bladder, and stops the Meat^ or
powers that the vryne can not pass, the which grieueth the patient
meruaylously. The other is caused of grauel or gross and viscous humors that
cannot pass the powers, and so cause that retention of vryne with great pain.
The third is caused of an obstruction or restriction of the powers or
cunduites, where the vryne does pass, and so keeps the vryne with-in, with
great pain so that these be the three chiefest causes of the retention of
vryne.

The cure of the first cause which is the stone, is to purge them well, and
then to use our most sovereign remedy that is written in this book
following, the which is of great virtue to break the stone, as I have proved
many times, but when this medicine is not able to break it, then it is
necessary to cut it forth, and this is all concerning the first cause.

To help the second cause, it were necessary to use purgations that purge the
reins well, and then to give them our Aromatico, and then to annoint the
reins six days every day once with Vnguento magno, and with this medicine
thou shall help him perfectly.

To cure the third cause it were necessary to purge with aperatiue things, and
then to annoint his reins and under the members and belly with our Balm
artificial, and give him to drink the powder of Hog lyce or Centum pedes,
that are found under stones, and by the grace of God he shall be perfectly
whole.

To help those that have great burning of their urine.
THe burning of the vryne may come of diverse and su^drye causes, but I find
four principal, of which one is ye stone in the bladder being great or small.
The second cause is a certain heat ye which corrupts the place where it
passes and caryeth forth as it were certain long thrids the which causes
that burning. The third cause is a certain viscousnesse the which holds to
the botome of the Vrinal, and it will not well break, and this is called Gonorea.
The fourth cause is certain fluxes of Urine caused of some kind of the Pockes,
as ye may see by those that use company with evil women and take harm, for
presently this burning comes, and therefore this shows me plainly to be
the Pockes that causes that burning of vryne.

But if thou will help the aforesaid four causes thou may do it with ease
having the true Art of a good Physician, and the remedy of the first cause
coming of the stone, is to take it forth of the bladder.

The second cause, is to be helped with purging with our Siropo solutino, and
then after that, to use our oil of Vitriole compound taking thereoff every
morning.1. ounce, and so they shall remain helped.

The third cause is helped with taking every tenue days a quantity of our
Aromatico, and so with this only remedy they shall be helped.

The fourth cause is helped with medicines appropriate for the Pocks, and to
annoint them with Vnguento magno.

To help those that have great pain of the Gout.
THe Gout is a corrupt and malign infirmity, and properly engendered of
corruption, as it is plainly seen in those that are troubled therewith, and
to prove it to be true, Nature does show it well, because you may see how great
the alteration is of that accident, and seeing that humor is caused of a
windy humor and alteration of the blood, as is seen by experience, I believe
the same disposition has his original and beginning of the stomach, for so
much as all those that are troubled with that disease, the first sign that
appears unto them, is a great pain in the stomach.3. or 4. days or more
before the grief comes, and then the pain increases exceedingly, so that
by the said sign, I judge this accident can-not proceed of other place then
the stomach, and to affirm it better, ye shall understand that those which
are troubled therewith, can find no better remedy then to euacuate the
stomach from all corruption, and therefore if thou will help them of that
accident, the first thing yt ye shall do is to give them a quantity of our
Aromatico in the morning fasting, and drink there on a little white wine, that
being done, it would be necessary to make a fomentacion with Nettells, that
be well boiled in water, and then to annoint them with our Balsamo
artificiato, and so for that time the Gout will be gone, and will remain away
for a long time.

But if God permit me life, I will hereafter set forth the order to help the
Gout, that it shall never come again, with a certain order to be observed in
the same, found out by this Author, and has been proved an infinite number of
times in diverse places, and on diverse noble men as ye may well understand in
his Thesoro della vita humana.

A remedy against the pestilence, that preserves those that use it.
THe pestilence is a certain corrupt humor ye which is cause of the evil
disposition of the air that is corrupted, and poisoned, and it is so
contagious that in 36. hours it corrupts the body, and causes them to dye,
and therefore if any will defend them from that infection they may do it by
the help of God and the Physician with these medicines, the first thing is to
confess our selves unto almighty God, and to pray heartily unto him, and then
as concerning Phisical medicines, three things are to be used, which may save
the lives of many. The first thing is to euacuate the stomach, the second to
sweat, the third vnccion. And touching yt first, ye shall use every 3. days
our Pillole aquilone for they euacuate the contagiousnes and will not let it
corrupt the body. For the second ye shall cause them to sweat by
artificial means, for that euacuateth a certain matter very apt to corrupt.
And the third is to annoint all the body with our Balm artificial, for that
preserves the body, and defends it from the contagiousnesse, so that by
these 3. means men and women may be preserved from that violent death.

To help Pellaria, that is a disease which causes the hair and bearde to
fall away.
THis Pellaria is a certain kind of fantastical infirmity the which we by
practice do know ye cause, the which is by using company with women corrupted
with the pockes, and by the same practice we see that those whose hair does
fall away, do fall into great infirmities of the pockes, although not all,
yet the most part, and therefore if thou will help that accident, it were
necessary to purge them with our Siropo Solutiuo, 8. or 10. days together,
that being done, give them our Aromatico, and then annoint the place where the
hair is fallen away every evening with our balm artificial, so that with the
use of these three medicines the patient shall remain perfectly whole of that
matter, because the sirope purges the whole body universally, and the
Aromatico purges the stomach and the head, and the Balm comfort and
defends the place where the hair is fallen, so that it shall fall no more,
for this I have proved an infinite of times. You shall understand that there
be two other kinds of Pellaria the which will not be helped in the aforesaid
order, for the one comes of a great fear, and the other comes because they
have had Mal di massuca, and their heads be corrupted by that means, and for
these two I know no remedy but to let nature have her course.

To help a Carnosite in the yard.
THe Carnosite that comes in the yard hinders the vryne so that it can-not
pass, and grows in the mouth of the bladder, and is a kind of matter
engendered in that place, the which is much like unto an Emerode that comes in
the neck of the intestine about the fundament, and because it is a gross and
vlcerated matter the urine passes with difficulty and great burning, the
which is very painful, unto those that have it, but if thou will help that
inconvenience it were necessary to purge the body well, and to keep a diet, and
to drink the Decoccion of Hipericon made with hunnye, and use to eat dry
meats as much as is possible, and then make certain little Wax Candles of
Wax and Frankensence, and then make this unguent.

Rec. Read lead ounce 1. white hunny ounce 1. butter two ounces, white Wine
as much as will suffice to incorporate them in a liquid form, on a soft fix,
and then take ten quilles that has blood in them out of the winge of a
young Pigion that is fat, and therewith stir the unguent when it boyleth, and
when one quill is dried take another, and so change them until the Wine be
consumed, and then it is made, and when thou will occupy it, take one of the
said Candles of Wax and upon the end put of this unguent, and put it into
the yard until it touch the Carnosite, and this thou shall use day, by day
until the Candell pass without any impediment, and then the patient shall be
helped, for this is most true, and I have proved it an infinite of times to my
great credit and content of the patient.

To help the white scall.
THis disease being so odious, is a corrupt humor the which is not only in
the head as many do think, but it depends of the inward parts and has
communication with the head, and this humor is like unto the Fume, for
continually it vaporeth up, and when it can assend no more because it is
hindered in the skin, then it setleth and ingrosseth and causes the head to
break forth in that grievous order as is seen. But I will show a secreate to
help it, so that it shall never come again, and the order it thus. You shall
give them our Siropo Solutiuo 8. or 10. days together, that being done give
them our Pillole Aquilone three times, the which pills must be taken every
three days once, that being done, take Sinaber finely beaten, two ounces,
Olibanum, Mura, ana one drame, mix them together, and divide it into 5. parts
and make thereof five perfumes in five mornings, and cover their heads with a
cloth so that it touch not the head, then let the powder be cast on by little
and little until it be spent, upon a chasing dish of coals, and so let them
stand covered one hour without moving, and this do every one of the times,
that being done annoint the head for the space of a month with Oil of Wax
and Terpentine, and they shall be helped, for this is a remedy that cannot fail,
for I have proved it an infinite of times, in Palermo, in Mesina, in Naples, in
Rome, and in Venice, and always I have had good success to my great credit,
and profit of the diseased person.

To help those Caruolli that come upon the yard, and their causes.
THose Caruoli that come upon the yard, are of diverse kinds, as by reason
and experience thou may see, but ye most part are taken by using ye company
of lewd and corrupt women, infected with the pocks, and those are the worst
kind, for they are the first original of ye pockes, and of those caruolli come
Pannochie or botches, and certain great scabbes, Pellaria, aiches, and tumors,
and an infinite of other evil effects and these are ye first kind. There are
another kind the which commonly come of their own accord by reason of heat,
and those are easy to be help, and are not perilous or paynefull. There is
an other kind, the which is as though it were scorched or burnt, the which
comes through debilytie of the yard, and having company with women, and these
are also of small importance.

The first kind are certain Ulcers that come upon the end, and some upon
the proper substance of the yard, and some upon the skin, and the order to
cure them is thus. Ye shall mortify them with-in and without with our
Causticke, and when they are mortified, ye shall dress them with our Magno
licore, and they shall be whole quickly.

But ye shall well note, that many times after they are healed before.xv. days
do pass, there will come a certain alteration in the throat, so that they
can scarce swallow their meat, and this alteration many times endures viii.
or x. days, and than it resolves by it self, and that is a certain sign of
Pellaria.

And therefore if thou will avoid that inconvenience that the hair fall not
off, as soon as ye feel any of the a afore-sayd griefs, then presently take a
quantity of our Electuario Angelica, and then take our Siropo magistrale.4.
or.5. days, and annoint thy head.x. or xij. days with our Magno licore, and
so by these means thy hair shall not fall. Because our Electuario Angelica
does euacuate the stomach, and cleanses the head, and dries up the matter,
the which is already alterated by that diseases. Also our Siropo magistrale,
does euacuate the body, and purify the blood, and slaketh the furye of the
disease. Our Magno licore preserves the hair from drying and falling.

There commenth many times, after those Caruoli are healed certain Impostumes
in the groyne, of the which we will speak off in an other book particularly.
The other kind of Caruolli that come upon the yard, are help only by
washing the^ with some bath that is restrictiue and comfortatiue. The other
kind which is like scorching or burning, are help by keeping them clean, and
annoynting them with a Liniment of Tutia camphorata.

And thus I make an end, giving to understand to those that practice, how
that they may avoid that disease called Pellaria or falling of the hair or
beard, for this is one of my secrets, where-off I mean to write a great number
if God permit me.

A discourse of those sores that come of the Pockes, and how to help them
quickly.
THe Pockes as I have written of diverse times, being a putrified and corrupt
disease, the sores coming there-off, of force must be of his nature, that is
corrupt and stinking, therefore if thou will help them and take away their
pain quickly thou shall use three operations, the first is to give them our
Pillole Aquilone, and then to wash the sore with oil of Sulphur, and then lay
ther-on our Cerote magistrale, with Precipitate, and annoint it with Magno
licore, and therewith thou shall help the^ quickly, because those Pills are
appropriate for that disease, and the oil of sulphur draws forth the filth
from ye senter, and the precipitate draws forth the gross matter, so that of
force it must heal.

The cure of one that had the Pockes in his head.
BEing in Naples, among al other that I cured, there came unto me a Spaniard
called Il signor Diego di Menas, a man of the age of.36. years, of complexion
choleric aduste, the which had the Pockes, and in his forheade he had a
certain tumor the which had perished a great part of the skull, and was open,
and he had been taken in hand of diverse men, and none could do him good, I
seeing that took him in hand, and gave him our Siropo solutiuo.8. or.9. days
together, afterward I gave him our Aromatico, and the^ gave him the roots of
Cina in decoction, and then perfumed him with Olibanum, Mastick, Mirrha, and
Scinaber, and so by these means he was help of ye infirmity, but the bone
remained bare, and I laid ther-on our Cerote magistrale, and so in short time,
the bone did separate of his own accord, and one day I took it off
altogether, and was so great that it covered the fourth part of the head, than
presently this signor Diego went abroad, showing what was taken from his head,
as diverse can testify.

The cure of a wound in the head and in the hand.
THere was a certain Gentleman called Gionan Iacopo Veniciane, the which had a
great wound on the head, and in one of this hands, the which being taken in
hand of diverse Chyrurgians, was brought to a very evil case by reason of great
alteration in the wounds, and the Physician that had hm in hand, was one
called Realdo polumbo cremense, the which dressed his head with Wine and Oil,
and the hand with Turpentine and Oil of Roses. Than I being in company told
him, yt it were good to change those medicines, because in wounds of ye head,
those medicines were not convenient, for ye oil being crud putrifieth, and the
wine is repercussiue, and will not suffer the putrefaction to come forth, that
the oil ingendereth, and for that reason the said medicine would not be used.

And as for the medicine for his hand, I say that the Turpentine is not
convenient, for where there is offense of skin, veins, sinews, and bones,
Turpentine is not good, because it is hot and putrifactiue, by means of the
Oil, and causes inflammation, and therefore it ought not to be used.

But if thou will help the head and hand both, ye shall use a kind of
medicine that comfort the place offended, and that does assuttiliate the
matter and incarnate, to the which the said Realdo answered and said, my
reason was good, if I could find remedies that will do that effect, the
which I sent for to my house, and used them in this order.

First, I did put our Quintaessence into his wound in the head being cold, and
then a little of our Balsamo cold, the which seemed strange to Realdo, and
then I laid there-on our Magno licore, and upon the cloth I laid a little of
our secret Powder, and the like I did to the hand, and so in.14. days the
wounds were whole, to the great marvel of a number.

A great secret particular for the flux, and dissenteria.
THe fluxes of the body are no other but a distemperaunce of Nature, and are of
two kinds, the one is caused of an evil qualytie and distemperaunce of the
liver, and that is called Flusso epatico. The other is caused of great heat,
Fever, and distemperment of Nature, and this is called Disenteria, that is, a
distemperment of the guts, and both these sorts are hard to be help of the
ancient doctors, as it is well seen by experience, of those that practice,
for they will help them with repression and restrictiues, but that is not the
way if we shall believe Galen, the which writes, Fluxus Fluxus curat, the
which is most true, for I have cured a thousand of the flux with giving them
our Aromatico, and three or four dosses of our Siropo Solutiuo, therefore
Galen says true.

But the Disenteria is cured with giuinge them our Electuario, Angelica, and
then every day after dynner stand in a bathe of water of the sea cold, two
hours at the least, and so in this order thou shall help any crud kind of
Disenteria in short time and with great ease, use this as a secreate.

The cure of one that was poisoned with Arsenycke.
THere was a certain man poisoned with Arsenycke given him in a mess of Ryce
pottage, in an euyning at supper, and as soon as it was in his stomach he
began to groan and sweat, and vomyte, in such order as it was strange to
see, and it happened that at the said time there was a learned man in the
house, who seeing this man in that case susspected him to be poisoned, and so
sent for me, and when I came, the poor man was all-most dead, then presentlye
I called the wife of the house and told her that her husband would dye, and
that she should have the Law for poysoninge of him, but if that she would
tell him what poison she had given him perhaps he might recover him again,
with many words more, so to conclude she told him that she had given him
two graynes of Arsenycke in Rise pottage, then presentlye I called for a cup
of Sack, and caused him to drink, and then he vomyted and went to the stool,
and then I anointed him with our Oil of Hiperecone, and Scorpiones, all the
body over, and still caused him to drink that he might euacuate that poison,
but all his mouth and throat remained swollen, and he did spite great
abundance, and I caused him to use that vngnent, and every morning gave him
Theriacle with wine and every three days, I gave him a quantity of Pillule
Aggregatiue, and last of all I caused him to use Aqua vitae compounde, and so
ere forty days he was perfectlye whole, and rydde of a terryble disease the
which he had a fore he was poisoned.

The cure of an Vlcerated leg.
THere was a certain man of the age of six and thirty years, of complexion
cholerike and sanguine, the which had his left leg all vlcerated, in such
order that the Physicians and Chirurgions of the city would have cut it
off, but in any wise I would not consent thereunto, but took it in hand,
and gave him first our Magistrall Sirope, in the morning eight or nine days
together, and in the mean time I washed the leg with Wine where-in was
boiled Mallows, Consolida maiore, Cardus benedictus, and Hunny, and then wette
clothes therein and laid them on twice a day, than I caused him to use a
decoccion of Lignum vitae and the bark with Iua artetica, Cardus benedictus,
Pollipodi, Ripontico, Wine, and Sugar, and his common drink was wine and water
boiled on the festes of the same, and this he used four and twenty days than
I perfumed him with Cinaber three times, and ere three months were past he
was perfect whole, for his disease came of the Pockes, and those sores are
commonly called Mal di formica.

The cure of the gout on a certain Gentleman.
IN the aforesaid year, in the month of August I was called to visit a
noble Gentleman called Ill seignor Don Christofalo della roca, a man of five
and thirty years, of complexion chollerike and sanguine, the which was sore
troubled with the gout, and because it was in the beginning of August, our
ancient Doctors have for bodden to take any solibell medicine in that time.
In respect of the Caniculare days. Nevertheless I called Armellio, and
Leonardo Testa, two excellent Physicians, the which gave their counsel to
take no medicine, never the less I proved that the gout was extreme whote,
and for that I ordained a cold Sirope to mittigate the superfluous heat, the
which was made of Lyuerworte, Hearts tongue, Dates, Raysons, Figs, Sugar,
and Succorye water, and Aromatised it with Musk and Rose water, of the which
he took every day four ounces, and for the alteration of the gout, I
washed it three or four times a day with our Aqua del Balsamo, because it
penetrateth and opens the powers, and a suttiliateth and dries the humor
offensive, also I ordained him bread of Barley, because it coleth the blood and
is of good disgestion, and caused him to refrain from all fat brothes and his
drink was temparate, and to this one of the Doctors did agree, but the other
would not, never the less the Gentleman was content with my advise, then I
began to give him the afore-saide decoccion, with our solible Quintaessence,
and there with he had every day two or three stools, and I washed the gout
three or four times a day with our Aqua Balsami, and the first day he began
to feel ease, and the second he felt more, so that in seven days all his
pains was taken away, and then I applied thereunto our secreate of secreats,
for that kind of disease, the which in three days delivered him: then I
caused him to use certain medicines to defend the gout for coming again,
and so he continued whole to his great satisfaction.

Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may help it.
THe Sciatica is a disease so called, because it comes in that place of the
body called, Sio, and is caused of an evil qualytie and gross humores, that
are stayed in that place, because they cannot pass down, and this is seen by
experience daily, for where that pain is, there is alteration, and the cure
thereof is with Glisters, Vomittes, Purgations, and Unctions, because the
Glister does euacuate those places next unto it, and so eases the humor, the
vomitte cleanses the stomach, the purgaciones do euacuate the body
downewardes, the unctions dissolve the wind, and so by these means thou may
help the Scyatica, as I have done many times to my great honor, and
satisfaction of the patient.

A most excellent remedy to help the flux of the body, with a certain
discourse there-on.
IF thou will help the flux of the body, it were necessary to know first from
whence it proceeds, for he that knows not the cause, is less to be
credited to cure the effect, and therefore I will show thee what the flux is,
and from whence it comes, and then I will show the order to cure it, also to
make the medicines.

The flux of the body is caused of a superfluous heat conceived in the
stomach, the which make a continual solution inwardelye, as ye may see by
experience of those that are troubled therewith, for so long as the cause is
not taken away, all their meat does turn into that matter, the which if it
be so, that is true which I do say, that the fluxes are a distemperance of
the body, caused of hot and corrupt humors in the stomach, and therefore if
thou will cure it, it were necessary to extinguish the heat and to take away the
corruption, the which thou shall do with the redness of Mart Militare,
written in this book following, for that is the most sovereign remedy that
can be found. But first ye shall take twelve graynes of our Petra
Philosophalla, with half an ounce of Mel Rosarum, and then take for four
mornings together one scruple of ye rednes of Mart, with half an.. of sugar
Rosat, and ther-with thou shall work miracles,

A discourse as concerning corns in the feet or else where, with their
remedies.
THis callowes matter, is a certain hot humor, of the which Nature would
discharge hir-selfe, and when that humor is driven forth of Nature, it goes
unto the lower parts, into the end of the toes, for in that extreme part of
the toes, that skin that is called Epiderma, is hard, and will not suffer it
to pass or exalare, and there many times it ingendeth a tumor in the skin
with great hardness, and many times that tumor does increase and cause such
pain, that it does not only hinder their going, but hinders them from sleep
in the night, and this kind of tumor is called commonly Callo or Corns in
English, and I thought it good to call them Creste, because they are always
growing, and is of great importance among the Chyrurgians, for an infinite
number of persons are troubled therewith, and therefore I will show thee our
secret to help them quickly, and with great ease, which secret was never
known before of any. First, ye shall pare them with a sharp knife until the
bottom, and there ye shall find a certain thing like matter, but if ye find
no matter, ye shall pare it until ye blood does appear, than touch it once with
oil of sulphur, and then dress it with our Balsamo artificiato, once a day
until it be whole. Keep this as a secret.

Of an infirmity of importance that comes upon the extremity of the toe,
upon the nail.
THere are many men that are troubled with a certain infirmity under ye nail
of their great toe, the which seems as though ye nail grew in the flesh, the
which is not so, but the flesh grows over the nail, and although this
seems to be a thing of nothing, and that the Ancients have had small
consideration theroff. Nevertheless it is an infirmity of great importance,
and to be considered of, because many are troubled therewith, and specially
men of authority, and in specially those that are troubled with the Gout. I
call to remembrance, that in the time that I was in Naples, I cured a great
number, and specially those that were of great authority, to my great honor
and profit. The first thing that I did I cut the nail on yt part which was
grieved, and took it away the which was done easily and with little pain, the
which thing being done, I touched it with our Caustike, and so let it remain
three days together, an than I dressed it every day with our Magno licore
until it was whole, the which was in short time.

A discourse upon the Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most
excellent medicines of our invention.
THe Hemerhodes are a certain kind of evil tumor, caused of the blood in the
veins Emorodiale, and these come always in the extremity of the Intestinals
about the fundament, and some of them cause great pain, and some of them do
burn excessiuely, or do scald. The which comes through the quality of the
good and evil humors. As ye may see by experience how yt some have such burning
yt they cannot rest in the night, the other have such pain that they cannot
sit, ye other are so scalded that they cannot abide it, ye shall understand
this infirmity is more paynefull in one complexion than in another, and the
cure there-off is difficile. Nevertheless it may be cured, and the order is
this.

First take our Aromatico, then take our Siropo solutiuo three or four days,
then take our perfume three or four times on the fundament, that being done,
annoint the place with our Balm artificial, for that dries and takes away
the pain altogether, and so the Patient shall remain perfect whole.

There is also a great secret in the tooth of a Horsefish if it be worn on a
man's finger, to take away the Hemerhodes, the which tooth I have known proved
at the least.7. or.8. times, for I have a ring made theroff and have used it.

A great secret to help those that are burst or have the Rupture.
THis is rare secret, never known before of any man, and in specially for
those that have not been burst long time, and that the Rupture has not yet
made a callow, and the order to cure it, is thus.

First ye shall give them our Aromatico, every ten days once, and every
morning fasting give them one ounce of fine Tartar beaten in powder with water
or wine to drink, and lyke-wise in the evening two hours before supper give
him as much, and his bread shall be Biscuit made of Rye, also he must wear a
trusse made fit for that purpose, and use this remedy.

Rec. Rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, ounce xij. Rosen of the Pine tree
that is dry, Ohbanum, Masticke, Sarcocolla, ana ounc. semis. Mix them
altogether, and with this water wash the Rupture every day twice, and then cast
there-on presently the powder of a herb called Bislingua and Balsamina, ana,
and than wet a cloth in the said water, and lay it there-on, and bind the
trusse very hard, and keep thy house with as much ease as thou may and
strain not thy self in any wise, and thus with-in.100. days thou shall help
any great Rupture, keeping the aforesaid order.

A rare secret and divine, to help those that are troubled with the spleen.
THe Mylte is alterated and comes hard, by reason of a superfluous humidity,
the which it receives, by the evil disposition of the liver and longes, and
therefore if thou will help it, it were necessary to use medicines abstersive
and drying, and to give them our Aromatico once, and then to use this
electuarye, the which is of marvelous virtue, in that operation.

Rec. Squamma ferri one ounce, Scolopendria, one ounce, Spignarde, Lapis
Lasuly, ana, two scruples, Sinamon, ounce half, beat them fine and make
thereoff an electuary with purified hunny, according to art, and ther-off take
every morning a spoonefull, and as much at night, two hours before supper, and
annoint ye place where the Mylte lies, with our Balsamo artificiato, and so by
the grace of God and means of these medicines, thou shall be helped quickly.

A another great secreat to help the spleen with great speed
THe Mylt as is a foresaid, is grieved through abundance of humiditie he
which it receives, and therefore thou must only seek to dry that humiditie,
and for that purpose, I will show thee 2. great secreates, wherewith thou
shall work miracles, and are of great reason and experience. The one is to be
let blood under the tongue in one of these 2. veins: that is, on that side
where the Mylte lies, that being done, ye shall take Mustarde and myxe it
with the urine of a boy, and lay it between two clothes, and lay it on the
sore place one night, and than if it be not well, use it still until it be
helped, for this I have proved an infinite of times.

The cure of a certain Spanyard called, Carabasall di Cordonet the which was
troubled with the Pockes.
THis soldier being of the age ot two and thirty years, was myghtely
troubled with the Pockes with extreme pains and sores, among the which he had
all his thigh so eaten away as though he had been gnawen with dogs, with
most extreme pain, and the way that I cured him was thus. I gave him 12.
graynes of our Petra Philosophalle, with Sugar Rosate, the which caused him to
vomyte and to euacuate downe-warde, of the which he found great ease, that
being done, I prepared him our decoction of Lignum sanctum solutiue, the which
is written off hereafter, with a certain drink made with wine and Lignum
vitae, and this he used five and twenty days, and then I anointed, him with
our vnguento Magno, and in the space of forty days he was perfectly helped to
the sight of all men.

The cure of the stytch in the side with retention of vryne.
THere was a certain gentleman called, Marco di Chiuffune of the age of six
and thirty years, the which was troubled with a terrible stytch in the side,
and had proved many medicines and none did him pleasure, the which after, I
took him in hand, I gave him our Aromatico, and after that the pain slacked,
than I caused him to annoint all those parts with the Oil of Nutmegs, and the
Oil of Eggs mixte together, and so he remained quite whole, for in this order
I have cured an infinite of persons to my great honor.

A cure of a certain Spanyard wounded in the head in Naples.
THere was a certain Spanyard called Zamora, of the age of four and thirty
years, of complexion cholorike and sanguine, the which was wounded in the left
side of the head, with inscicion of the bone, also ye shall understand, that
in Naples the air is most evil for wounds in the head, by reason that it is
so subtle, and for that cuase the doctors did fear the cure, nevertheless I
dressed him with out Magno licore, and Balsamo, artificiato, keeping the wound
as close as was possible, annoynting it only upon the wound, and so in
fourteen days he was perfectlye whole, to the great wonder of a number, of
Chirurgions of that city.

The cure of a certain gentleman that had Mal di formica.
THere was a certain Gentleman Neapolitan, the which was called Ill signior
Giouan Francisco Gaetauo, of the age of 38. years, the which was meruailously
tormented with a sore arm and a sore leg, called Mall di formica, and he was
of complexion cholerike and melancholyke, and these sores went creeping upon
the flesh, healing in one place and breking in another, and in his arm he had
nine sores, and in the leg fourteen, and this Gentleman had sought help
the space of 2. years and could find none, and had twice taken the diet, and
yet could find no help, the which Gentleman I took in hand, and the first
thing that I gave him was this, one ounce of Gerapigra Galenie with twenty
grains of our Petra Philosophalle, the which provoked both vomitte and sege
diverse times, that being done, I gave him our Siropo Solutiuo, xij. morninges
together, that being done I gave him a medicine with our Petra Philosophalle
and Eleborus niger, the which caused him also to vomit and purge downe-wardes,
that being done I caused him to make a sirope of Lignum sanctum, and the bark,
Iua Artetica, and Cardus benedictus, in the which I put seven pound of wine,
and one of Sugar, and then I caused him to make a drink with water, wine, and
hunny to drink continuallye, and that I caused him to use five and twenty
days, and then I anointed him with our Vnguento Magno, five times without
fire, the which unguent caused him to spitte a boundance of filthy matter, and
at the last it caused him to spitte blood, then I caused him to make a bathe
the which is written in our Regiment of the pestilence, called the joyful
Jewel: I laid on the sores our Cerote Magistralle, and thus with in 38. days
he was perfect whole.

Certain cures that this author did when he travailed into Afryca.
IN the year 1550. he travailed into Africa, and there he was chosen by Il.
S. Don Pietro di Toledo vicere di Napoli, to be Physician unto the camp under
Don Gracia his son, and so in the year.1551, in the month of May he
departed from Naples with all the army of the Emperor, Carolo quinto, D.
Austria, and so having a prosperous wind, arrived in Barbary by a certain old
city called Monasterio, and there gave an assiege, and took it, without any
remission or ra^soming, and made slaves of all those that were left alive, and
it remained utterly destroyed, but not without great mortalytie of our
Christian soldiers, and beside those that were killed, there was a great
number wounded the which were brought into the Gallyes, and carried to the I Will
of Sicilia in a certain city called Trapano, the which say they, was builded
by a great Idolater called Tarpos, and there in the hospital those wounded
persons were left, with certain Chyrurgians that were under my jurisdiction,
and with certain medicines of my invention, and so in short time the most
part were help, and then the army returned unto Naples again, and refreshed
them with new men and victual. And then on the.15. of June, we set up sail and
sailed, and when we were in the midst of the goulfe between Naples and
Palermo, there happened a great misfortune, the which was thus.

In the Galley of Signor Giordano Captain general of the Galleyes of the Duke
of Florence, it happened that he being at the table with diverse captains and
gentlemen, and as they were at dinner, a certain Captain being grieved with
an other, multiplied words, and took a loaf of bread and threw it at his
face, without any reverence or respect of the said General S. Giordano. That
being done, the said General rise from the table and took him by the bosom,
and gave him 5. stocados in the breast the which pierced within the body, and
there he fell for dead, that being done, the said General repented himself
of his rashness, and presently sent for me being in the Gally of Don Gracia,
to come and dress him, and so my General caused me to do with all dilygence,
and when I came, this poor Captain lay as though he had been dying,
nevertheless I dressed him with great dilygence, and the medicines which I
used were these. First I put in to the wounds, of our Quintaessence, and upon
the wound I dressed it, with ur Balm artificial, and gave him a vomit, the
which caused him to cast great quantity of blood, and then every morning I
gave him half an ounce of our Aqua Balsami, and thus within two days after we
arrived at Palermo, the Captain was perfect whole, to the great marvel of a
number. After that we departed from Palermo, and went to the city of Trapano,
where the rest of the galleyes were, and there continued.4. days, and then on
Saint John's even, we went to an Island called Fanignana, and there keept the
feast of Saint John, and then we departed with all the army, and went on the
side of Africa, and on Saint Peter's day we landed in the Gardens of that
city, and there began to offer battle, and there remaining about.24. or.25.
days, the army began to be infected with a certain kind of flux,
where-off a great number dyed, every day. My Generalll seeing that, called
me, and asked if it were possible to find some remedy for that flux, unto
the which I answered willyngly, and said, I would devise by the help of God
some remedy, because it was my duty, as well as for th health of the
soldiers of the Emperor, the which thing I did in short time through the whole
camp: as I will write hereafter in the next chapter.

The cure of the flux, wherewith I help the Army of the Emperor in Africa.
BEing as I have said before in ye camp, where they were meruaylously tormented
with a flux, and many dyed there-off, and could find no help, although they
had medicines. Than I which had the experience in hand, began to laugh to my
self, and the remedy wherewith I help them all, was this. First, I caused them
to eat well, and tha^ on ye morning, I gave them a vomit, and then every day
after they had eaten, I caused the^ to go into the water of the Sea, and there
to remain 4. or.5. hours, and so doing with-in.4. or.5. days they were
help, for I swear as I am a Knight, that if I had not been there, the whole
army had dyed of that flux, for of.14. or.15. thousand that were there, there
was not left, 2. thousand but they were infected with tha flux or
distemperaunce of the liver, caused of superfluous heat, the which heat
distempereth the stomach, and causes ye continual flux: ye shall understand
that our vomit does euacuate the stomach of the putrified humor, and the salt
water cools the heat, and restrains the flux, so that by these means they
were help.

A goodly remedy found out by me, for wounds in the head.
Wounds in the head, were very perilous in that place, so that if a.100. were
hurt in the head, it was not possible to recover.x. and that came through two
things, the which were much contrary in that region, for the day was so hot, yt
it burned all things, and the night to the contrary so extreme cold, that it
was intolerable, and not to be credited, and so by this diste^perance when
Craneum was uncovered that ye air might touch it, presently they dyed without
any help, than I seeing that, began to consider of the matter, desiring to
find some mean to help them, and so studying, it came in my memory, that the
air was cause of their death, as it was in troth.

Than presently I commanded all those Chyrurgians that were under my
jurisdiction, yt they should not meddle with any wound in the head without my
presence, the which thing was done, and as many as were wounded, the first
thing yt I did in steed of cutting or launcing or discovering, according to
the common order, I joined the parts and sowed them close and dressed them upon
the wound with our Quintaessence, and with Balsamo and Magno licore, and so in
short time the most part were help, and there dyed none so desperate as they
did before, and therefore to my Judgment, this was a good invention, and never
used of any before, and this order of curing is very natural, for Nature does
show it in herbs, plants, and stones, how that they cannot stand dis united:
then much more our flesh cannot stand dis united, without great torment of
the Patient, for until it be joined together again, it is impossible to be
help, then seeing that is true, it is most natural for the wound to be joined
together, and to use those medicines that where they be applied, will not suffer
the humor to come thereunto, nor putrify the place that is hurt, and seeing
it is so, as by experience is seen, we must believe this to be a natural and
most wholesome remedy, so that I affirm that the joining of the parts of the
wound in the head and other parts of the body, is most souereine and of great
satisfaction to the sick, for they never feel pain, nor have no fever nor
other sort of accident, for of those I have cured a great number with good
success.

The cure of one that had his nose cut off, and set on again.
IN that time when I was in Africa, there happened a strange case, and that
was thus.

A certain Gentleman a Spaniard that was called Il Signor Andreas Gutiero, of
the age of.xxix. years, upon a time walked in the field, and fell at words
with a soldier, and began to draw his weapon, the soldier seeing yt,
stroke him with the left hand and cut off his nose, and there fell down in
the sand, than I hapened to stand by, and took it up, and pyssed thereon to
wash away the sand, and stytched it on again very close, and dressed it with
our Balsamo Artificiato, and bound it up, and so let it remain viii. days,
thinking that it would have rome to matter: nevertheless when I did unbind
it, I found it fast conglutinated, and then I dressed it only once more, and
he was perfectly whole, so that all Naples did marvel there at, as is well
known, for the said S. Andrea does live yet, and can testify the same.

The cure of an arm of S. Giordano Vrsino.
AT the same time, the said S. Giordano Vrsino, and S. Antamo Sauello Romano,
and S. Astor Baglione, with diverse other, took their horses, and ryd about two
miles from the camp, and there perceived certain Mores on horseback, the
which did assault these gentlemen, and one More with his lance, did thrust
through the arm from ye elbow through the shoulder, then the said S. Giordino
returned to the camp with great pain, and presently I was sent for, and when
I had seen it I put therein our Quintaessence, and upon the wound I laid our
Balsamo and Magno licore, and bound it strait, and so left it, and in five
days it was whole and sound, and than went to the assault most valyantly, as
many can testify, because he was general of Firenze.

A great chance that happened at the assault in Africa.
AT the same time, there was a Gentleman Florentine that was with ye said S.
Giordano Vrsino, that was called Milllematti, the which fought with his sword
and target, and defended many shot of Calyuers and such like, at the last one
persed his targette, and stroke him upon the breast, and bruised him
merueilously, and yet broke no skin, and therewith all he fell to the ground
for dead, and the caryer of dead men or Becamort, as they call them, would
have buried him in a mine, I then being present caused him to be brought to the
tent of S. Astor Baglione, and there I put our Quintaesse^ce into his mouth, and
that caused the blood to liquifie and come forth at the mouth, and laid upon
his stomach a plaster of Ashes and Oil, as hot as he could abide, and that
I changed morning and evening, and always I gave him of our Quintaessence to
drink, so that in short time he was help, and yet lives in health: and this
was one of the most straungest things that ever I saw, that a pellet of a
Calyuer could not break the flesh, and that came by certain words that the
said Millematti did carry written upon his breast, as he persuaded me
afterward for the said. In verbis, and in herbis, and in lapidibus sunt
virtutes, etc.

The cure of wounds being poisoned, and of other sorts.
WHile that wars dured in Africa, many times the Christians were poisoned
with venomous Arrows and such like, for the Mores commonly when they fight
against the Christians, they stycke the heads of their arrows in a Squill and
poison it with the juice, and when those arrowe heads or other weapon goes
into the flesh of a man, it causes so great burning that it brings Spasmus,
and so in short time they dye. And until this time there has been no other
medicine found, but to cut away all the flesh that the weapon has touched, or
else to cauterise it two or three times with a red hot iron, to exstinguish
the venom, but I through the grace of God have found the true and perfect way
to help them quickelye and with great ease, and without detriment of the
wounded, and the remedy is this, ye shall put our Quintaessence into the
wound, and lay there-on our Magno licore, the which are two medicines that
kill the poison of the Squille, and therefore if any will prove this to be true:
To see the experience, take a peese of a Squilla, and scratch it with thy
nail, and then put thy finger into thy ear, or scrach any other place that
ye may touch the flesh, and presently thou shall feel a terribell bourning,
and to quench it, presently take of our Quintaessence, and wash the place
therewith, and presentlye the pain will cease, and therefore use this as a
secret, for therewith I have cured a great number.

A remedy found out by me against the poison of a fish.
WHen that I caused so many sick of the flux to go into the sea whereby they
were help, there was a certain kind of fish yt as soon as they touched the
flesh of a man, presentlye it inflamed and the poison so increased, that in two
or three days, it caused corosiue sores, the which caused many to dye, and
many were stonge with that fish the which never could find help, I than
seeing that desparate case, upon a time visited a young man being a Roman,
the which was hurt on the coddes and yard, with such a spasmus that it was
wonderful to behold, and having a glass full of my Quintaessence in my hand,
I opened the sore and washed it therewith, and presently the pain ceased, then
afterward I dressed it with an unguent made of the fat of the fish, and so
there with he and a great number more were help in short time, and these are
secrets of my invention.

Of the taking of Afrika and his destruction.
IN the year.1551. the 11. of September about the 19. hour the general
asault was given to the city of Africa, and in the space of 2. hours it was
taken, and destroyed by the soulders of Carolus Quintus, Emperor, where at was
slain a great number of both parts, and there was such a number hurt that it
was to be wondered at, the which were healed with our Magno licore, and
Balsamo, and when the city was taken and all ended, the Galls remained there
all September, and the fourth of October every man went to serve at their
ports appointed, and so we turned to Naples to pass the Winter, but yet we
remained but a while, for there was occasion to go to Siena, the which rebelled
against the Emperor, and so we went with Don Pietro da Toledo the which dyed
after at Firenza, etc.

The cure of a great wound on the head.
IN this year.1551. in the month of November, there came unto my house a
Spaniard, the which was called Giouan Ruiz di Zamora, the which had a great
wound over the ear, on the left side that reached half over the head, with
great fracture of the bone, the which I presently stitched with diligence, and
put there-in our Quintaessence, and upon the wound I dressed it with Magno
licore, and Balsamo, and made a gentle ligature with a piece of silk, and sent
him home to his lodging, and commanded him to come again the next day about
the said hour, and those that were about me, fell a laughing at my words, and
said that he would dye of that wound, because I let him go forth in the
air, to the which I answered that he might safely go forth, and so the
next day he came again, and I took off the lygament, bu not the cloth, and
ther-on I put of our Quintaessence and Balm, and so in three days I touched
it not, and then I took off the Lygament again, and dressed it upon the
cloth, and let it remain until the.8. day, and then I opened it and took
away the cloth and found the wound so healed that ye could scarce perceive any
scarre, and many said that it was impossible to be healed, for it would come to
impostumation, nevertheless it remained perfectly whole, for.5.or.6. months
that he remained in that city, in the which time I cured a great number in the
same order that were wounded in the head, to the great wonder of those that
dwelt in Naples, for they count all wounds in the head to be mortal, because
the air is so pestilentiall, for as soon as it touches the scull it
corrupts the wound.

But using our order thou may safely help them, so that the wound be not
mortal, for by keeping it close shut it is preserved.

A very strange thing that happened in the afore-sayd year.
THere was a certain young Mariner of the age of 26. years, the which was
called, Francisco di Giouanni Raguseo, of the I Will of Mezo, the which being in
fight fell down, and the other that fought with him cut him over the side and
back a handful long, insomuch that a piece of the Milt was cut ouer-thwart,
then he was carried to a Chyrurgian, and he stitched him up, than the next day
I was called, and there I found the wound not well stitched, the which I ripped
up again, and found the belly full of blood, and when I saw that, I caused
diverse to make water, and therewith I washed him, and with taking forth of
the blood, there came a piece of the Milte that was cut, the which I washed,
and gave it to a Mariner that stood by, and the Patron of the ship took it
from him and carried it away, then I stitched him up again and left a little
hole or orifice beneath, where the matter might come forth, and dressed him
with our Quintaessence, with Balsamo, and Magno licore, and in the space of.22.
days he was whole perfectly.

The cure of a Fistoloe in the lower parts.
IN the year.1552. in the month of March, I was brought unto a man of the
age of forty years of complexion, choleric, and melencholicke, the which
had a Fistoloe in the lower parts, ye which was of this Nature, that it had
alterated the coddes, the member, and all the parts ther-about, with.xi. holes
infistolated* at the which.xi. he made water with great burning and
intolerable pain, and which are accident of a fever in manner continual, ye
which Patient had been taken in hand of diverse and none could do him pleasure.
Than the first thing that I did, I gave him our Aromatico, that being done, I
gave him.xij. days together our Quintaessencia solutiuo, that being done, I
gane him a quantity of our Electuario Angelica, a then he used one of my
secrets, the which I will not write in this place, that being done I caused him
to spitte with one of my confections, written heere-after, and so by these
means he was perfectly whole.

Of many that I cured in Naples.
IN that time that I remained in the famous City of Naples until yt year.1555.
in ye Month of February, and then I thought it good to go to Rome where at
this time I cure a number of persons, and have help so many by the help of
God, the which if I should record them it would be sufficient to fill a great
volume, for there came such a number to my door, that the people wondered
ther-at, and with.4. medicines compounded by me, I help in manner all of every
disease, and the medicines were these, one Pil made with our Petra
philosophile, Elbero negro, Olio di sulpho, Olio dimelle, mixed with marchpane,
and made in pills. The second remedy was soluble pills, made with Aloe
hepatico, Colloquintida, Siena, and oil of vitrioll, made in paste with sugar,
and common hunny, The third remedy was a unction, made with Sage, Rosemary,
Worme-woode, Rue, Mint. Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mastick, Franke^cense,
Terpentine and wax with common oil. The.4. remedy was our Quintaessence, and
these.4. remedies, I gave unto those people to help their griefs: and I willed
the^ yt took these medicines to eat well and of good meats, and so always they
praised these medicines, the which was not without great reason, because ye
pills first euacuate ye stomach of al impedime^ts, a leaves nature eased, ye
second pills euacuate ye body of the corrupptio^.

The Unction comfort the stomach, and helps disgestion, and mitigateth
the pain. The Quintaessence comfort the stomach, causes good disgestion,
purifieth the blood, and comfort the head, so that be these aforesaid
resons, ye may understand that these four remedies may help against al
indispositions inwardly, and for cause of those remedies those people honor me
like a Prophet, and always have had me in great reverence, as long as I
remained among them.

A cure of Vlcera putrida, the which was in the arm.
IN the year afore-sayd and in the month of August, there came to my hand a
certain Gentleman of the Imbassadours of Portingall, that was called, Il
signor Iari, a man of the age of.32. years of complexion melancholyke: the
which had a putrified ulcer about the left shoulder, that he had carried above
three years, and was a big as a hand, and very deeps the which could not be
healed of the common Chyrurgians, nor yet be eased of his pain, than I
reasoning with this Gentleman, told him that the cause of that sore, was
corrupt and putrified blood, and by that means the ^yuer received evil
qualyties, and that if he would be help, the cause must be removed, the which
was hard to be done, because the blood must be euacuated a little, and then
the stomach must be euacuated of moist matter that offends it, and
hinders disgestion of the meat, and will not suffer good blood to engender,
than it will also be necessary to euacuate the body downwards, that the
corruption sends no up his vapors to the upper parts of ye body, and hinder
the cure of the ulcer, all this being done, it were necessary to euacuate the
humor between the skin and the flesh; by sweat, so that all the parts of
the body may remain purified, and so by these means the ulcer may easily
mundifie, incarnate, and scicatrise, and shall be a perfect cure, to the which
thing the Gentleman was willing, for he had as willingly dyed as lived, and
so in the name of GOD I took him in hand, and the first thing that I gave him
was a vomitte that purged the stomach, and took away great part of his
pain: then I purged him with our Quintaessencia Solutiuo, eight days
together, that being done I made him a fomentation, that caused him to sweat
well, and to spitte abundance, than I caused him to be let blood under the
tongue, and then I anointed all the ulcer with our Causticke, the which
mortified all the filthiness therein, and then I dressed it with Magno licore,
and our cerote Magistralle, and so with these remedies in short space the said
Gentleman was cured, to the great marvel of the said Ambassador, and all
those that saw it, by reason of that cure came another of the same house unto
me called Il seignor diego Iaimes the which was troubled with a difficulty of
urine, the which troubled him mightily, the which I gave three times our Petra
Philosophalle, and once the juice of Elder barks, and he was help: I cured
another in the same house of a fever with our Oil of Hunny, and with Balsamo:
The Ambassador like wise being troubled with the gout, willed me to take him
in hand ye which I did, and cured him so that in three years after which I
continued in Rome he never felt pain, and of these cures I help an infinite
in Spain, as is well known to the inhabitaunts thereoff.

The cure of ethesia in the beginning.
I^ ^he year 1555. in the month of March, there came to my hands a young
man of Milayne the which was a painter, of the age of five and twentye years,
the which was fallen into a spice of etisie, and did spitte much blood with a
continual fever, the which I cured in this order.

First I let him blood under the tongue on the right side, and after that I
gave him a quantity of our Aromatico with Plantaine water, because the bleding
takes away the superfluous blood of the breast, the which nature sends
forth by it self, and the Aromatico with Plantayne water is cold and dry,
which are most necessary for that disease, for they euacuate the stomach,
repercute and mittigateth yt alteration, those things being done, I caused him
to use our Quintaessence solutiue to euacuate the body in respect of the
putrification already conceived with-in the intestinalles, also I caused him
to use the Quintaessence of the flower of flowers, and I anointed his stomach
with Magno licore, and also he used our Electuarie of Althea, and so by these
means he was help perfectlye.

The cure of a certain man wounded in thirteen places.
IT happened that a certain man called Alessandro Oresice, was wounded before
my lodging in 13. places, and there fell for dead, and then by a certain
friend was brought into my lodging, and there I laid him upon a table and
took of his clothes, and sowed all those wonndes which were to be sowed or
stitched, and dressed him with our Quintaessence, and Balsamo, and Magno
licore, and our secret powder, and so by those means in 15. days he was
perfect whole.

Of remedies that help many diseases.
THere are diverse and sundry diseases, and they be help with diverse and
sundry medicines, therefore I will make a note only of those the which are
most used.

And first I will write of those remedies that help the fevers of all sorts,
the which are these, the sirope of Burrage, Buglos, Endive, Cicory, Hoppes,
Fumitori, Rhabarb, Cassia, Scamony, Sine, Barlye water, sirope of Scytrones,
and such like.

The remedies that help the pockes are these, Aloes, Coloquintida, Turbit,
Hermodactilis, Scamony, Precipitate, Oriola, Oliuella, the unction of Mercury,
Lignum sanctum, Cina, Salsa perilla, the perfume of Scinaber, a stoue of
herbs, our Ceroto Magistralle, and such like things, those remedies that
help the cough, are Enula Campane, Garlike, Sulfure, Hunny, Lapaciolle, the
Oil of Sulfure, and such like, those remedies that help the scabbes are the
juice of Aureola, Sulfure, Litarge, Aqua Realle, Roch Allome, those that are
troubled with pains in the body, may use Genciane, Nutmegs, Dictamus albus,
Euphorbio, those that are wounded shall use Terpentine, our Balsamo, Magno
licore, Aqua Balsamo, Elixer vitae, Ceroto magistralle, Oil of Hiperconie of
our invention, and such like: Those yt prouok urine, are yt flowers of Mallows,
Alcake^gi, Hoggs lise, Cantarides, and such like, and therefore I will not
trouble you further because I have written sufficiently in my other books in
sundry places, and hereafter I will write of diverse, and sundry medicines of
our invention never found out a fore of any man.

Here begins the order to make diverse and sundry medicines of our
invention, never found out before by any man. And first to make our Petra
Philosophalle, that helps against all manner of diseases that happens unto
man or woman, or any other animal terestryall.
THere has always been a great questioning among the Philosophers, whether
that one medicine might help against all diseases or not. The which I affirm,
and will approve with sufficient reason that the Petra Philosophalle made of our
inuencion, may help against all the infirmities that comes unto man's body,
and two only reasons I will show thee with brevity, the first of them is
this, that all sorts of infirmities have their Original and beginning of the
stomach, and to know the troth ye may see manifestlye, that if the body be
never so little infermid the stomach is also grieved: For ye may see how the
anymalles terestryall, never help themselves of other infirmity than of the
stomach, and when they will help themselves, they eat herbs, the which
causes them to vomitte, and this does signify that they have no other
infirmity, than the aforesaid, so by ye experience of ye animalles I approve
that the infirmity is caused of the stomach, and this is the first reason.
The second is, that all the medicines, where in our Petra Philosophalle is
put, as soon as they are come into the stomach, it draws unto it, all the
evil humors of the stomach, and also of the whole body, and mixeth with
them, and so Nature sends them forth by vomit or by sege, or both, and so
the stomach shall be euacuated of that matter, and the body remain free from al
impediments of infirmities, so that by this reason I affirm, that our Petra
Philosophalle may help against all sorts of infirmities, and to know the
troth, I have proved it by experience, in all manner of infirmities, and
always have found it to do much good unto al men, and hurt none unto my
knowledge, and the order to make this Petra Philosophalle, is thus.

Rec. Sal niter, Rock allome, Vitrioll Romayne, of each two pound.

First dry the Vitrioll in a earthen pan, and then beat it to powder, and
mix it with the other matters, and put thereunto four ounces of Sal gemme,
then put it in a goord with his head, and a receiver, well luted, and distill
it in a wind furnace, so that ye may make fire with wood, and at the first
make small fire, and so increase it according to Art, and always lay wet
clothes on the head and receiver, and that thou shall do because the spirits
of the water shall not fly away. Ye shall understand that in the beginning of
of your distillation, the Receiver will wax red like blood, and then turn
white, and at the last, when ye give it strong fire, it will turn red
again, and those are the pure spirits of the Aqua fortis, and then at the
end, the Receiver will turn white again, and then it is ended, then let it
wax cold, and then keep it in a Glass close shut, to make our Petra
Philosophalle.

Than take Mercury. lib. 1. Quick lyme, ounces.6. Soap, ounces.4. Common
ashes, ounces.3.

Mix them together in a mortar of stone, and then put them into a Retort, and
distill it with a strong fire until all the Mercury be come forth into the
receiver* then take it forth, and keep it in a glass, to make thy
composition, the which is made thus.

Rec. The water that thou made first, and put it into a goord of glass being
well luted, and then put in thy Mercury that thou did distill before. After
that, take Steel in thin plates, ounce.1. Iron also in thin plates, ounce.2.
Fine Gold in leaves, the weight of two French crowns, and put them altogether
in the glass, and presently set on the head, for it will begin to boil, and
cause red fumes like blood, the which thou shall receive in a receiver, and
presently set thy glass in the Furnace and give it fire until all the water be
come forth with the fume. Them let it cool, and keep that water close in a
glass, then break ye other glass that stood in the fire, and in the bottom
thou shall find our Petra Philosophalle, the which thou shall grind finely,
and searce it in most fine powder, and then wash it well with Vinegar
distilled, and dry it again, and at the last wash it with Rose Water, and
dry it very well, stirring it continually over the fire, then keep it as a
precious Jewel close in a Glass.

For the order to use it, I will write heere-after, in sundry places: Ye shall
understand that the water the which ye distilled away from the stone, will
serve for the same purpose again: But ye must take but half the quantity of
the afore-sayde matters, and when ye have distilled it again from the stone,
ye shall preserve it, for an infinite number of purposes, as I will show thee
heere-after.

To make our Balm artificial, with the order to use it, and wherefore it
serves.
THis Balsamum has all the virtues of the natural Balm, although not in
qualytie, yet in virtue, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Venice Turpentine, pound.1. Oil of Bays, that is perfect without
mixture, ounces.4. Galbanu^, ounc. 3. Gum Araby, ounc. 4. Olibanum, Mirrha
elect, Gum hedera, of each, ounces.3. Lignum Aloes, Galingal, Cloves,
Consolida minore, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoaria, Ginger, Diptamnum album, of each,
ounce 1. Musk of Leuant, Ambergres, of each one dram.

Beat all those afore-sayd things together, and put them into a Retort of
glass well luted, and put there-to.6. pound of Rectified Aqua vitae without
fleame, and so let it stand viij. days, and then distill it by sand, and
there will come forth a white water mixed with oil, and so keep thy fire
small, until there come forth a blackish Oil, then change thy receiver,
and set thereto an other, and increase thy fire until all the spirits be come
forth, than separate the Oil from the black water, and keep them by
themselves, and the like shall ye do by the first water. The first water that
is white, is called Aqua del Balsamo, and the Oil separated from that is
called, Oleum del Balsamo. The second water that is black is called Matter
Balsami, and the Oil separated from that water, is called Balsamo artificiato,
the which would be kept as a precious Jewel.

The first water is most excellent to clear and preserve the sight of the
eyes, also the face being washed ther-with, it makes it very fair, and
preserves it youthfully, it keeps back age, it breaks the gravel in the
reins, and provoke urine the which is stopped (...) is our Aromatico,
because it euacuateth the stomach by vomitte, and the body downewarde, and his
operation is such, that it does in manner help any crude sort of infirmity,
and the quantity is from one drame, to two drames, and may be taken in broth,
in wine, in water, or mix it with any pills, or pocion, giving you charge,
that when ye put it in any pocyon that ye leave none in the bottom, of the
cup where ye drink it out, because the Petra Philosophalle is heavy, and
will remain in the bottom, for if that remain it will not work at all,
giving you also charge that the said day that ye give this medicine, that ye
let the patient drink as much crude water as the will, and give them little
meat to eat that day, and this is the order to use this medicine.

To make our Electuario Angelico, and the order to use it, and in what diseases.
ELectuario, Angelico romano, is so called, because it was compounded of me in
the city of Rome, in the time of the Pope Paulo quarto, and because this
composition works sodeinelye, I called it Angelico, and is most excellent
against many diseases, it is good against all sorts of fevers, giving it
Perminoratiuo, and for the stitch in the side it is most rare, because it
takes away the viscocitie in the stomach, and opens the powers, and is good
against the gout, for if they take it every third day once, in ten days they
shall be hope, it is also good against the cough, Cattar, and for the Mylte, and
for those that have ye pocks, or the running gout, and such like influences,
and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Safran, Lignum alleos, Sinamon, read Coral ana three drames, Elleborus
niger, without preparation, two ounces Electuario de succo rosarum, Mesue, that
is not too much boiled, vi. ounces, Sugar rosate viii. ounces, Musk of Leuant
one drame, Petraphilosophalle three ounces, our Quintaessence, of wine, two
ounces, purified hunny as much as will suffice to make it in form of a
Lectuary, mix them on a small fire in an earthen pan, and when it is made,
keep it in a vessel of glass, for any other vessel will not be good: This
Electuary ye may mix with any sollible medicine, but ye must take it fasting,
the quantity is from two drames to four drames. Ye shall understand yt this
in manner reuiueth the dead by his great virtue, as has been seen many
thousand times, in Venice, and in Rome, most worthy of memory, and therefore if
any Physician desire to get fame in the world, let them use our Electuario
Angellica, the which works miracles on the earth.

Of the vigitable stone, of our Invention, to transemute a body of one
complexion into another, and to make him sound for ever.
THe way to make the vigitable stone is rare, and his virtues are infinite, and
without comparison, and the cures that are done therewith are so myraculous,
that the world will not believe them, although it be the mere troth, and the
order to make it is thus.

Rec. Tartar of white Wine that is thick and shining, Turpentine that is
clear and pure: The herb called Alloes that has leaves as long as an arm,
and dented on both sides, and some call it semper viue, take of each of these one
pound, and stamp them together, and put them into a vrynal with a head and
receiver, and distyll them in a wine furnes until all the substance be come
forth, then take the fesses out of ye glass and grind them with the said
water, and then distill them as thou did before, and always at the last
give it a strong fire that the fesses may remain well burnt, then take out
the fesses again and grind them with the water as thou did first, and
distill it again, and this thou shall do 15. or twenty times, until all that
water be consumed, and yt the fesses remain white like salt, then lay that
fesses on a smoth stone in a moist place, and it will turn into water, the
which keep in a glass close shut, and that is the water of the vigitable
stone, the which water is of so much virtue, that one scruppell thereof being
put into ij. ounces of Iulepe of Violettes, and given to drink to any that is
infirmed or evil complexcionated, in less then four and twenty days he
shall be help of any griuous discase, and this must be taken in the morning
fasting when the stomach is empty, for than it works better his operation.

This is also an excellent remedy against ye worms, giving it in the a
fore-saide manner, it mundifieth the Liver, and dries ye humiditie of yt
Mylte, it dissolueth the cough, and Cattares, it provoke vryne where it is
let, with diverse other virtues, the which I will let pass until another
time, for if I should write them all, they would not be credited, and
there-fore we Physicians should not rest to practice in all things that
seems to us convenient, and I promise thee truly that he which shall
occupy this thing, shall work miracles on the earth, and win great fame
and honor. Ye shall understand that this is the stone that the Philosophers
have long sought to fix their medicine mynerall, so that making the proiection
they join the medicine with metalling bodies, and not to go away in sum,
because this stone resists all great fires without consuming, and sixeth
Sulfure and Orpiment, so that they shall abide the fire, and makes them white,
if ye make proiection therewith on Copper, or on Lattine, it will turn it
into the whiteness of pure silver, and that I have seen with my eyes, so that
ye may see of what importance this vigitable stone is, the which works such
goodly transmutations, as well in mettallyng bodies, as in humain bodies, and
therefore it is to be accounted off, because it may save the life of many that
use it in their medicines.

Our solyble siroppe with the order to use it.
SOlyble siropes made in decoction are very wholesome and of great faculty, and
specially in the crudite of humors, and the reason is this: because it
disperseth the matter, and euacuateth it with great ease, and without danger
or trouble of the Patient, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Sage, Rosemary, Worme-wood, Cicory, Cardus sanctus, Nettels, Organy, of
each a handful. Figs, Raisons, Dates, sweet Almonds, Sal gem, ana ounc. 4.
Coloquintida, Aloes hepatica, Cinnamon, Mirabolani citrini, ana ounc. 2. Common
hunny, two pound.

Stamp them all grosely, and put them to infuse in eighteen pounds of fair
water, then boil it till half be consumed, then strain it, and distill it by
a filter, and aromatise it with two caretes of Musk and a pint of Rose Water,
and then it is made, the which ye shall keep in a bottell of glass close
stopte, the quantity is from four ounces to six ounces.

In Winter you shall take it very warm. And in the Spring and Autumn, ye
shall take it but warm. In Summer ye shall take it cold, for this purges the
gross humors of the body, and hurts not the stomach, ye may use it in a
fever.4. or 5. days together, and it will help it. In cruditie of humors, as
the French Pockes, Goutes, Cattares, Doglie Artetiche, and such like matters,
where there is no accident of Fever, ye may take it.x. or.xv. days together,
and cannot hurt by any means, for it purges most excellent, it is given
against the Cough, against flux of the urine, and pains in the head, and
carnositie in the yard, for the Hemerhodes, and in sum it is good against al
diseases caused of corrupt humors, for it has such virtue, that it draws
from al parts, and euacuateth the humors intestinall, for of this Siroppe I
have had great experience, in such persons as were in manner banished and had
lost their taste, and presently using this, they came to good temperature, and
I have used it an infinite number of times, in persons that were vlcerated, and
full of sores, evil bandeled of Fortune, and of the infirmity, and finding no
means to cure them as they should be, I gave them this Sirop fourteen or
fifteen days, and then they were cured, with a number of other things the
which would be too long to write, and therefore I would wish every one to use
this, not only in the afore-sayd matters, but in all other diseases.

Our Siropo magistrale Leonardo, the which sarueth against an infinite number
of diseases, and is a rare medicine.
THis Sirop is solutiue, and very pleasant to use, and can-not hurt in any
wise, the which is seldom seen in other medicines, and the order to make it
is thus.

Rec. The leaves of Sine, ounces.2. Fumitorie, Mayden-haire, Hartes-tongue,
lyuer-wort, Epitemu^, Ellemo, Pollipo of the Oak, the flowers of Burrage, of
Buglosse, Lycories, of each ounces.3. Colloquintida, Elleborus niger, Aloes
hepatica, Mirabolani Indi, ana ounc. 1. Proynes.14. Sebestien.12. Tamirise..1.
Stamp them grosely, and infuse them in.x. pounds of Fumitorie water, then
boil it until the consumption of the third part, and then strain it, and in
that which is strained put these things: Sirop of Stecados, pound.1. Saffron,
one scruple. Mel rosarum, ounc. 6. Rectified Aqua vitae, ounc. 4. Musk,
dram.1. The muslege of marsh Mallows, ounces.4. Benjamin, ounce 1. Rose Water,
ounces.3. And then it is made, ye which ye shall keep in a glass close stopped,
and keep it in a temperate place, and this you must take warm, the quantity
is from two ounces to four ounces, and it is a most safe medicine to be used
without keeping of any diet. It helps those much that have Pellaria,
scabbes, Hemerhodes, and such like diseases, and may be given unto a woman with
child, without any danger, when she shall have occasion to use any.

Our Sirop against the melancholic humor, and specially where there is
ventositie in the stomach.
IT were necessary for those that will make this siroppe, to be expert in the
Art, for it would be made with great diligence, and the order to make it is
thus.

Rec. Water of Fumitorie, of Hoppes, of Wormwoode, of Maiden hair, of each
five pound. Then with this water thou shall make a decoction with these things
that follow.

Rec. Pollipodium of the Oak, one pound, Sine leaves, Epitimum, ana ounc. 4.
Cordial flowers, two handfulls. Mayden-haire, one handful. Lycoris, Raisons,
Cinnamon, of each ounces.2. The.4. Cole seeds, ounces.2. Make thereoff a
Decoction acording to Art, and strain it, then take four pound of that
Decoction, and put there-to, the juice of Burrage, of Buglosse, of Hoppes, of
each ounces.2. Common Hunny, ounces.6. Then with white Sugar, make a Sirope in
good form, and aromatise it with Musk and Amber, putting there-to, one ounce
of Plyris without Musk, and then it is made. The quantity is from three
ounces to four ounces in the morning warm, and fast there-on, at the least
three or four hours, for this purges meruaylouslye the melancholycke
humors and all other gross humors, and dissolueth wind, and comfort the
heart, etc.

Our Potion of Lignum Sanctum, the which is miraculous to dissolve crude, and
malygne humors, with the order to use it, in the French Pockes, and such like
diseases.
Because the Pocks is a disease contagious, putrified, and corrupt, and works
many evil effects, as I have written in my Caprici medicinalle, therefore it
were necessary to prepare most excellent and rare rememdies to dissolve the
same, which medicines are infinite.

But in this Chapter I will write one, that purges the crude and viscous
humors downe-wards, and does assuttiliate the gross humors, and dries al
sorts of subtle humors that offend Nature and sends them forth by sweat,
it dries the melancholic humor, and dissolueth choler, and is most wholesome
for those that are troubled with that disease, because it dries much and
dissolueth the disease, with many other good effects, as by experience thou
may see, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. The bark of Lignum sanctum grosely beaten pound.1. and lay it to steep
in xiiij. pound of fair water 24. hours, then boil it until four pounds
be consumed, then put there to, Pollypody of the Oak, two ounces, Cicory one
handful, Aloes epatike four drames, and let them boil for an hour: Then put
thereunto the leaves of Syue, Epitemum, ana, ounce 1. Coloquintida, drame 6.
Sugar, ounce 8. the^ let it boil till half be boiled away, and that there
remain pound 7. then strain it, and put it in a glass with 12. grains of
Musk, and keep it very close stopped, and this is the sirope the which ye shall
take twice a day, that is morning and evening, then make this drink following
ye which shall be ye common drink at all times, to your meat.

Rec. One pound of Lignum sanctum, Raspead, and steep it in x. pounds of whit
wine that is ripe, and let it boil an hour, the^ put thereto xv. pound of
fair water and let boil a little more, and then strain it, and keep it in a
glass bottle, for this is to be used all they day time, and the order to use
these is thus. First when any feels himslefe grieved with the pocks or any
such like disease, he must keep his bed at the least xx. days, and use to
take of the first sirope or pocyon every morning a good draft being as warm as
he may suffer it, than keeuer him well with clothes that he may sweat as much
as he can, then take off the clothes by little and little, and dry him with
warm clothes, and so let him repose for two hours, and then let him eat and
his meat must be dry, as Biscote, rost-meate, Raysons of the Sun, Almonds,
and sometime a raw egg, and his drink at meals,a and all the day beside shall
be the last made with wine and water, the^ at night give him of the first
sirope as ye did in ye morning, and cause him to sweat, and then dry him, and
this order thou shall use xx. days together not coming forth of thy chamber,
and by the grace of God thou shall be help of any such griuous infirmity, as
I have seen ye experience thereof an infinite of times, to my great honor, for
it may be occupied in all complexions, with safety, as by the ingredience thou
may see.

A most marvelous water and rare, to cause a man to avoid the grauel in urine,
and to mundifie the raynes.
THe grauel int he raynes of the back is caused, and inge^dred of great heat,
and drynes in those parts, as thou may plainly see by those which are
troubled therewith, for heir raynes is so hot yt they cannot abide any heavy
garment to lie there-on, and they always make their water with great pain and
burning: therefore if thou will help that infirmity, it were necessary to
refrigerate the raynes and moisten it with good juice, and take away that
burning of ye urine, and so in that order the patient shall be help, and this
thou may do in short time, and with great ease with this remedy.

Rec. The seed of small Lemonds, the seed of Oranges, ana one pound,
Saxifrage, pound vi. Balm, Scolopendria, Pellitory of the wall, Sparagus,
Crisoni, Isope, Fenel roots, Parsely roots, ana, ounce 6. stamp the^
altogether and make the^ in form of aliquid vngue^t with the juice of Lemons,
the^ distill it in a common tyn stillytory being luted until the matter, remain
dry, the^ keep yt water in a glass close stopped, and when ye will occupy this
water, ye must first purge ye body of the crude and viscous humors, and
likewise euacuate the stomach of choler and fleme, that being done thou shall
take every morning and evening vi. ounces warm, and it would be necessary for
those yt take it, to use a diet, and to refrain moist and cold meats, and use
only dry things and so this water shall help those aforesaid griefs, as I have
proved diverse times.

To make the water of Lignum sanctu^, most wholesome against the pockes with a
new order.
COmmonly they use to take the water of Lignum sanctum, against the pockes, the
which surely is most wholesome, but it must be taken in good order and form,
and must be made with great discretion, and not as they use it now adays, for
they give it some 3. or 4. times, and never the better, although the wood be
sufficient enough to help themm and therefore I would wish every one yt will
use this water to take it in such order as it ought to be, the which I will show
thee hereafter.

Rec. Lignun sanctum Rasped small, pound 1. ye bark being beaten..3. infuse
them in 12. pounds of fair water one night, and the next morning put therein
li. 1. of hunny, the which is put in, because it is aparatiue and warm, a
helps to provoke sweat, and causes it to have a good taste, then boil it
til half be consumed, then put ther-to Cardus sanctus..4. strong wine pound 3.
then boil it until a third part be consumed, and than it is made, that
strain it, and take forth the Cardus sanctus, and put ther-on 20. pounds of
fair water, and li. 1. of hunny, and let it boil until 4. pounds beeconsumed,
and strain it and keep it in a glass bottle, for this is ye common drink to
drink all ye day long, and ye order to take it is thus: first before ye will
take this water it were necessary to take our Siropo Solutiuo.7. or.8. days,
after ye take of our Electuario Angelica, s. yt being done in ye name of god
take this potion of Lignum sanctum in this order, take in the morning at the
appering of ye day, ounce 8. very warm as ye may suffer, and presently lay
clothes on him, and cause him to sweat 2. hours, and then dry him with warm
clothes, and so let him remain 2. hours, and the^ give him to eat, and his
meat shall be Biscote, Raysons, Almonds, and sometime a little rost-meate, and no
other: then in the evening about the 22. hour, ye shall give him the said
sirope as ye did in the morning, neither more nor less, and cause him to
sweat, and about the 24. hour give him only Biscote and Raysons, and the
other common drink that was made last, giving you warning that ye make this
drink fresh every third day, because it shall not hurt the stomach, and
every week once ye shall take a pil of Mart millitare, and that day thou
shall eat birds flesh, because of weakening, also ye shall take very great
heed to one thing, and yt is this, if it happen tha at the beginning of this
cure, there comes a fever or other accydent unto the patient, that in any
wise ye leave not the cure, but follow the order, for that is a certain sign
of health, for many times I have given this water and unto some in the fourth or
5. day the fever came, and tarried many tames, x. or xij. days, and the^ the
fever went away with the corrupt disease, and all for company, and so in short
time they were cured, so that as I have said before when that syne appears,
and is delivered it is a certain sign of health: Also I will advise thee of
another thing, and that is this, if the patient cannot sweat, ye shall
annoint him all over with the Oil of Quinces, the which will cause him to sweat
a pace: For without sweat the cure will not be perfect, and this order thou
shall keep at the least forty days together, within the chamber so that
there come no air in, for it will hinder the cure.

Our distillation for the Etesia, the which is of of meruaylous virtue and
without comparison with the order to use it.
Saving written sufficiently of the qualytie of the Fever Etike and his cure,
in my Caprici medicinalle, here I will write of nothing but the order to make
this precious Licore, with the order to use it, as well for that disease as for
other such like, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. A young Hen that has not yet laid Eggs, and pull her quick, and then
take forth her guts, only and stamp her in a stone mortar, and put there-to
as much crum of white bread as the flesh does way and stamp them together, and
put there-to a handful of fresh scabious, and as many leaves of gold as
wayeth a French crown, than put there-to as much water of Mortella as all the
afore-sayd matter does way, and so leave it one night, and then distill it in
a vrinall of glass, with three pound of strong wine, in Balneo Marie, until
the feses remain dry, and then it is ended.

Then for every pound of this distillation, put thre-vnto one ounce of the
water of Honny made according to our order, and keep it in a glass vnstopte
that the strong savor may go away, and the order to use it in the Fever Etike I
have written in his chapter, this serves alsofor those inward causes the which
are most troublesome, a for those yt have a burning fever, also for women that
have a fever in their childberth.

Our vigitable Siroppe the which is miraculous and divine.
THis Sirop is one of my 7. secreetes with the which I have done many miracles
many times, in diverse operations, on many infirmities, and have been so charie
of it, that I meant never to set it forth in my life time, but yet I
considering what great benefit it might be unto the world, I thought good to
set it forth that every one might be served according to his pleasure: and the
like I will do of many other secrets of great importance, the which shall be
dispearced among my books, and the order to make this Siroppe, is thus.

Rec. Lignum aloes, Riopontico, Eupatorio, Read Saunders, of each ounces.2.
Beat them and make thereof a decoction in good form, and with four pound of
this decoction make a sirop, and put thereto these things following, whiles it
is hot, Saffrane, one scruple. Ginger, one dram. Musk.2. Carrets. The
solucion of our Petra Vigitabile, ounc. 3. Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one scruple
and a half, that keep it in a glass close shut, and this is our vigitable
sirop, the which works miracles in diverse infirmities, for by his nature it
purifieth the blood mundifieth the liver, comfort ye heart, preserves ye
stomach, provoke urine dissolueth grauel in the raines, it helps ye cough,
and helps disgestion, and quieteth al ye humors in the sick person, with
diverse other virtues, the which I will leave till another time. This may be
taken with broth, with distilled waters, or with any decoction or medicine
fasting, ye quantity is from one dram, to two drams, and happy shall they be
the which shall use it.

An Electuary that helps the cough, with great speed, and ease.
THe Cough is caused of a cattarus humor, and coldness of the stomach, and
therefore if ye will help it, it were necessary to have a remedy that does
ripen the cattare, and mollify the stomach, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Enula campana, ounc. 4. Marsh mallows, xij. ounces. Quinces.xvi. ounces.
But if ye can-not get Quinces, ye may take Marmilade ready made, and boil it
in fair water with the said roots, until they be dry then stamp them in a
mortar, and strain them through a strayner, then take for every pound of that
matter.2. pound of white Honny, and boil them together, but boil them not to
much, then take it from the fire, and put thereunto for every pound of the
aforesaid matter, one scruple of Saffran, and one dram of Cinnamon, and two
ounces of sulphur, and one scruple of Lycoris, and then incorporate them well
together, and aromatise it with Musk and Rose water, and this ye shall use
morning and evening, for this is of so great virtue that it is to be wondered
at, because the mallows do moilifie, the Enula campana does warm, and causes
disgestion, and comfort ye stomach, ye quinces are cordial and warm, the
sulphur is a great dryer, the which destroys ye evil humors of ye body, ye
saffran comfort the heart, ye cinnamon is stomacall, ye lycoris is
mollificatiue, and disgesteth ye matter, so yt of force this Electuary must
help any kind of cough, except it come of ye pocks, for then it will do small
pleasure, as I have proved.

Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purges the body without any grief,
and is miraculous in his operation.
THis Electuario benedicto, is compound of our inue^tion many years ago, and
is so called because of his marvelous operation, and the order to make it, is
thus.

Rec. Of a certain kind of fruit called of some, Spina merula, of other Spini
ceruino, with his bery they make a kind of sap green, take of these berries
when they be ripe, and stamp them, and take there-off, the Juice and strain
it by a fylter, and for every pound of the before said Juice ye shall put
therein these things, Sinamond, Safarne, Cloves, Nutmeges, Ginger, ana dram 1.
Sena, alloes, ana dram.3. mix the^ well together and set it in the sun till
it be dried like a paste, and than make it liquid again with these following.

Rec. Rose water, our Quintaessence, ana ounces 2. for a pound. Musk 2.
carretes for a pound, Mirrha dram.1. for a pound. Incorporate all the
aforesaid things together, and set it in the sun until it be through dry
and may be made in powder, of the which ye shall take what quantity ye will,
and mix it with as much honnie purified, and that is our Electuario benedicto,
the which purges the body without pain, and preserves the stomach, purges
the head, and helps putrified fevers, with diverse other things the which I
will not write at this time. Ye may keep this Mixture 6. months after it is
mixed with honny: the dose is from half an ounce to a whole ounce. Ye may take
them in Pills in broth, in a Lectuarie, or in Wine, or how ye will, and
always they shall make his effect well.

An Electuarie against the evil disposition of the Liver and Stomach.
THe Liver is troubled with diverse and sundry causes: but for the most part
it is of heat: For the heat shows some out-warde sign as is seen by
experience, for their Face and Nose are red, they have heat in their Legs,
chops in the palm of their hand, and feet. It ingendreth Fluxes in the body,
burning of Urine, running of the Raines, and such like effects. And the order
to cure them is thus.

Rec. Citraca, Scolopendria, Epatica, Eupatorio, ana 3. ounces, beat them in
fine powder, Lignum aloes three drames, Safrane 2. scrupules, Cinnamon, two
drames, white crude hunny one pound and a half mix them and incorporate them
together without fire, then take thereof morning and evening 1. ounce at a
time, but before ye begin to take this electuary, ye shall take a quantity of
our Electuario Angelica, and then in short time they shall be help as thou
may well see by the ingredience that goes into this composition.

Our magistrall Electuary of Sulfure the which serves against diverse sorts of
infirmities.
AS the fire has virtue to heat and dry materyall things, so has the
Sulfure virtue to warm, and to dry the humiditie and coldness of our bodies,
for I have occupied it diverse and sundry times, and all ways have seen diverse
and sundry good effects, but for the better commodity, and more ease to use
it, I have compounded this Electuary, the which thou may use with ease and
benifite unto a number, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Very fine Sulfure that is without earth, and make it in fine powder, one
pound, Cinnamon half an ounce, Safran one scruple, Ginger 2. drames. Musk
dissolved in rose water.2. Carretts, white hunny crude as much as will suffice
to make it in a lectuary with out fire, then keep it in a dry place: and this
ye shall use in the morning fasting, and his quantity is from four drames to
seven. This dries up scabbes, proves vryne, breaks the stone in the raynes,
it helps ye cough, dries up ye watering of the eyes, causes a good
appetite, with diverse other things the which I will leave to the experimentors.

Our Electuario of Consolida magore that serves for many diseases inwardly.
THis Consolida magore, is a herb so called, because of his effect that it
does in healing of wounds, and other places of the flesh separated, for if ye
eat thereof it will help the rupture, and all sorts of wounds penetrating
and ulcers of the longes, it dries the milte and such like effects, but
because thou may use it more commodious, I have compounded an Electuary the
which is excellent and rare, and is made thus.

Rec. The root of Consolida magore, one pound, and boil it in water until
it be consumed, then stamp them in a mortar and pass them through a
strayner, then put there-to as much white hunny as the matter wayeth and boil
them on a small fire until it be come to the form of a Lectuary, and when it
is boiled put thereto these things.

Rec. The shelles of Pomgarnades in fine powder, one ounce, Lignum aloes, vi.
drames, Mirra, Mastike, Sarcocolla, Sanguis dragonis in grain, ana two drams
Sinamon, one drame, Musk of Leuant dissolved in Rose water, one Carret, then
incorporate them well whiles it be warm: Ye shall note that the body must
first be well purged are ye take this Electuarye, and ye must also keep a
diet that the medicine may work the better, for this helps all the
afore-saide diseases inwardlye as is said before: ye may use it implaister
wise upon wounds, and on broken bones, and use it inwardlye, and so the
pacyent shall remain help. With this I have seen man of great age help, that
were burst below, and wounded from one part to the other, and also broken
bones and bruses, the which if I should write them, it would not be
credyted.

Our imperyall Electuary for the Mother.
THis Electuary for the Mother, is by Nature temparate whot, and by his heat
provoke Menstrua, and comfort the Matrixe, and all other weak parts of
what causes so ever it be, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Cinnamon elect, one ounce, Nutmegs, Maces, Cloves, ginger.ana, one drame,
Calsie ligne, drame vj. Marmilad.12. ounces Lignum aloes, 4. drames, read
Sanders, 2. drames, Aqua vitae well rectified 3. ounces, fine Musk two
Carrets, purified hunny 2. pound, then make thereof a Lectuary according to
art, the which is most excellent against the indisposition of the mother: But
first ere ye begin to take this medicine, it were necessary to take a quantity
of our Pillole Aquilone, and then to take this Electuary in the morning fasting
thereon, 4. or fine hours, the quantity is from half an ounce to an ounce,
also that time that ye eat this Electuary, ye shall eat no evil meats, as
hoggs flesh, fried meats, or baked meats or such like as might hinder the
operation of the Electuary: This Electuary ye shall use at ye least 40. days
together, and so thou shall see merueilous effects theof, as I have done a
thousand times in Cicilia, in Naples, and in Rome, and also in Venice, and al
ways it fell out in one order, and yet the regions are much different one from
another, and the inhabitance are contrary of complexion, nevertheless this
medicine wrught always one effect in operation, as well in one place, as in
another, and therefore I approve it to be a most blessed medicine and of great
experience.

Pills against poison the which are of marvelous virtue.
THese pills are of such experience against poison, as is not to be believed,
and the order to make them is thus.

Rec. Imperatrice, Bistorta Tormentilla, Valeryana, Dittamo bianco, Carlina,
Aristologia rotunda, Gencyana, Agarico electo, Salgem, of each a like quantity,
beat them in fine powder, then take the juice of garlike, and of onyons as
much as will make it into a paste, also put into the juice one drame of Safrane,
then let the said paste being mixed dry in the shadow, and then beat it into
powder again, and mix it with the afore-saide juice in good form, and keep
it in a vessel of lead until thou have need, and when thou will occupy it,
take thereof 4. drames and make there of pills with Siropo Acetoso, in good
form, the which thou shall give unto him that is poisoned and in short time
thou shall see miracles of that medicine: for all the aforesaid simples in
manner a lone is sufficient to deliver one that were poisoned, but being mixed
together it works greater effect.

Vnguento magno Leonardo.
THis Vnguento magno is so called by reason of his great virtue and operation,
for it works so straung in some diseases, yt it in manner reuiueth the
pacient, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. Otnegra ouiu. 6. ounces, Oximel squilliticum half an ounce, mix the^
together in a earthen dish until the Otnegra ouiu. be become like ashes, then
it is deifitrom, then put there-on two ounces of vinegar, and wash it well,
until it remain pure and clear, then take, Olibanum, half an ounce.
Cerusae, ounc. 1.

Beat them fine, and mix it in a stone mortar with as much Magno licore, as
will serve to incorporate them well, the^ put ther-to the Otnegra ouiu. and
mix the^ very well together, that being done, put ther-to Auxungia porcina,
ounc. 8. And mix them all together, and then it is made, the which keep in a
vessel well glased, for it will keep a long time without corruption, and is
apt to help those that are lame, full of pains, and sores and swellings,
pains of the eyes, the stone in the raynes, and such like matters, it helps
al manner of French Pockes, if ye annoint them therewith until their gumbes
be sore, and then leave. But ye shall note that ye body must first be well
purged before ye anoint them. This unguent cools al corosiue ulcers, and
helps them in short time, it helps all pains in the eyes, if ye put it
there-in, and takes away all burning with speed, and to be short, it helps
those diseases in most short time, so that it is to be woundred at.

Oil of Hipericon, the which is most miraculous for wounds and bruses.
THis oil of Hipericon co^pounded by us, is of great virtue, in diverse and
sundry accidents and specially in wounds, for it helps them without any
pain, although the veins sinews, or bones were hurt or cut, and that in
very short time, it preserves the wound from corruption, and takes away the
pain, and incarnateth and cicatrizeth, as by experience thou may plainly
see. It dissolueth contusions, and is most meruaylous against poison.

It helps against any crude sort of venomous fever, if ye annoint all the body
ther-with, leaving no part, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. The flowers, leaves and seed of Saint John's wort, as many as ye will and
stamp them together, and put them in a glass, with as much strong white wine
as will keuer it well then set it in the sun, x. days together, then put
there-to as much pure sallet Oil, as the herbs and the wine does way, then
let if stand in the Sun other.x. days, giving you warning that ye way your
oil before ye mix them, that being done put thereunto for every pound of
Oil.2. ounces of Turpentine, and one dram of Saffrane. Of Nutmegges, Cloves,
Mirrha elect, of each half an ounce. Frankencense, ounce.1. Viticella, ounc.
2. for every pound.

Stamp them altogether, and put them into a great glass, and set it to boil
in Balneo Mariae, with a head and Receiver close shut, and to know when it is
boiled enough, is that there will ascend no more vapors into the head, and
that will be within.24. hours or there-about, then take forth the glass
being yet hot, and strain it, and keep it in a glass close shut as a
precious Jewel, ye shall note that this Oil must always be occupied very warm
and in any wise tent no wound but wet clothes ther-in and lay it thereon, and
thy cure shall prosper well, for this I have proved a thousand times in diverse
places.

To make our Oleum benedictum the which heals wounds deuinely.
THis Oleum benedictum serves chiefly for wounds in all parts of the body, and
in specially for wounds the head, if there were fracture of bone, and offenses
of the Pannicle, and in other places where sinews were hurt, or muscles or
veins, or in any other noble place of the body, with this Oleum benedictum,
and with our vigitable Quintaessence thou may help them easily and in short
time, without any danger or detriment of the wounded person, as is said
before, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. The whites of Eggs being hard sodde in water, ounces.12. Clear
Turpentine, ounces.14. Pure Mirrhe, ounces.3. Mix them and put it into a
Retort of glass and give it gentle fire at the first, and then increase it
according to Art, until all the substance be come forth of the Retort, the
which will be both water and Oil, the which separate, and keep the oil by it
self in a glass as a precions Jewel, for this works miracles in wounds of
what sort soever they be, more-ouer it causes hair to grow on ye head or
beard, the which were fallen away, and that it does in short time by only
annoynting the place therewith, also if any have a stitch in his side, and
retention of urine, let him take a Glister, where-in he shall put a little of
this Oil and he shall be help, and this effect it does because it dries
mightily, that alteration made in the secret parts of the raynes inwardlye,
where no local medicine can be applied.

A magistrall water, the which preserves the sight a long time, and mundifieth
the eyes of all spots.
IF thou will make a water that shall have virtue to preserve the sight long,
and to mundifie the eyes from all spots, that are therein, it were necessary
that therein were simples that are preservative, and mundificatiue, as I will
show thee heere-after.

Rec. The best and strongest white wine that thou can find, pounds.12. New
bread well risen, pounds 4. Celandine, Fenell, Cipolla squilla, ana ounc. 4.

Cloves, half an ounce. Stamp them and then distill them altogether in a goord
in Balneo Mariae, until ye have received v. pound, the which keep by it
self, for that is most excellent against pain in the eyes.

Also if any drink every morning for a month, the quantity of one ounce, it
will help him of any grievous Infirmity. Also I never applied this Water to
any thing, but always it did great pleasure.

To make Oil of Vitriol compound, the which preserves nature in his strength.
THe order to make this composition is thus.

Rec. Four pound of fine Sugar. Riopontico, lib. 1. Rhabarbaro, ounc. 1. The
flowers of Mercury, one pound.

Stamp them altogether, and make there-off a paste, that being done, take pure
rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, four pound. And put them altogether in
a Retort of glass close stopped, then set it in warm horse dounge six
days, then take it forth, and distill it in Balneo Mariae, until there will
come forth no more substance, than take forth the fesses in the Retorte, and
put it in a canuas, and press it forth very hard. Than take Buglosse water,
Fumitorie water, Scabious water, of each six ounces. And with the said waters
wash well the fesses and press it forth again as hard as ye can. Then cast
them away, and distill that water by a filter, until it be clear, then mix
it with the first that was distilled by Balneo, then take the best Oil of
Vitryoll that ye can get, and for every pound of the said matter, put there
unto half a scruple of the said Oil of Vitryoll, and keep it in a glass
close shut. This composition I have caused to be used in the summer time, and
yet continually do use it, whereof I have seen great experience, it provoke
a good appetite unto those that have lost or spoiled it, it helps the Milte,
It dissolueth the pains of the head and teeth, with many other virtues the
which I will not write at this time, it preserves old men in their strength
and lustines, so that it has been a thing do be woundred at, and the order to
take it is thus. Ye shall take half an ounce in the morning fasting as it is,
and fast there on 4. hours at the least, and that day eat but little meat
but let it be of good norishment, and who soever follows this order long,
shall live in perfect health of body, as I have seen diverse and sundry times.

Oleum philosophorum de termentiua and cera.
THis Oil of Turpentine and wax, is a most precious Balm, and his virtues
are infinite, because it is made of simples in manner incorruptible, and is
most miraculous for those that are corrupted or stricken with the pestilence,
because it is most penetratiue, and of nature drying, and comfort al weak
parts in man's body of what infirmity they be, and the order to make it is
thus.

Rec. New yellow Wax..12. clear Turpentine,.18. Bengimine..2. Fine rectified
Aqua vitae,.30. common Ashes,.6. mix them and put them into a retort of glass
well luted, and then distill it in a wind fornes, until all the substance be
come forth, and in the receiver thou shall find 3. things, the first is ye
water, ye second oil, the third fleame, yt which thou shall separate one from
another, and keep them close stopped in a glass, the which is most excellent in
time of ye pestilence, as well for vnctyon, as for to help ye sores, for if ye
put it in a sore or botch that is broke, presently it takes away the pain,
and being mixed with other of our medicines as I have showed in my regiment of
the pestilence, it helps them with great speade. If any annoint al his body
with this Oil twice a month, it will preserve him youthful and in health a
long time, it preserves also dead flesh or fish that is put therein from
corruption, also if any be wounded in any part of the body, let him annoint it
with this Oil 4. or 5. times, and it shall be whole: Also if any cannot make
water, give him 2. drames of this Oil to drink, and presently he shall make
water, it is also good against ye stitch in the side and pluresse, and worms,
and ye cough and cattar, and against the pestillent fever, and such like in
disposition, if ye drink a little thereof, it has a number of other virtues
the which I will leave unto the experimentors.

Our magno licore the which is of great virtue.
THis is of my invention, and the order to make it is thus.

Rec. sweet sallet Oil, xx. pound, white wine, 2.li. boil them together
until the wine be consumed, the^ put it in a vessel of stone, and put there
unto these things following.

Rec. The flowers of Rosemary, 3.li. Lignum aloes,.6. Olibanum, Bedellinum,
ana..x. then stope it very close, and bury it in ye ground, 4. foot deep,
and this would be buried in ye beginning of August, and there remain until ye
month of March, the^ take it forth of ye ground, and set it in ye Sun, and put
thereto these matters following. Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Betony, Millyfolly,
Comfery roots, Tamaro, Viticella, ana, one handful, Gallingall, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Spignard, Saffarne, ana,.1. Sarcocolla, Sanguis Dragonis in grain,
Mastike, ana.2. aloes epatike, Rasa di pino, ana,.8. yellowe Wax, Auxungia,
ana,.18. colophonie, 1.li. Hipercone with the seade and all, 2.li. Musk 1.
drame. Mix these all well together, and boil the^ in Ballneo until the
herbs become dry and have no more substance, then it is boiled, then take it
forth and strain it, and put there unto for every pound, 6. drames of our
Balm artificial, and when ye month of September comes, put thereunto 2.li.
of ye fruit of the herb ralled Balsamina, the which are red, and then it is
ended, ye which thou shall keep in a glass close shut, for the older it is
the better it is, and is of such virtue, yt it helps the Etici, and
Hidropsie, if ye give them every morning 4. drams, with 1.. of sirope of Roses
warm the space of 40. days, as I have proved: And this is ye true and
perfects unction, yt helps the Petocchie, a disease so called in the Italian:
If any were wounded and had cut veins, sinowes, and bones, let him join ye
parts close together, and dress it with this Oil very hot upon the upper
parts, and in short time it shall be whole, with out any alteration, it helps
also the white scal if ye annoint it therewith: It helps coldness in the
head and Cattares, if ye annoint it within the nostrilles at neight when ye go
to bed, if ye annoint the stomach therewith it causes perfect disgestion
of the meat, it provoke urine where it is let through carnositie or Gonorea,
or such like matter, it causes hair to grow, it preserves ye heard black,
and is good against worms, and al these experime^ts are true, and proved of me
diverse and sundry times in yt aforesaid infirmities, and also in diverse other
the which I leave until another time: Ye shall note that if ye anoint any all
over that is grieved with the pocks with this Oil, it will increase his pain,
and so by that means ye may know whether he be infected or no.

Pillole Angelica, the which euacuate the body without any impediment, and are
most profitable.
IT is most necessary yt all kind of Piltes, should be well prepared and
artificially handled, because they shall make no alteration in ye stomach of
those yt take them, and therefore I will write a kind of pill of our invention,
and are called Pillole Angelica, Leonardo, the which may be used in any kind
of infirmity, and may be given to a woman with child without danger, for
they dissolve the body without trouble, they purge choler and fleame, and
purge partibus alonge, and are good against all pains, they dry up ulcers in
all parts of the body, it dissolueth the Cattarrus humore and in manner all
fevers, and the order to make them is thus. Rec. Coloquintida,. 4. and put it
in 1. pound of pure rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, and there let it
remain 3. days, the^ strain it hard into a clean vessel, and put therein
Aloes epatike, Mirra, Eleborus niger, ana..1. Beat in fine powder, and mix
them like a paste, then set it in the Sun until it be almost dried: Than put
thereto Saffarne, Cinnamon, yellow Sulfure, ana, 4. drames, and mix them well
together, and let them dry altogether, then make it into a paste with white
crude hunny, and keep it in a vessel of lead, for that is best, the
quantity is from one drame to two drams, for these are Pillole preparate, yt
may be taken with out keeping of diet, and they do purge al humors ha^ging in the
body, and preserves the body from putrefaction as I have seen the experience
thereof diverse times.

Pillole Aquilono of our invention.
THese Pills are above all other in operation, as the Eagle is above all other
bides, and therefore I thought good to call them Pillole Aquilone, and the order
to make them is thus.

Rec. conserve of Damask Roses made with Honny, ounces.3. Lignum alos, dra. 1.
Oil of Vitryoll.12. grains. Cinamond elect, two scruples. Petra Philosophalle
of our invention, half an ounce. Sugar candy, ounces. 2.

Mix them and make there-off a paste with Siropo acetoso, and keep them in a
Glass. The virtue of these Pills I will not write at this time, but only I
say they help against all sorts of infirmities, and hurts none in any wise,
the quantity is from one dram to two drams in the morning fasting, but ye may
not guild them in any wise, but drink after-them a cup of water or wine, to
carry them down, then sleep there-on, and that day eat little meat, and
light of disgestion.

Our Quintaessencia solutiua, the which is of meruaylous operation in diverse
matters.
THis Quintaessentia solutiua euacuateth the body with great ease and without any
detriment, and it purges al parts of the body, that are troubled with gross
and viscous humors, it resolves swellongs and takes away the pains, it
preserves the sight, and kills worms, and causes a good appatite, with
many other good qualyties, the which I will leave at this time, and the order
to make it is thus.

Rec. Lignum aloes, Cinnamon, Turbite, Aloes hepatica, ana ounc. 1.
Colloquintida, ounc. 2. Cloves, Saffran, of each three lcruples. Musk of
Leuant one dram. Iulep of Vyolets, one pound.

Mix all the aforesaid matters together in a glass, and put there-on two
pound of our Quintaessence, and so let it stand.12. days and then strain it,
and put it into a vessel of glass close shut, this may be taken with broth,
wine, or with what sirop or potion ye will, the quantity is from two drams to
four drams in the morning fasting without keeping of any diet at all, and it
shall work well without trouble at all.

Our Sirope of Quintaessence, the which is of merualous virtue.
THis sirop is of meruaylous virtue as is seen daily by experience, and the
order to make it, is thus.

Rec. Of that pure rectified Aqua vitae where-off we make our Quintaessence,
ounces.12. Oil of Sulphur, Oil of Vitriol, of each one dram. Oil of Tartare
perfect ounces.2. Iulep of Roses, pounds.4.

Musk, carretes.2. Saffran one scruple, Cinnamon, one dram.

Mix them together, and keep them in a glass, for his virtues are
innumerable and in manner reuiueth those that are half dead. It helps the
fever in short time, if ye use it. This sirop may be mixed with any kind of
potion that is given to the sick, and may be given alone in broth, wine, or
water, or in what sort ye will, the quantity is from two drams to four drams,
and heere-with I have done miracles, as thou may read in my Thesauro dela
vita humana.

Pillole magistrale, the which is good against diverse infirmities.
THese Pills are of great virtue, and specially against al kind of pains
coming of corrupt humors, for they purge the putrified humors, and preserve
the body from corruption, and the order to make them, is thus.

Rec. Olibanum, Masticke, Mirrha. Sarcocolla, Aloes hepatica, Elleborus niger,
Saffran, Turbit, Colloquintida, ana q.v.

Stamp them finely, and for every ounce of the aforesaid matters, put
thereunto.2. carretes of musk, and than incorporate it with honny of Roses,
and Aqua vitae of each alyke, and this paste thou may keep for.6. months,
in a vessel of lead, the quantity is from 2. drams to.3. drams, in the morning
fasting, and drink there-on a little wine. These Pills are most excellent to
take away the pains of the Gout, and to preserve a man from it, they are also
good for those that have the French Pockes, because they euacuate the gross and
viscous humors, and maintain the body in good temperature, and using them in
those diseases, it preserves the body in good temperature. They are also good
for women that are troubled with pains of the Mother, and retention of their
terms, for these are aperatiue and provoke them, and purges the matrice of al
impediments contained ther-in, they serve against the Megram and al pains of
ye head, and also against al kind of putrified fevers, as I have seen ye
experience theroff sundry times.

A compound Aqua vitae the which serves against all cold diseases of the
stomach.
THis Aqua vitae, aromatised with simples of Leuant, is of most excelletn
virtue, and by the ingredience thou may perceive, and the order to make it is
thus.

Rec. Rutmegs, Cloves, Gallingal, Cardamonum, Cubebes, Maces Cinnamon, Ginger,
Saffran, Ohbanu^, ana. ounc. 1. Beat then finely and put them in a goord of
glass, and put there-on sire pound of pure rectified Aqua, vitae, and so let
it stand six days, then distill it by sand, and there will come forth a
red water, the which is most precious against all infirmities caused of cold,
it mundisteth all sorts of sores, and helps al wounds without pain. It
causes a good memory, it helps the cough, and makes the heart merye, with
diverse other virtues, yt which I leave to ye experimenter.

A compounds Oil against poison, the which is of a meruaylous virtue.
IF thou will help those that are poisoned, it were necessary to have remedies
of such virtue, that are apt to the solution of the poison, for the poison
works those three effects, as is said before, in the Chapter of the effects
of poison, where-in it is written, how that it is necessary to keep the blood
lyquid, so that it congeale not in the veins, and lyke-wise to let or stay
that water which comes to the stomach, and to let that alteration or
inflammation, as we may term it. And all these operations, are necessary to be
done with most excellent Remedies, in the which there enters part of poison,
for the Proverb says, that one poison kills an other, and that I will
approve in this Chapter, and the order to make this composition is thus.

Rec. The oldest Oil that thou can find, pound one. Aloes hepatica,
^liabarbaro, Spico nardo, Mirrha, Tormentillae, Dictanum album, Gentiana,
Bistorta. Consolida magore, Rubia di tintory, ana,. half. Theriaca,
Methridato, ana, three drams, quick Scorpions to the number of 60. First put
the quick Scorpions into the Oil, and let it boil in Balneo, Marie 4. hours
than put thereunto the other matters, and let them boil altogether other four
hours, then strain it and keep it in a vessel of glass close shut, for
truly this is a divine Oil for that accident, in the which ye see enters
Scorpions, the which are venomous, and yet his poison is wholesome for those
that are poisoned.

The like ye may see by those that are burnte with fire, for ye best medicine
that they can find is to burn that place again: Also ye may see that when
great quantity of blood comes forth of a wound, the Chirurgian presentlye
lets him blood in another place to turn ye same. Seeing the^ yt these are
true, it is also true, yt one poison does kill another poison. And by this
reason I approve, yt if ye exstingush the poison it were necessary to be done
with his kind, neuer-thelesse it must be prepared so that the matter be not
altered, and become hurtful unto the poisoned person, and the order to use this
Oil against poison is thus.

When that a man is poisoned presently annoint all his body with this Oil, and
give him thereof to drink two drames with white wine Vinigar, morning and
evening, and God willing thou shall help any poison be it never so strong: It
he be poisoned with Subblimate, or a Diamond, this remedy will not be good
because they are not poisons, but are deadlye mineralled, the which by no
means can be disgested or their evil effect mitigated. Therefore when one is
poisoned with Subblimate, his remedy is no otherwise, but to make him bathes of
Viniger, and let him drink milk enough, and eat butter, and drink Siero.

For this is the true remedy, as for an example when that a sore is mortified
with a rottorye made of Subblimate, or Arsenicke, presently it causes great
altealteration, for the which there is no excellenter remedies than Vinegar,
Butter, and Milk: Than seeing yt these remedies are so profitable to be used
outwardly there is no doubt but that they will do the same effect inwardly:
Also it would be necessary to cause them to vomit every day once at the
least, to keep the stomach euacuated of that matter, so that it come not to
choke the infected person, or infect the sinowes, so that the party remain not
lame, for a long time after as is daily seen in diverse places.

A marvelous Soap that helps those which cannot spyt but with great pain.
THis composition is called Saponea nostra, because it is made of Soap, but not
of that Soap the which is in the Apothicaries shopes in Venice, but this is a
confection, the which being eat every morning a little quantity, it helps
those that spit with pain, it opens the stomach, and breaks that evil
matter contained therein, and casts it forth at the mouth with the spyttle,
and so leaves the pacient well disposed and merry, and the order to make it is
thus.

Rec. White Venice Soap, and beat it in powder,. 1. pure Maisticke 2. drams,
Sinamon, Licores, ana, one drame, fine Sugar as much as will suffice to make it
in tables according to art, yt which are most strange, nevertheless marvel
not there at for I will show the reason, so that every one shall be satisfied.

Ye shall understand that the first ingredience being the Soap, is made with
the Lie of Soda and Calkes, the which things do dry and mundifie al sorts of
Vlcere Sordide, and cools them: Also there in is Oil Olyfe, the which is one
of the most excellentest licours in the world, for this of it self is able to
cut that matter from the stomach, and to mundifie it, than in this compounde
there is Masticke, the which is most excellent for the stomach, and draws
down from the head, than the lycoures, and Sinamon are aparatiue and
comfort the stomach, so that all these being mixed together, of force it
must help against these infirmities of the breast, and the quantity thereof is
from.2. drams to half ounce.

To make the Quintaessence of Hunny.
THis Quintaessence has all the virtues of the Quintaessence of wine, and is
made in this order, and is rather to be counted a divine remedy than human.

Rec. The purest Hunny that ye can get, the which is not mixed with any thing
2. pound, and put it into a gowrd of glass, with his head and receuer close
luted, and give it first a gentle fire until there appear certain white
feumes in the head, the which will turn into a red water, by laying of
clothes wet in cold water, upon the head and receiver, than keep in thy fire
according unto art until all the substance be come forth the which thou shall
keep in a glass close shut, and in short time it will turn into the cooler
of a Rubyne, than distill it vii. times in Balneo marye, and it will leese his
red color, and be of a very pleasant smell, and remain in the cooler of gold,
and this Quintaessence dissolueth gold and makes it potable, and also all
manner of Jewels that is put therein, also if ye give two or 3. drams to any
that lie a dying, presently it will recover him again, as the Quintaessence of
Wine does: If ye wash any wound or sore therewith it will heal it quickly: It
is good against the cough, cattar, and pains of the Mylt, and many other
sorts of diseases the which I will not write at this time, for few or none will
believe his great aparation or virtue. If ye distill it 20. times with fine
Silver, it will restore the sight unto those that are almost blind. Moreover I
have given this 46. days unto one that had the Palsy and he was help quickly.

It helps also the falling sickness, and preserves the body from
putrefaction, so that by these means we may see that it is a celestial remedy
given unto us by the almyghtie God, and therefore I would wysh some virtuous
men to take a little pains in making of this precious liquore, and they shall
see such wonders thereof that the world will marvel there at, as I have
proved many times, to my great honor and profit of the pacient. For many
times I have given it the sick that no man did see me, and presently they
thought I had wrought by enchantment by reason of his great virtue, and
therefore all men that profess Physic and Surgery, ought to be provided
of this licour and such like for their commodity, and profit of the patient.

To make our Elixer vitae, or Aqua Caelistis.
THis Elixer vitae is a medicine of such virtue and strength yt it helps in
manner against all diseases that comes to man's body, for those that are hot
it coleth, and those that are cold it warmeth, and that it does by his proper
quality and virtue, for this I have proved a thousand times, and have used it
against sundry diseases, and always have had good success, and the order to
make it is thus.

Rec. Ginger, Zedoaria, Gallingal, Long Pepper, round Pepper, Iunipyr berries,
Citron peeles, Ora^ge peeles, Sage, Basil, Rose-mary, Minte, Margerome, Bay
berries, Penyrial, Gentian, Callamint, the flowers of Elders, red Roses and
white, Spica nardi, Cubebe, Lignum aloes, Cardamomu^, Cinnamon, Calamus
aromaticus, Germa^der, Sticados, Camepitcos, Meligette, Mace, Olibanum, Aloes
hepatica, the seed of Mugwort of each two drams, Figs, Raysons, Dates,
Almonds, Graynes of the Pine, of each.6. ounces. Pure white Honny, pound.1.
Musk of Leuant, one dram. Fine sugar, pound.4.

Mix them altogether, and infuse them in five pound of pure Aqua vitae
without fleame, and so let it stand.8. days, than distill it in Balneo Mariae,
until the fesses remain dry, then take that, and sercolate it in a Pellicane,
in horse dounge.40. days, the^ take the glass with the fesses, and distill it
in sand, until all the substance become forth, the which will be red like
blood, and stinketh of the fire, and is thick, the which must be sercolated
as the first, and this is the fiery part, the which is of meruaylous virtue,
insomuch that it reuiueth those that are at the point of death, and therefore I
will write of some of his virtues, yt which I have proved.

The first water distilled by Balneo, being taken every third day one dram,
preserves the body in prosperous state, and defends from many sorts of
diseases. It helps all sorts of wounds, if ye wash them therewith.3. or.4.
times, and is most excellent against all impediments in the eyes, if ye put
there-in one drop and preserves the sight a long time, so that ye shall not
need to wear spectacles. If a young woman does wash her face therewith
oftentimes, it preserves her a long time in that state. If ye use to drink
this Elixer it provoke Venerous ades, and disposes women to be delyued with
diverse other virtues, yt which I leave to the experimenter.

The last water the which is red, is excellent good against the pains of the
mother if it be drunk. It dissolueth also the Plurissie, if ye give ther-off
two drams and annoint the parts grieved therewith. It helps the pains of
the Collyke, and hardness of the Milte.

It is also good against pains in the teethe and stinking breath, and many
such like things. It helps all manner of Fevers, and the reason is, because
it dries up all the evil humors that offends Nature as well with-in as
without, so by this reason it is apt to help all sort of diseases. If any
were sick and could not speak, let him take one dram of this, with one dram
of the first, and presently he shall speak most miraculous to see, for this I
have proved a thousand times to my great honor and content of the Patient, and
therefore I would wish all those that profess Physic or Chyrurgery to be
prepared of this liquor, and such like, for their own profit, and health of
their neighbor.

To make Aqua Reale vel Imperiale, the which makes the teeth white presentlye,
incarnateth the goumbes, and causes a good breath.
THe teeth being black rustie and full of filth, and the goumes putrified or
corrupt, are the w(...) things that may be seen in man or woman, and ar(...)
very unwholesome, and the remedy to make the teeth white and to help the
goumes, is thus. Make this water, and use it in the order as I will show thee.

Rec. Sal gemma, Roch allom, Brumstone, of each.2. pound. Borax, ounces. 10.
Pearl beat fine, Coral, ana ounces. 2. Pure dististilled Vinegar, ounces. 4.
Put all the afore-sayd matters in a goord with his head and receiver and give it
fire according to Art, and and at the last there will come forth a white water
like Milk the which after it has stood a while, will wax clear. Ye shall
understand yt this water is above al other waters in ye world to help ulcers
in ye mouth, and to incarnate ye goumes, and to make ye teeth white, and
causes a good breath in those which are troubled with the aforesaid matters.
For of this water I have made great quantity: and has been carried into Spain,
into Almany, into Poland, into Constantinople, and in diverse other countries,
as though it had been a divine thing, and not material.

For truly his experience does cause the world to wonder at it, the use
heere-off I have written in this book, and heere-after I will write it again
in some of my-bookes where occasion shall serve to use it in cures.

A kind of Pille most convenient for the eyes and comfort the stomach.
THose Pills which comfort the stomach, by force must help the sight, for
when the stomach is filled with malign humors, it distempereth those parts
that are about it, and the fumes that ascend up to the head, moysteneth Nerui
optici of the eyes, and by this cause the eyes are offended, therefore it were
necessary for those Pills that help the eyes also to comfort the stomach, the
which must be done by, euacuating the matter hanging by vomit, and the order to
make these Pills, is thus.

Rec. Marchpane made with sugar and almonds, dram.1. Petra Philosophalle grain.
10. Elleborus niger. grain. 6. Diagridij.3. graynes, Mix them well in a mortar
in form of a paste, and make there-off.5. Pills, and those thou shall take in
the morning fasting, for they are of so much force and strength that they help
not only the eyes and stomach, but in manner all diseases, because they
cleanse the stomach, and euacuate the body, the which two things are most
necessary in all diseases.

A discourse upon a composition that preserves a man or woman in health a long
time.
IF thou will make a pass that shall have virtue to preserve whole bodies, and
to help the sick, it were necessary to look out simples that have virtue to
do it, and when thou have found out those drugs that have virtue to preseue,
thou may put thy trust in them: the which I discoursing by the way of reason,
and conferring it by experience, have found out a number of drugs that are
friends unto our nature, and preserves it, of the which I will show thee some
that are of great importance, the which may be approved of reason and
experience, and are these.

Rec. Aloes hepatica, Olibanum, Mirrha, ana ounc. 2. Beat them in fine powder,
and make them into a paste like a salve with rectified Aqua vitae, then dry it
in the Sun, then beat it into powder again, and make it into a past with our
Oleo del balsamo, and than thou shall have a past of most meruaylous virtue,
for if ye take ther-off every morning one dram, it will preserve him long in
health, it is most excellent for those that be wounded or have any sore upon
them, because it keeps the sore from putrefaction as by the ingredience thou
may perceive.

A marvelous Water to be used of all Chirurgians in cureing of their pacientes.
IT is necessary for the Surgeon in the cure of wounds and sores, to help
the body, as well inwardly as outwardly, to take away the evil quallities and
corruption of the humors, and to preserve it from putrefaction, and then the
sore will heal with little help, and in short time, and that thou may do
with this Water, the which is vncorriptible and of great experience, and the
order to make it is thus.

Rec. Of that Aqua vitae where-of we make our Quintaessence, pound x. and put
there-in these things following. Sinamond, Lignum alloes, red Sanders, Cardus
benedictus, ana 3. ounces, Cloves, long Pepper, Callomus aromaticus, Saffrane,
ana 2. ounces, Almondes, Grains of the Pine, Dates, ana 4. ounces. Melegette
ounce 1. fine Sugar, pound 4. Musk 4. carrets: let all these stand in a long
necked glass, close stopped, 8. or 9. days, and then distill it in Balneo
until ye have received 5. pounds, the which keep close stopped in a glass,
as a precious Jewel: than distill the rest in sand, until the fesses be dry,
and that will be a red Water, and will stink somewhat of the fire or smoke,
the which also keep in a glass: for in time it will leese his stinking smell,
and be most precious. The first Water is of such virtue, that it helps al
putrified ulcers, if yoe dress them therewith. The second is also perfect, that
if any man drink every morning 2. drames, it will so preserve him, that it
were impossible he should have any infirmity. For of this Water I have made
great experience in many kind of diseases, and specially in the plurifie and
petechie. etc.

To make our Causticke.
ALthough I have written this Causticke in my Regiment of ye pestilence, called
now in english, A Joyful Jewel. Imprinted by William Wright, dwelling under
saint Mildredes Church. Nevertheless, I thought good to write it in this
place, because every one has not both these books: and the order to make it
is thus.

Rec. Arsnike cristalline, Sal armoniack, Sublimate, ana, boil them being
finely ground in as much strong vinegar as the matter wayeth, until two third
parts be consumed, and that there remain a third: then keep it in a glass
close shut unto thy use. As I will show thee in diverse places when occasion
shall serve.

To make oil of Antimony.
Rec. Antimoni and calcine it until it will smoke no more, and that it be of a
grayish color, and always as it cluttereth, stamp it again: then take as
much common ashes as the Antimoni, finely searced, and put them in-to a
Retorte well luted, and give it fire according unto art, till all the fumes or
spirits be come forth: giving you charge that your Receiver be very great,
least all break. This Oil is of merueilous virtue against Ulcers: if ye give
ther-of 4. graynes with any sirop, it helps the fever presently. It helps
Phistolowes: and to be short, it is most wholesome in diverse things. But it
were necessary for the Surgeon to be expert in the use thereof, and to mix
it according to his work. And therefore he that cannot use it well, it were
better to let it alone: because it is a perilous thing unto the unskillful, and
precious unto those that know how to use it.

A precious Licoure above all other.
THis is the most precious Water that may be made in ye world, and his virtues
are such, and so many, that they cause the world to marvel at them. The
Mirra and Aloe with Vernish and with as much of our Quintaessence, being myxed,
the which without fire ashes and coals, cannot be separated, and when the
Air, the Water, and Eearth, are separated, each of them shall be apt to
mittigate pains, dissolve humors, help wounds, dissolve pains with-in the
body, and such like matters. This Water I have used diverse times, and caused
the world to wonder of his operations, and so shall every one do that desires
to follow the right way, and that will be a child of art. Thou shall
understand that I would have written this playner, but that I write it to those
that have judgment both of the quantities and virtues: because pearls are
not for swine.

A secret of marvelous virtue.
Rec. A new brick forth of the kill, and break it in small pieces like a Nut,
then lay them in the fire until they be red hot: then take them forth and
quench them in sweet sallet Oil, then take them forth again, and lay them in
the fire until they be red hot: then quench them again, and this ye shall do
at the least five times, and at the last time take them forth, and put them
in-to a glass with Aloes, Frankensence, and Mirrha, and distill it according
to art: then separate each lycoure by him self, and ther-with thou shall work
wonderful cures, if thou know how to use it and whereunto.

Our secret of marvelous virtue in act and strength.
THis Unguent is of marvelous virtue, and was never made by any a-fore,
neither auncientes nor of our time, the which unguent helps putrified Ulcers
in the legs, so that it is to be wondered at: for it works diverse
operations, it mortifieth the evil, mundifieth, incarnateth and cicatriseth,
the which things to the professors of the art seems hard: Nevertheless,
it is true, as I have proved and infinite of times: and because the world
should have it, I have written here the receite.

Rec. Of our Magno licore, and oil of Mastike made at the Apothecaries, and
put them into a vessel of copper, with as much Litarge as ye shall think
good, and so let it stand a good while on the fire, and put there-to of our
Cerote magistrale, and incorporate them well together, and so of yellow, it
shall become black: then take it from the fire, and put ther-in Mercury
precipitate, and stir them well until it be cold, and here-with thou shall
work wonders. It would be necessary for him that will make this receite, to
consider well of the ingrediences of the compositions, the which are written in
this book.

To rectify and preserve the sight of those that are weak sighted.
IF thou will rectify and preserve the sight in those that are weak sighted,
of what cause so-euer it be: thou shall make this Water, and use it according
to this receite.

Rec. Fenell seed, the flowers of Rosemary Rue, Celendine, Cardus benedictus,
Staueseager, Eufrage, Eufrage, of each a handful, Cinomon, Nutmegges, sweet
Almonds, of each one ounce.

Stamp all these grosely, and infuse them in.xxx. pound of pure white wine,
then let it stand.4. days, and then distill it in Balneo, vntil-ye have
received.4. pound, the which keep close by it self, and when thou will occupy
it, put there-off one drop into the eye, when ye go to bed, and in the
morning when ye rise. And thus using it, it will preserve the sight a long
time.

Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it.
THis Lac Virginis, is a solution of Satorne and Sal gemma, the which is a
thing most necessary, for the Chyrurgion to use, and the order ot make it, is
thus.

Rec. Lytarge of gold as much as ye think good, and beat it in fine powder,
then put there-on strong distilled Vinegar, and so let it remain two or three
days, stirring it every day, then boil it until half be consumed, then let
it repose two or three hours, and the vinegar will be clear and of the
color of gold, then pour it forth into a glass, and keep it, then take
Sal gemma and rain water, ana, and dissolve it on warm ashes, and when it is
dissolved, keep it in a glass, and when thou will make Lac Virginis, take of
each of these solutions alike, and mix them together, and thou shall see a
strange thing. For as soon as they are mixed together, they will turn to a
white Unguent like Ceruse or white lead, the which serves in diverse causes
according to the intention of the Chyrurgian. The solution of Lytarge by
himself, with as much Oil of Roses being mixed together, makes a delycate
Unguent, an refriscatiue the which cicatrizeth ulcers with great speed.

To calcine Tutia, and to bring it into a salt.
THou shall dissolve thy Tutia in this water following.

Rec. Sal niter, Roch allome, Vitrioll, Scinaber, ana lib. 1. Beat them
together, and distill them according to Art. Then take that water, and put
there-in thy Tutia, and let it dissolve upon the warm ashes, and when it is
dissolved, vapor away the water until it remain dry, the which take forth,
and put it into an earthen pan vnglased and calcine it with a strong fire.
Then dissolve it in distilled vinegar, and when it is dissolved, vapor away the
vinegar, and the salt will remain in the bottom, the which serves much for
Tinture, and to make a Liniment for the eyes, the which is most precious and
rare, for if ye mix a little ther-off with Hogs grease and Camphir, and then
put it into the eye, it helps them with such speed, that it is to be
wondered at, and not without cause. For his Nature is to give light and to
heal things imperfect. The Tutia mixed with Borax and with our Vernish that we
guylde leather with, and given in proiection upon Venus molte, it causes it to
be in color not much differing from Sol, of the which thou may make strange
things, for he that knew the virtue and quality of Tutia, as well in Alchimi,
as in infirmities, were to be counted a wise man.

To precipitate Mares, and to bring it in to a red powder, called Crocus
martis, the which serves for diverse purposes.
REc. Sal niter refined, Roch Allom, Vitriol Romain, ana, and there-off make a
water according to Art, with all his spirits, and in that water dissolve
thin plates of Iron or steel, and when it is dissolved, vapor away the
water, until it remain dry in a red powder, then take it forth, and calciue
it in a Furnaice of reuerberation.24. hours. Then keep it to thy use, until
thou know more there-off, for it is wounderfull in his operation, as I will
show thee here after.

A secret of Turpentine of Ciprus.
THe Turpentine of Ciprus is a kind more finer then our Turpentine, and
without comparison, and of more virtue then ours is, and this the Doctors say,
does dissolve pains and preserves the body, if it be taken inwardly: because
they say, that Turpentine is an incorruptible Gum, the which is most true.
But in that Gum there is one part thick and gross that hinders his
operation, and he that can separate this gross part from the noble parts,
shall do great wonders therewith: It is needful then with the fire and the
means of our Quintaessence, to make the separation of the Elements, the which
are.4. Water, Oil, Lyquor, and Earth. The Water is profitable, the Oil is
perfect, the Lyquor is noble, and the Earth that remains is spoiled and of no
substance, and with those things thou may do high and great cures, when they
are applied according as they ought to be, because many good and profitable
things through the want of perfect applycation in time and place many times do
hurt, and to show the troth I will show thee an example of wine the which is a
precious lyquor, the which being drunk in the morning is hurtefull to many, to
eat meat betwixt meals is not good, and many such like things, yt when
they be not done with order do hurt, and therefore it is necessary for those
that will understand that matter to be of a good intellygence, as well in making
it, as in using or applying it to the sick.

IF any be disposed to have any of these afore-sayd compositions ready made, for
the most part he may have them at Paul's Wharfe, by one John Hester
practisioner in the Art of distilliations, at the sign of the Furnaises.

FINIS.
blazon or coat of arms MIEVL X. VAVLT. MOVRIR-EN. VERTV. QVE. VIVRE. EN.
HONCTE.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas East. 1580.


