A TREATISE OF FAITH, WHEREIN IS BRIEFLY, AND PLANLY SHOWED, A DIRECT WAY, BY
WHICH EVERY man may resolve, and settle his mind, in all doubts, questions,
or controversies, concerning matters of Faith.

Isa. 30. Haec est via, ambulate in ea, This is the way, walk in it.

A. D.

Permissu Superiorum. 1605.

A TABLE OR BRIEF Summary of the whole Treatise.
Cap. 1. THat faith is absolutely necessary to salvation. Cap. 2. That this
faith, is but one. Cap. 3. That this one faith, must be infallible. Cap. 4.
That this one, infallible faith, must be entire. Cap. 5. That Almighty God has
provided some sufficient means, whereby, all sorts of me^, may at all times,
learn this one infallible, and entire faith. Cap. 6. What conditions or
properties are requisite, in this rule or means, provided by almighty God.
Cap. 7. That Scripture alone, cannot be this rule, or means. Cap. 8. That no
natural wit of man, or humane learning, either by interpreting Scripture, or
otherwise, can be this rule of faith. Cap. 9. That private spirit, cannot be
this rule. Cap. 10. That the doctrine or teaching of the true Church of Christ,
is the rule or means, whereby al men must learn the true faith. Cap. 11. That
this true Church of Christ, of which we must learn the true faith, is always
to continue, without interruption, until the worlds end. Cap. 12. That this
same Church must always be visible. Cap. 13. How we should discern or know,
which company of men, is this true visible Church, of which we must learn
true faith. Cap. 14. That those Notes or marks which heretics assign. To wit
true doctrine of faith; and right use of Sacraments be not sufficient. Cap. 15.
That these four, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica. One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic, be good marks, whereby men may discern, which is the true
Church. Cap. 16. That these four marks, agree only to the Roman Church. That
is to say, (...) that company of men, which agree^^ in profession of faith,
with the Church of Rome.. 1. That the Roman Church onely^ One.. 2. That the
Roman Church only is Holy.. 3. That the Roman Church is only Catholic..
4. That the Roman Church is only Apostolic.
Cap. 17. The conclusion of the whole discourse. Viz. That the Roman Church is
the only true Church of Christ, of which, all men must learn, the one,
infallible, entire faith, which is necessary to salvation. And that the
Protestants Congregation cannot be this true Church.


THE PREFACE.
BEing moved by some friends, to confer with one of indifferent good
judgment, and of no ill disposition of nature, though very earnest in that
religion which he did profess: I was desirous to do my best endeavors, to let
him plainly see, that the Catholic Roman faith was the only right. For
which purpose, I did chose, to let pass disputes about particular points, and
in general to show; First, that it is necessary to admit an infallible
authority in the true Catholic church: by reason whereof, every one is to
learn of it only, which is the true faith of Christ. Secondly, that those
only, which profess the Roman faith, are the true Catholic church. The
which having proved: I did consequently conclude; that the faith and belief,
which the authority of the Roman church, does commend unto us, ought,
without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.

Upon which points, when he had heard my discourse: he desired me, for his
better remembrance, to set down in writtinge, what I had said. The which I
had first thought to have done briefly, and to have imparted it only to him:
but by some other frie^des, it was wished, that I should handle the matter,
more at large; they inte^dinge (as it seemed) that it might not only do good
to him, but to others also, that should have need of it, as well as he. Of which
sort of men standinge in this need, as I could not (consideringe their
miserable case) but take great pity: so I was easily moved, especially at my
friends request, to be willinge to do my endeavor, which might be for their
relief and succor: and to take any course, which might turn to their help
and profit.

Now of all other courses, which have been, and might be undertaken; that,
which, in my speech, I did choose, as most expedient for him, with whom I did
confer, seemed best also for me, to prosequute in this my writing, for the
benefit of him, and others, and this for four reasons.

First, because it is very brief, and compendious;

Secondly, because, it, standinge only upon few, but most certain
conclusions, and grounds* is free from many cauils of the captions, which more
ample discourses are subject unto.



the true faith in all points: and that this church is, by Gods appointeme^t,
to teach all men in all matters of faith, which is the infallible truth: and
further, that this Church, which is thus taught, and must teach us, is no other
but that visible company, which professes the Roman faith: then he shall not
need to strain his wits in studying, or to wast words in wrangling, about
particular points of controversies, or to use any such trouble some and
uncertain means to find out the truth: but may easily, and most certainly
be instructed in all, by only enquiring and finding out (which all sorts of
men may easily do) what is generally holden, by the Church, for truth, in all
particular points, whereof they doubt. Of which points also, (If they be
desirous) they may have sufficient authority and reason yielded, by the
learned of the same Church, though they should not so desire reason to be
yielded, that without reason be given, they would not believe at all, or as
grounding their faith upon the reason given: since Christian belief ought
only to be grounded, upon the authority of God, speakinge by the mouth of the
church who ought to be believed in all matters, without giving any reason.

The which brief and compendious resolution of faith, whosoever will (as every
one may securely, and (as in the discourse following shall be declared) must
necessarily embrace: beside the ease, he shall also reap this commodity,
that, cutting of all occasions of needless and fruitelesse doubts, questions
and disputes, concerning matters of faith: wherein unsettled minds spend their
time and spirit; he shall have good leisure, and better likinge, then
ordinarily such unquiet minds can have, to emploie his endeuoures more
fruitfully otherways; to wit, in building upon the firm foundation of
steadfast faith, the gould and precious stones, of Gods love, and other virtues,
in practice whereof consists that good life, which makes a man become the
living temple of almighty God: the which temple, Gods spirit will not only
visitte with holy inspirations and blessings oftentimes, in this life, but he
will also inhabit and dwell continually in it, both by grace, here, and by
glory, in the other most happy, and everlasting life.

A TREATISE OF FAITH.
CHAP. I. That true faith is absolutely necessary to salvation.
Whosoever has a true desire to please God, and an earnest care to save his
own soul, (the which should be the chiefest desire, and care of every
Christian man) must first resolve, and settle himself, in a sound belief of
matters of faith: holding it for a most assured ground, That there is a faith,
which, whosoever wants, cannot possibly please God, (nor consequently be
saved, since none are saved that do not please God.) This ground is set down by
S. Paul himself, who says, Heb 11.
Sine fide impossible est placere Deo: without faith it is impossible to
please God. The same is confirmed by S. Augustine, who says, Constat, Ser. 38.
de Tempore.
neminem ad veram posse peruenire beatitudinem, nisi D^o placeat: and Deo
neminem placere posse, nisi per fidem. Fides namque est bonorum omnium
fundamentum. Fides est humanae salutis initium. Sine hac, nemo ad siliorum Dei
consortium peruenire potest: quia sine ipsa, nec in hoc seculo, quisquam
iustificationis consequitur gratiam, nec in futuro, vitam possidebit aeternam.
It is certain, that none can come to true happiness, unless he please God: and
that none can please God, but by faith. For faith is the foundation of all good
things. Faith is the beginning of man's salvation. Without this, none can come
to the fellowship of the children of God: because without this, neither does
any, in this world, obtain the grace of justification, neither shall he, in
the next, possess eternal life. Thus faith S. Austen. And the same might be
confirmed, out of other To. 2. Galat. 3. Ephesians. 2.
Scriptures and Co^c. Milea Can. 4. Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 7.8. Iren. l. 5.
cap. 29. Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Joan. and Sermon de Fide and Char. Cirill.
Alex. in Joan. lib. 4.
Fathers, but that the matter is clear enough. only this I will add, that
when the Scriptures do require faith, as a thing absolutely necessary to
salvation; the common tradition of counsels and Fathers do interpret, not
only, that there is a positive precept of faith; (for if it were but a positive
precept, ignorance might excuse in some case) but that at least, some kind of
faith is necessaria necessitate medij; that is to say, is ordained as a
necessary means, without which, no man can attain salvation, in any case: and
that in this matter Si quis ignorant, ignorabitur. If any man by ignorance do
not know, 1. Cor. 14
he shall not be known, as S. Paul speaks.

CHAP. II. That this faith, necessary to salvation, is but one.
THis faith (which I have showed to be so absolutely necessary to salvation) is
but One only. This is plainly proved, out of S. Paul, who says, Ephesians. 4.
Vnus Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptisma, signifying, that, like as there is but
one Lord, and one Baptism: so there is but One faith. The same is confirmed,
with the authority of the ancient Fathers Nisi vna est (says S. Leo.) Fides
non est, dicente apostolo, Ser. 4. in Natiu. Dom.
vnus Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptisma. Unless it be one, it is not faith,
since the Apostle says, one Lord one faith, one Baptism. Omni studio (says S.
Hierome) Laborandum est, In cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
primum occurrere in fidei vnitatem. We must labor with all diligence, first
to meet, in the unity of faith. Hanc fidem (says Irenaeus) ecclesia in
vniuersum mundum disseminata diligenter custodit, Lib. 1. c. 3
quasi vnam domum inhabitans: and similiter credit ijs, quasi vnam animam
habens and vnum cor: and consonanter haec praedicat, and docet, and tradit,
quasi vnum possidens os. N^ quamuis in mundo dissimiles sint loquelae, tames
virtus traditionis vna and eadem est. This faith, the Church spread over the
whole world, does diligently keep, as dwelling in one house: and does believe
in one like manner those things, (to wit which are proposed for points of
faith) as having one soul and one heart: and does preach, and teach, and
deliver by tradition those things, after one uniform manner, as possessing one
mouth. For although there be diverse and different languages in the world, yet
the virtue of tradition is One and the same. Thus says this Father. By whose
words we may understand, not only, that there is but one faith, but also, how
it is said to be one; which might seem not to be one, considering there are
so many points or articles, which we believe by our faith; and so many several
men, who have in them this faith; yet One (says this Father) it is, because
the whole Church does believe those points, in one like manner. That is to
say, because the belief of one man, is in all points like, and nothing
different from the belief of another: or, because every faithful man believes
every point or article, for one and the like cause, or formal reason; to wit,
because God has revealed it: and delivered it to us, by his Catholic Church,
to be believed. For which reason every one should believe, whatsoever he
belieueth as a point of Christian faith:

CHAP. III. That this one faith necessary to salvation is infallible.
THIS one faith, without which we cannot be saved, must be infallible, and most
certain. This is clear, because, faith is that credit or inward assent of
mind, which we give to that, which God, (who is the prime or first verity,
which neither can deceive, nor be deceived) has revealed unto us, by means of
the preachinge or teachinge of the true church; as we may gather out of S.
Paul, when he says: Quomodo credent ei, Romans 10.
quem non audierunt? quomodo andient sine praedicante? quomodo praedicabunt
nisimittantur? etc. ergo fides ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum Christi. The
sense of which words is, that, since we can not believe, unless we hear: nor
hear, unless some lawfully sent do preach unto us; faith is bredde in us, by
hearing, and yielding assent or credit, to the word of Christ, made known
unto us, by the preachinge of the true Church, which only is lawfully sent of
God; wherefore, like as the word of Christ, being God, is absolutely
infallible, so also the creditt given to this word, (which is our faith) must
needs be also most certain and infallible. Fides (says S. Basille) est,
Ser. de Fidei confessione.
eorum quae dicta sunt, assentiens approbatio, sine vlla haesitatione, cum
animi persuasione de eorum veritate, quae Dei munere praedicata sunt. Faith is
a consenting approbation of those things, which are said; and an undoubted
persuasion of mind, of the truth of those things, which are preached, Hom.
12. in epist ad Hebraeos.
by the gift of God. Fides (says S. Chrysostom) dici non potest, nisi circa
^a quae non videntur, amplius quam circa ea quae videtur, certitudinem quis
habeat. It can not be called faith, unless one be more certain of those things
which are not seen, then of those things which are seen. The reason whereof,
the same S. Chrysostom declares in an other place, Hom. 83. in Matthew.
saying: Superet sensum and rationem nostram sermo ipsius: (Dei) nam verbis
eius fraudari non possumus: sensus vero noster deceptu facillimus est. Let Gods
word (says he) surmount our sense and reason: for we can not be deceived by
his words, but our sense is most easily deceived. Since, therefore, our faith
is grounded on the word of God, revealed to us by Jesus Christ our Lord,
speaking by the mouth of the Church, as he says himself Luc. 10.
Qui vos audit me audit: he that hears you hears me: we ought to receive
the word of faith, preached by the true Church, 1. These. 2.
not as the word of man, but, as it is truly, the word of God; and
consequently, we must account it a thing most certain, and absolutely
infallible.

CHAP. IIII. That this one infallible faith necessary to salvation must also
be entire.
THis one infallible faith, without which we can not please God, must also be
entire, whole, and sound, in all points and it is not sufficient to believe
steadfastly some points, misbeleeuing or not believed obstinately other some, or
any one. The reason of this is, because, every point of doctrine, yea every
word, that almighty God has revealed, and by his Church, propounded unto us to
be believed, must under pain of damnation, be believed; as we may gather out
of S. Mark; Mar. c. 16.
where when our Savior had given chardge to his Disciples, to preach the
gospel to every creature (the which chardge he also gave in S. Matthew, Math.
28.
saying: docete omnes gentes, etc. docentes eos seruare omnia qu^cumque
mandaui vobis. teach all nations, etc. teachinge the^ to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you) he pronounces indefinitely; Qui non
crediderit, condemnabitur. he that shall not believe, shall be condemned; not
excepting, or distinguishing any one point of doctrine, as needles to be
believed, or which a man might, at his pleasure, misbelieue, or doubt of
without danger, and this not without reason: for not to believe any one point
whatsoever, which God, by revealing it, does restifie to be true, and which,
by his Church, he has commanded us to believe, must needs be damnable, as
being a notable injury to Gods verity, and a great disobedience to his will.
But all points of faith are thus testified by God, and commanded to be
believed, otherwise they be not points of faith, but of opinion, or some other
kind of knowledge. Therefore all points of faith, must, under pain of
damnation, be believed; believed (I say) either expressly and actually, as
learned men may do: or implicit and virtually as unlearned Catholics
commonly do: who believing expressly those articles, which every one is bound
particulerly to know, do not in the rest, obstinately doubt, or hold some
error against the Church, but have a mind prepared to submit themselves in
all things, to the authority of the Church, (which they are sure is taught and
directed by the spirit of God) and do in general hold for undoubted truth,
whatsoever the Catholic or universal Church does believe.

Secondly, that man which believing some points, should deny others: cannot,
while he does thus, have one and the same faith, which other Christians have.
Since he does not (as Erenaeus requires to the unity of faith) believe the
points of faith in a like; but in a different manner from other Christians.
That i^ to say. Neither does he believe all the points which they do:
neither does he believe those points wherein he does agree with them* for the
same reason that they do, that is to say. He does not believe those point^
which he seems to believe precisely* for that God has revealed them, and by
his Church propounded them; for if he^ did; since this reason is common to al
point of faith, he should as soon believe all, (...) any one. He has not,
therefore (I say) one and the same faith, which other Christians have, (who
notwithstanding have the true faith.) And since as S. Leo said nisi (...) est,
fides non est. If it be not one faith, it i^ no faith at all: It follows
that he, tha^ believes not entirely al points of faith* has no faith at all:
and consequently* since one, that has no faith, can no way be saved; It is
evident that he, that believing some articles, does obstinately deny others,
cannot be saved.

Thirdly, to believe some points o^ faith, and to deny others, or any one; is
heresy: as to deny all is absolute Infidelity. But it is sure, even out of
Scripture, that Heretics shall not be saved, no more then Infidels. Joan. 3.
For as it is said Qui non credit, iam iudicatus est, he that believes not,
is already judged: so the Apostle Saint Paul reckons heresies among the
works of the flesh; In the Greek text, aires es.
of all which he does pronounce. Qui talia agunt regnum Dei non consequentur.
Gal. 5.
Those which do such like things, shall not attain the kingdom of God.

Fourthly, I may confirm the same, with the testimony of the ancient Fathers.
First of S. Athanasius in his creed, which is commonly known and approved of
all. Athanas. in Simb.
Quicunque (says he) vult salvus esse, ante omnia opus est, vt teneat
Catholicam fidem: quam nisi quisque integram, inuiolatamque Seruauerit, absque
dubio in aeternum peribit.

Whosoever will be saved, before all things, it is needful that he hold the
Catholic faith: which unless every one do keep entire and inviolate, Test
theodoreto lib. 4. eccles. histor. c. 1^.
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. Qui sunt in Sacris Litteris
eruditi, (says S. Basil) ne ^nam quidem sillabam diuinorum dogmatu^ prodi
sinunt: sed pro istius defensione, si opus est, null^^ non mortis genus
libenter amplectuntur. Those that are well instructed in holy Writ, do not
suffer one syllable of divine doctrine to be betrayed or yielded up: but for
the defense thereof, if need be, do willingly embrace any kind of death.
Nihil periculosius (says Nazianzen) his haereticis esse potest, Gregor.
Nazianz. tract. de Fide.
qui cum integre per omnia decurrant; vno tamen verbo, quasi venem gutt^, veram
illam ac simplicem fidem dominicam infi^iunt. Nothing can be more perilous
then these heretics, who, when they run uprightly through all the rest,
yet, with one word, as with a drop of poison, do infect that true and
sincere faith of our Lord.

CHAP. V. That there must be some means provided by Almighty God, by which all
sorts of men may learn, this faith, which is so necessary to salvation.
AS this one, infallible, and entire faith, is necessary to salvation, to al
sorts of men, as well unlearned, as learned: so we must say, 1. Tim. 2.
that almighty God Qui vult omnes homines saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem
veritatis venire who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of truth; has (for proof that this, of his part, is a true will)
provided some rule or means, whereby every man learn^d, and unlearned, may
sufficiently in all points, questions or doubts of faith, be infallibly
instructed, what is to be holden for the true faith: and that the only cause,
why any man misseth of the true faith, is either because he does not seek
out, and find this rule and means, or having found it, he will not use it, and
in all points, (submitting his own sense, self-opinion, and proper Judgment)
obediently yield assent unto it; as the nature of divine faith, and the duty
of every Christian, binds him to do. This is proved. Because, if Almighty God
has a true will, of his part, 1. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3. Aug. lib. de
Sp. and lib. c. 33. Prosper. lit. 2. de vocat gent. cap. 23.25.28.
to lead all men to this happy end of eternal salvation, (as it may be
plainly proved that he has out of Scripture and Fathers) he must needs
provide them sufficient means, by which it may at least, be possible for them
to attain that end. For we never say, that God has a will to do any thing,
unless he do either absolutely work the thing, D. Ambros. Ser. 8. in Psalm.
118. Iren. l. 4. cap. 71.
or at least, provide means sufficient, by which it is possible to be done.
But unless there be such a rule or means provided, by which every one
learned and unlearned, may attain to this one, infallible and entire faith, of
which I have spoken before, there are not sufficient means provided, by which
it is possible for all men to come to salvation; since (as I proved) without
that faith, it is impossible for any one, to come to salvation. Therefore we
must needs say, that Almighty God has provided this rule or means, by which
every man, eue^ the most unlearned, may sufficiently be instructed in matters
of faith.

To this purpose says S. Austen: Si Dei prouidentia praesidet rebus humanis,
Lib. de vtil. credendi
non est desperandum, ab eodem ipso Deo auctoritatem aliqua^ constitutam esse,
qua, velut certo gradu, nitentes attollamur in Deum. If Gods providence (says
he) rule and govern humane matters, (as he proves that he does) we may not
despair, but that there is a certain auctority, appointed by the same God,
upon which, staying our selves, as upon a sure step, we may be lifted up to
God. Saint Austen therefore does acknowledge some auctority to be needful, as a
means whereby we may be lifted up to God. The which lifting up to God, is
first begun by true faith: and because, this auctority is so needful a
means, he would not have us doubt, but that God, whose providence stretches
it self to all humane matters, has not failed to provide this means for us,
it being a principal matter, and so principal, as upon which (according to
the ordinary course) depends the sum of our salvation. We are not therefore
(I say) to doubt, but that almighty God has provided a means, whereby
Animalis homo qui non percipit ^a quae sunt spiritus Dei, 1. Cor. 2.
a sensual man who has no understanding of the divine mysteries of faith, may
come to know them, by a firm and infallible belief.

Only the question is, what manner of thing this means must be; and where
every man must seek and find it, that having found it he may (as S. Austen
speaks) stay himself upon it, as upon a sure step, thereby to be lifted
up to a true faith, and by faith to God. The which question being of so great
consequence, that it being well determined, a man need never make more question
in matters of faith; I will (God willing) in the chapters following, endeavor to
resolve it, as clearly as I can. And this I purpose to do, first by setting
down, what conditions or properties this rule of faith must have: afterward
by proving particulerly, that neither Scripture alone: nor any natural wit or
humane learning: nor private spirit, can be this rule of faith. And finally
that this rule, which all men may safely and must necessarily follow, can be no
other, but the teaching of the Catholic Church.

CHAP. VI. What conditions or properties must be found in the rule of faith.
THis rule, which almighty God has provided, as a sufficient means, to direct
me^, to the knowledge of true faith, necessary to salvation; must have three
conditions or properties.

First it must be certain and infallible; for otherwise it cannot be a
sufficient foundation, whereupon to build faith, which (as is proved before) is
absolutely infallible.

Secondly it must be such, as may be certainly, and plainly known, of all
sorts of men. For if to any sort, it could not be known, or not certainly
known, it could not be to them a rule or means, whereby they might direct
themselves, to the certain knowledge of the true faith.

Thirdly, it must be universal, that it may not only make us know certainly,
what is the true faith in some one, two, or more points, but absolutely in all
points of faith. For otherwise it were not a sufficient means, whereby we may
attain to an entire faith; which integrity of faith is necessary to salvation,
in such wise, as has been declared, and proved before.

CHAP. VII. That Scripture alone cannot be this rule of faith.
OVT of these former grounds four conclusions.

The first conclusion is, that Scripture alone, especially as it is, by
Protestants translated into the English tongue; cannot be this rule of faith.

This I prove.
First, for that these translations fail in the first condition; that is to
say, they are not infallible; (as the rule of faith must be) for neither were
the Scriptures written in this language, immediately by the holy Ghost: neither
were the translators assisted by the same holy Ghost infallibly. Infallibly (I
say) that is, in such sort, as it were impossible that they should err in any
point. Since, therefore, the translators, as being but men, may err. (To say
nothing of that which by Gregory Martin is proved: and by the often changes of
new and variable translations is showed that some have erred) how can a man,
(and especially an unlearned man, who has not sufficient means, learning, nor
leisure to compare the translations with the prime authentical original) how
can (I say) such a man be infallibly sure, that this particular translation,
which he has, does not err? and if in some places it err; how ca^ he be
infallibly sure, that in those places, which do seem to favor that sect,
which he follows, it does not err? unless he will admit an infallible
auctority in the Church, to assure us, that such, or such a translation does
not err, in any point, of which auctority, I shall speak more hereafter.

Secondly, they fail in the second condition or property, which the rule of
faith should have. For the Scriptures themselves alone, in what language
soever, be obscure, and hard to be understood, at least to unlearned men, who
cannot read them; and therefore the Scriptures alone, cannot be, unto
unlearned men, a sufficient rule to instruct them in all points of faith; as is
plain. For lock up an unlettered man, and an English Bible, for a time in a
studdy; and he will come forth (I warrant you) as ignorant in matters of faith,
as he went in; if we add no other means to instruct him, but the bare
written Word, which he cannot read. And yet unlearned men may be saved: and
saved they cannot be, without an entire and infallible faith: and this they
cannot have, unless there be some certain rule and infallible means provided
by almighty God, meet for the capacity, to teach them this faith: and
Scripture alone (as is now proved) is not a rule meet for the capacity of
unlearned men, or apt to instruct them sufficiently, in all points of faith.
But what speak I only of unlearned me^? since, also learned men cannot, by
only reading the scriptures, be infallibly sure, that they rightly understand
them. For while they understand one way, perhaps they ought to understand
another way: that which they understand plainly and literally, ought perhaps
to be understood figuratively and mystically; and contrary, that which they
understand figuratively, ought perhaps to be understood properly. And seeing
that it is most certain, that all do not expound right, since the exposition of
one, is contrary to the exposition of another; (as right is never contrary to
right) how should one be infallibly sure, that he only expounds right;
having nothing to assure him, but the seeming of his own sense and reason,
which is as uncertain and fallible, as the judgments and persuasions of other
men, who seem to themselves, to have attained, as well as he, the right
interpretation or sense. Moreover there be many things required to the perfect
understanding of Scripture, which are found but in very few: and those also in
whom those gifts are, are not infallibly sure, that they are so guided by
those gifts, but that, both they and others may prudently doubt, least
sometimes, in their private expositions, as men, they err. And consequently,
their private expositions cannot be that rule of faith, which we seek for,
which must on the one side be determinately and plainly understood: and on
the other side, it must be infallible, certain, and such as cannot err.

Thirdly, they fail in the third condition. For the Scriptures are not so
universal, as the rule of faith had need to be. For this rule ought to be so
universal, that it may be able, absolutely to resolve and determine all
doubts and questions of faith, which either have bin, or may hereafter be in
controversy; for otherwise there were not sufficient means provided, by
which, schism and heresies might be a^oided: unity of faith, (so necessary to
salvation) might be conserved among Christian men. But the Scriptures be not
thus universal. For there be diverse questions or doubts, moved now a days,
and those also touching very substantial matters, which are not expressly set
down, nor determined, by only express Scripture. For where have we any
express Scripture, to prove, that all those, and only those books which
Catholics or Protestants hold for Scripture, or indeed Gods word, and true
Scripture? this we shall not find expressly set down in a part of
Scripture. This point, therefore, whereupon depends the certainety of every
point, proved out of Scripture, cannot be made certain to our knowledge, or
belief; unless we admit some other infallible rule, or auctority, whereupon
we may ground an infallible belief; which infallible rule if we admit, to
assure us, that there is, at all, any Scripture: and that those books, and no
other be Canonical Scripture; why should we not admit the same to assure
us vnfalliblie, which is the true sense and meaning of the same Scripture.
Hereupon S. Austen says very well Cur non apud eos diligentissime requiram,
Lib. de vtilitate credendi, cap. 4.
quid Christus praeceperit, quorum auctoritate commotus, Christum aliquid
praecepisse iam credidi? Tu ne mihi melius expositurus es, quid ille dixerit?
etc. Why should I not most diligently ask, or learn of those, (he means of
the Catholic Church) what Christ has commanded, by whose auctority I was
moved to believe, that Christ commanded any thing at all? what Will thou
expound unto me better, what he has said? that is to say, the meaning of his
words. Ibidem.
Quae (says he) ista tanta de^ent^a est, illis creed Christo esse credendum,
and ^ nobis disce, quid ille dix^rit? multo facilius ^ibi persuaderem, Christo
non esse credendum: quam de illo quidquam, nisi ab ijs; per quos ei
credidissem, discendum. What a madness is this in thee, to say, believe them (to
wit the Catholics) that we must believe Christ (and the Scriptures to be
his word) yet learn of us, what Christ said? (that is to say what is the
meaning of his word) I should (says S. Austen) much more easily persuade my
self, that I ought not to believe Christ at all, then that I must learn any
thing, concerning him, of any, except of those, of whom I have already learned
to believe in him.

Thus I have proved, that those english translations, whereupon Protestants
commonly build their faith, cannot be a sufficient rule of true Christian
faith. First because they are not infallibly free from error. Secondly, for
that all men cannot read them; neither can any by only reading, be sure to
attain the right sense without which to have the words of Scripture, is to
have them as Austen says ad specie^, non ad salutem for a show, but not to
salvation Lastly for that all points of doctrine, which appertain to true
Christian faith, are not expressly set down in Scripture, Aug. l. 5. de bapt.
and donat. cap. 23. Basil. lib. de Sp. cap. 29. Epiph. haer. 61.
as, beside my proof, S. Austen S. Basi^l, and Epiphanius do affirm. Some of
which reasons have also force to prove, that Scripture alone, in what language
soever, is not a fit means, to instruct sufficiently, all sorts of men in all
matters of faith. Wherefore I may absolutely conclude, that Scripture alone
cannot be that (...) of faith, which we seek for.

Some object against this conclusion, that place of S. Paul. Omnis Scriptura
diuinitus ^^^spirata, vtilis est ad doce^dum etc. vt perfectus (...) homo etc.
But this place proves nothing against that which I have said. For it says
not, that Scripture alone is sufficient to instruct a man to perfection, but
that it is profitable for this purpose, as it is indeed and the rather,
because, it commends unto us the auctority of the Church, which (as I shall
afterward prove) is sufficient. Now it is certain, that to be profitable,
and to be of it self alone sufficient, be far different things. Stones and
Timber be profitable to the building of an house: yet they alone, without a
worke-man to square them, and set them in order, be not sufficient for this
purpose.

CHAP. VIII. That no natural wit or learning can be the rule of faith.
THE Second Conclusion is, that no one man's natural wit and learning;
neither any company of men never so learned, (only as they are learned men, not
infallibly assisted by the holy Spirit of God) can, either by interpreting
Scripture, or otherwise, be this rule of faith.

This I prove.
Because all this wit and learning, be it never so exquisite or rare, is
humane, natural, and fallible; and therefore it cannot be a sufficient
foundation, whereupon to build a divine, supernatural, and infallible faith.

This reason I confirm. Because, whatsoever a man, never so witty and learned
propounds to others, to be believed upon the only credit of his word, wit,
o^ humane study and learning; it can have no more certainety, then is this his
word* wit, and learning. But these being all natural and humane: are subject
to error* and deceit. Romans 3.
For Omnis homo mendax, then is no man, but he may, both deceive, and be
deceived: and may (if he have no other help, but of nature, and industry)
both be deceived, in thinking, that to be Gods word, which is not: or that to
be the true meaning, and sense of Gods word, which is not: and may also deceive
others, whilst being to confident of his wit and learning* he presumes to
teach others, these his erroneous opinions. Therefore the belief which shall be
builte upon such a man's word and teaching, is, or may be a false belief; and
always is uncertain and fallible; and therefore can never be a true divine
and Christian faith, which always is most certain and infallible. And this
which I have said of the wit and learning of one particular man; may also be
applied* to prove against the wit^ and learning of any company of men, having
no assistance, but their own natural gifts, and industry of study or
reading.

This same reason I confirm yet again more strongly. For the rule of faith,
must be able to propose to us infallibly, not only the letters and seeming
sense* but the true sense of Gods word, and the sense in^ended by the holy
Spirit of God, the author of this word; otherwise it cannot be a sufficient
means, to breed in us, an infallible, Christian faith, and belief, which is
only grounded, upon the true sense intended by almighty God, the prime or
first verity, the speaker of this word. But no man, nor no company of men, can
by their natural wit and learning, tell infallibly, what (especially in all
points of faith) is the true intended sense of Gods word. 1. Cor. 2.
For as S. Paul says Quis c^gnouit sens^m domini? who has known, to wit, by
nature, art, or learning) the sense of our Lord. Ibidem.
Quae Dei sum (says the same S. Paul) nemo cognouit nisi spiritus Dei those
things which are of God, no man has known, but the spirit of God. And
therefore that knowledge, which himself had of divine matters, came not from
any natural wit of man, Ibidem.
but (as he plainly affirms) from the spirit of God nobis reuelauit Deus
per spiritum suum. God has revealed unto us, (says he) by his spirit.
Therefore we may well conclude. That no one man, nor (...) company of men,
(without the assistance of God^ spirit) can, either by interpreting Scripture,
or otherwise, be the rule of faith.

Hence I infer that those, who, for matters of faith, rely wholly, either
upon their own private opinion or judgment, of the sense and meaning of
Scripture; o^ upon the learning and judgment of others, who are but men, not
infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, nor by him infallibly preserved from
error; (as many or rather all Protestants do) those (I say) cannot have divine
and Christian faith* but only fallible opinion, and humane faith.

CHAP. IX. That a private spirit cannot be the rule of faith.
THE Third Conclusion is, that no private man, who persuades himself to be
singulerly instructed by the Spirit, can be this rule of faith; especially so
far forth, as he believes or teaches, contrary to the received doctrine of
the Catholic Church.

This I prove.
First, because S, Paul says Si quis vobis ^^^ngelizauerit, praeter id quod
accepistis, Gal. 1.
Anathemasit. Pronouncing generally, that, whosoever teaches or preaches,
contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic Church, should be held
Anathematized or accursed.

Secondly, the rule of faith, must be infallible, plainly known to all sorts
of men, and universal; that is to say, such, as may sufficiently instruct all
men, in all points of faith, without danger of error. (As has been proved
before.) But this private spirit is not such. For, first, that man himself*
cannot be infallibly sure, that he in particular is taught by the holy Spirit.
For neither is there any prom^se in Scripture, to assure infallibly, that he
in particular is thus taught: neither is there any other sufficient reason to
persuade the same. For suppose he have such extraordinary motions, feelings or
Illustrations, which, he thinks, cannot come of himself, but from some
Spirit; yet he cannot in reason straight ways conclude, that he is thus moved
and taught by the Spirit of God. For sure it is, that every spirit, is not the
Spirit of God. As there is the Spirit of truth: so there is a spirit of error.
As there is an Angel of light: so there is a prince of darkness. Yea
sometimes Ipsa Sathanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis. 2. Cor. 11
Satan himself, does transfigure himself, into an Angel of light. Wherefore
he had need very carefully to put in practice, the advice of Saint John who
says. 2. John 4.
Nolite credere omni spiritui, sed probate spiritus, si ex Deo sint. Do not
believe every spirit, but prove or try them, whether they be of God or not.
Neither does it seem sufficient, that a private man try them, only by his
own judgment* or by those motions, feelinges or illuminations, which, in his
private conceipte, are confirmable to Scripture; because al his trial is very
uncertain, and subject to error; by reason that our own judgment
(especially in our own matters) is very easily deceived; and that Satan can
so cunningly cover himself under the shape of a good Angel; and so color his
wicked designements with pretense of good; and so guild his dark and gross
errors, with the glistering light of the words, and seeming sense of
Scripture, that hardly, or not at all, he shall be perceived. Wherefore the
safest way were to try these spiritts, by the touchstone, of the true Pastors
of the Catholic Church, who may say with S. Paul, non ignoramus cogitationes
Sathanae, 2. Cor. 2.
we are not ignorant of the cogitations of Satan; and who may also say with S.
John. Nos ex Deo sumus; 1. John 4.
qui nouit Deum audit nos: qui non est ex Deo, non audit nos. In hoc
cognoscimus spiritum veritatis, and spiritum erroris. We are of God; he that
knows God hears us: he that is not of God, does not hear us. In this we
know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. Now, if any will not
admit this manner of trying, and discerning the spirit of truth, from the
spirit of error, but will trust their own judgment alone, in this matter;
fear they may justly, nay, rather they may be sure (as Cassian says) that
they shall worship in their thoughts, Collat. 61. c. 11.
the angel of darkness, for the Angel of light, to their exceeding great
harm. And, at least, howsoever their private affection and self-love incline
them to think well of themselves, and of that spirit, which they permit to
teach them those singular points of new and strange doctrine: yet sure it is,
that this their persuasion of the goodness of their spirit, is not infallible,
as the rule of faith must be; since diverse, now adays, persuade themselves in
the same manner to be taught by the holy Spirit; and yet (one of them teaching
against another) it is not possible, that all, that thus persuade themselves,
should be taught by this spirit; since this Spirit does never teach contrary to
it self. And therefore some, in this their persuasion, must needs be
deceived. And therefore who, having no testimony of evident miracle, or some
other undoubted proof, dare arrogantly affirm, that he only is not deceived;
especially in such sort, as to condemn all other, and to propose himself to
himself and others, as the only sufficient rule of faith, considering that
others, who presume, and persuade themselves altogether in like manner are, in
this their persuasion, deceived.

But suppose one could assure himself, that he were taught by Gods Spirit
immediately, what is the true faith in all points, in such sort, that he could
err in none, (as it is not the manner of almighty God, to teach men
immediately by himself alone, or by an Angel; but rather as the Scripture
tells us fides ex auditu. Romans 10.
Faith is bredde in us by hearing: and is to be required ex ore Sacerdotis out
of the mouth of the Priest: Mal. 5.
and is to be learned of Pastors and Doctors, whom God has appointed in his
Church, of purpose; to instruct us, and continue us in the ancient faith) but
suppose (I say) that one could assuredly persuade himself, to be immediately
taught of God, what is the truth in all points. How should he, without
testimony of miracle, glue assurance to others, that he is thus taught?
especially when he teaches quite contrary to the Catholic Church, which, by
plain promises and testimonies of Scripture, we know to be taught of God.

Perhaps he will allege that general promise of Scripture Omnis qui petit
accipit assuring them thereby, Matthew. 7
that every one that prays for any thing, receives it; and that he has
earnestly prayed for the spirit, therefore he must needs have it. But to this
argument, we may easily answer* that this promise of our Savior, is not so
universally to be understood, as though every one that prays for a thing,
shall infallibly obtain it, without any condition (at least in the manner of
praying) required of our part. For we read, even in Scripture petitis and non
accipitis eo quod male petatis. Iacobi 4.
You ask or pray and receive not (the thing requested) because you ask
amiss. By which place we learn, that to obtain any thing by prayer,
requires a condition of praying well, or in such sort, as is fit; the which
condition, does (as learned men observe) include many circumstances, for fault
of the due observance whereof, it may and does often happen, that our prayer is
not well made, nor in such sort as is fit; and is consequently frustrate of the
efficacy, which otherwise by the promise of our Savior it should have had. Now
these circumstances being many, and diverse of them very inward, it is not very
easy. For any man, to be absolutely sure, that he has observed them, in such
sort, as is fit; and therefore he cannot be absolutely sure, that his prayer
has taken effect; and therefore it is no sufficient proof, whereby one may
persuade others, that he has the Spirit of God, to say, he has prayed for
it; especially considering, that we may find very many most contray, in
religion, one to another, who notwithstanding will say, that they daily pray
for the spirit; and I doubt not, but many of them in some sort, yea earnestly,
after their manner, do pray for it; yet sure it is that all these (being thus
contrary) have it not. How shall we then be assured, that this or that man, who,
presuming upon the assistance of this spirit, (which he thinks he has
obtained by prayer) sets a broache a singular and new inverted doctrine, how
shall we be sure (I say) that such a man has the spirit of God indeed? Some
will perchance say, that we may safely believe them, because, they preach
nothing but pure Scripture, while as for every point of their doctrine, they
cite still sentences of Scripture. But this answer will not serve. First,
because, for and in the name of scripture, they bring forth their false and
corrupt translations, which do differ, in some places, even in words, from
true scripture. Secondly, supposing that they did always cite the true words
of scripture, yet they may easily apply them to a wrong sense or meaning; to
wit to that, which they falsely imagine, (being seduced by their own appetite,
or by their own former error) to be the true sense. For as S. Austen says: Ad
Imagines phantasmatum suorum carnalis anima conuertit omni^ sacramenta and
verba librorum sanctorum: Lib. 3. de bapt. and donatist. cap. 19.
a carnal and sens^all mind (such as heretics are not without; since heresy
it self is accounted, by S. Paul a work of the flesh) does convert or turn
all the mysteries and words of holy books, unto his own imaginations and
fantasies. Whereupon it comes to pass, that, as the same S. Austen says.
Ep. 222. and Tract 18. in Ioanes.
Omnes haeretici, qui in authoritate Scripturas recipient; ipsas sibi videntur
sectari, cumsuos sectentur errores. All heretics that receive and admit the
authority of the Scriptures, seem to themselves to follow the only Scriptures,
when they follow their own errors. And as they may seem to themselves, to
follow only the Scriptures, when they follow their own errors: so they may
seem (especially to the simple people; or to those, who, being seduced by them
wholly build their belief upon the^) to preach nothing but pure Scripture, when
indeed, they preach their own erroneous opinions, colored and painted with
words of Scripture; as it is the manner of every sect master, to confirm his
error, with words of Scripture; yea the Devil himself does sometime, for his
purpose, Matthew. 4.
allege words of Scripture.

Wherefore, there is no reason, whereby we may be assured, that such men have
the Spirit of God: but we may find many reasons to convince that they have not
this Spirit. And to omit, for breuity sake, the seeking out of any other;
even the singularity or priuatenes of their spirit, is sufficient not only to
move us to suspect it, but also to condemn it, and to assure us, that it
cannot be the Spirit of truth; as is very well signified by S. Augustine; who
says, Veritas tua, Domine, Lib. 12. Confess. cap. 25.
nec mea est, nec illius, sed omnium, quos ad eius communionem public vocas;
terribiliter admonens nos, ne eam habere velimus priuatam, ne priuemur ea. Nam
quisquis id, quod tu, ad fruendum, omnibus proponis, sibi proprie vendicat, and
suum esse vult, quod omnium est, a communi propellitur ad sua, id est, a
veritate ad mendacium. Thy truth (O Lord) is neither proper to me, nor him,
but common to all, whom thou do publicly call to the common partaking of
its, warning us terribly to take heed, that we will not have it private to
our self, least we be deprived of it. For whosoever does challenge that to
himself privately, which thou do propose publicly to be enjoyed of all,
and will have that his own, which is common to all, he is driven from the
common to this own, that is to say from the truth to a lie.

CHAP. X. That the doctrine and teaching of the true Church, is the rule of
faith.
THE fourth Conclusion is, that, this infallible rule, which every one ought to
follow, in all points of faith, is the Doctrine and teaching of the true
Church, or company of the true faithful of Christ.

This I prove by this reason.
If our Savior Christ has promised to any company of men, the presence of
himself; and the assistance of his holy spirit, of purpose, to instruct, and
teach them all truth: giving withal peculiar charge and commission to them,
to teach all nations, and to preach to every creature: giving also warrant to
all, that they may safely hear them, giving also commandment, whereby he
binds all, to do, in all things, according to their saying: and threatening
greatly those, who will not hear and believe them: then certainly the
doctrine and teaching of these men, is, in all points, most true and
infallible; and such, as, (if the other conditions, required in the rule of
faith, be not, (as they are not,) wanting) may well be proposed to all sorts,
as an assured ground, whereupon they may safely build an infallible Christian
faith. For look what our Savior Christ has promised must needs be
performed: and whatsoever he warranteth, or commands, may safely, and without
danger of error be done; nay must of necessity be done; especially, when he
threatens those, and will not do it: and consequently if he have promised, to
send his holy spirit, to teach, any company of men, all truth it is not to be
doubted, but that he sends this his holy spirit, and by it teaches them all
truth; and since the teaching of this spirit is infallible, we are not to
doubt, but that this company, is, in all points, infall^bly taught the truth.
If also the same our Savior gave warrant, and commandment, that they should
teach us, and that we should hear them, and do in all things, according to
their saying: we may not likewise doubt, but that they shall be able to teach,
all sorts of men, in all points, the infallible truth; and that all sorts
of men, may, if they will, learn of that company, what, in all points, is the
infallible truth. For otherwise by this general commandment of hearing
them, and doing according to their saying, we should be bound sometime, to
hear and believe an untruth and to do that, which were not upright and good:
which without blasphemy to Christ his verity and goodness can no way be thought.

But so it is, that Christ our Savior has in holy Scripture promised, given
commission, warranted, commanded, and threatened in manner aforesaid.

Therefore we can not doubt, but that their is a certain company (the which is
called the true Church of Christ) which both is, in all points of faith,
infallibly taught by the holy spirit; and is likewise to teach all sorts of
men, in all points of faith, what is the infallible truth: and therefore the
teaching of this company, may well be assigned, and proposed to all men, as an
undoubted, sufficient rule of faith.

The promise of our Savior Christ we have first in the Gospel of S. Matthew:
Mat. c. 28
ego ^obiscum sum omnibus diebus, vsque ad co^sum^ationem seculi: I am with
you, all the days until the end of the world: in which words is promised the
continual presence of Christ himself, (who is veritas the truth it self)
with his Church; not for a while then, or for a while now; but, all the days
until the end of the world. Secondly we have an other promise in the gospel
of S. John: Joan. 14.
Ego rogabo patrem and alium paraclitum dabit vobis, vt maneat vobiscum in
aeter^um, spiritum veritatis. I will ask my father, and he will give you an
other paraelite, the spirit of truth, that he may remain with you (not only
for 600. years, but) for ever. And again (in the same S. John.) to show us,
for what purpose he would have his holy Spirit remain among us for ever; he
says, Joan. 14.
Paraclitus qua^ ^ittet pater in nomine m^o, ille vos docebit om^^a, and
suggeret vobis omnia, quaecunque dixero vobis, the paraclite, whom my Father
will send in my name, shall teach you all things, and shall put you in mind of
al things whatsoever I shall say unto you. Joan. 16.
And again Cum venerit ille spiritus veritatis, docebit v^s omne^ veritate^.
When that spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth.

The charge and commission is plain in S. Matthew cuntes docete omnes gentes.
Math. 28
Going teach all nations. And in S. Mark euntes in mundum vniuersum praedicate
Euangelium omni creaturae. Mar. 16.
Going into the whole world preach the Gospel to every creature.

The warrant we have in S Luke Qui vos audit, Luc. 10.
me audit. He that hears you hears me. By which words appears
plainly, that our Savior Christ would have us to hear and give credit to his
Church no less then to himself.

The commandment is expressed in S. Matthew, Math. 23.
Super Cathedram Moysisederu^t Scribae and Pharisaei. Omnia ergo quaecunque
dixeri^t vobis seritate and facite. The Scribes and Pharisees have sitten upon
the chair of Moses. All things therefore, whatsoever they shall say unto you,
observe and do. Out of which words we may gather, that we are bound, in all
points, to do according to the doctrine of the Prelates of the Catholic
Church, yea, although it should happen, that their lives were not laudable but
bad. For although our Savior, in this place, does only in express words,
make mention of the chair of Moses, in which the Priests of the old Law did
sit: yet he is to be understood, to speak also of the chair of S. Peter, his
own Vicegerent, in which the Priests of the new Law do succeed. And this a
f^rtiori because, we have greater reason to think, that our Savior intended,
in his doctrine, to give rules to the Priests and people of his new Law, which
was presently to begin, and to continue till the worlds end, then only to give
documents to those of the old Law, considering he knew, that it should, so
shortly cease. Wherefore the ancient fathers do understand, that place to be
meant of the Priests of the new Law; and namely S. Augustine who says thus In
illum ordinem Episcoporum, Epist. 165.
qui ducitur ab ipso petro ad Anastasium, qui nunc in eadem Cathedra sedet,
etiamsi quisquam traditor, per illatempora, subreps^sset, nihil praeiudicaret
Ecclesie, and innocentibus Christianis; quibus prouidens, Dominus ait, de
praepositis malis; quae dicunt, facite: quae faciunt, facere nolite. Into that
order of Bishops which is derived from S. Peter himself unto Anastasius, who
now sits upon the same chair; although some traitor had crept in, in those
times, he should nothing hurt the Church and the innocent Christians, for
whom, our Lord providing, says of evil Prelates, what they say, do; what
they do, do not.

The threats we may gather. First out of S. Luke when our Savior faith, Luc.
10.
Qui vos spernit, me spernit. He that despises you, despises me. Signifying,
that look what sin it were, not to hear, but to despise our Savior Christ
himself, that we should account it the same, to despise, and not to give
ear, and credit, to the Catholic Church. Insinuating thereby, that the like
punishment is to be expected, for the said contempt. Secondly in S. Matthew
the same our Savior expressly says; Si Ecclesiam non audierit, Math. 18.
sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and publicanus. If he will not hear the Church let him
be to thee like an Ethnicke and a Publican. Finally, in S. Mark after he had
given charge and commission to preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.
he pronounces this threate to those that will not believe saying Qui non
crediderit condemnabitur he that will not believe shall be condemned.

Thus you see our Savior Christ has promised to his Church, the continual
presence of himself and of his holy Spirit, to teach that company all truth.
Whereof follows that it is infallibly taught al truth. Moreover, he has
given charge and commission to that Church, to teach us, and has warranted,
and commanded us, in all points, to hear and do, according to the saying of
this Church; which proves, that it appertains to this Church, to instruct
us, in all points of faith, and that we ought to learn of it, in all matters
of religion, what is the fallible truth; and consequently, that the doctrine of
this Church is the rule of faith,

Worthily therefore does S. Paul call this Church columnam and firmamentum
veritatis. The pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3.
Worthily also says S Austen Scripturarum a nobis tenetur veritas, cum id
facimus, Lib. 1. and Crescon. cap. 33.
quod vniuersae placet Ecclesiae, quam, earundem scripturarum commendat
authoritas: vt quoniam scriptura sancta fallere non potest, quisquis falli
^etuit huius obscuritate questionis, ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam, sine
vlla ambiguitate, scriptura sancta demonstrat. The truth of the Scriptures is
holden of us, when we do that, which pleases the universal or whole Church,
the which is commended by the authority of the Scriptures themselves; that
because the holy Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived
with the obscurity of this question, let him require the judgment of the
church, which, without any ambiguity, the holy Scripture does demonstrate, by
which words, he shows plainly that the sentence of the Church, is of
infallible and undoubted truth, and that the way not to be deceived in an
obscure question, is to ask and follow the judgment of the Church. Wherefore
worthily also do we all say Credo Ecclesiam Catholica^. I believe the Catholic
Church; and worthily also may I conclude; that neither Scripture alone; nor
natural wit and learning; nor private spirit: nor any other thing, but only
the teaching of the true Church of Christ, is that ordinary means, which
Almighty God has provided, whereby all men may learn that one* infallible,
entire faith, which I proved to be necessary to salvation.

CHAP. XI. That the Church, whose doctrine must be to us the rule of faith,
must always continue, without interruption, from Christ his time, till the
worlds end.
COnsidering what had been proved, in the former Chapter, about the infallible
authorite of the doctrine of the true Church: I hope no Christian will deny,
but that, so long as this Church does continue, we have, of it, a sure pillar
and a firm foundation, whereupon we may safely build our belief. For either a
man must deny, that ever our Savior did make any such promise; gave such
charge and commission, left any such warrant; set forth such a commandment;
or thundered out any such threats, as before is rehearsed: which were to deny
the scriptures, which scriptures are generally received by all Christians; no
otherwise the^, (as they are,) the undoubted word of God: or else he must wrest
the interpretation thereof, both from that, which the words, of themselves,
naturally yield, and also from the common sense and understanding, either of
al, or the most learned, and almost of the unlearned also, of the whole
Christian world: or else he shall be forced to confess that, which, not I, but S.
Paul has said: 1. Tim. 3.
ecclesia est columna and firmamentum veritatis: the Church is the pillar and
ground of truth. Only it may perchance seem to some (of those, that do, at
this day oppose themselves against the authority of the Church,) that this was
true, for S. Paul's time, and perhaps for some 3.4.5. or 6. hundred years
after: but not to be presumed upon in latter times, and namely when Luther
began his reformation (as they term it) or now a days.

Against these men I set down this assertion.
The true Church of Christ (which the forenamed testimonies of Scripture do
commend) was and is to continue, without interruption, till the worlds end.

This I prove.
First, out of the very words, of those promises, which I cited, out of S.
Matthew, and S. John. For how can Christ our Savior, or his holy Spirit, be
with his Church, in such sort, as there is promised; to wit till the worlds
end, and for ever: and especially, as is said in S. Matthew: Matthew. cap. 28.
omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem seculi: all the days, even to the end
of the world; unless the Church also be, all the days until the end of the
world. For if the Church for any time, days, months, or years do cease to
be: Christ can not for those years, months, and days, be truly said, to be
with his Church (since he can not be with that which is not) and consequentely
he can not be said, to have fulfilled his promise, wherein he said, he would
be with his Church, all the days, until the end of the world.

Secondly, I prove the same, out of an other promise, or prophecy of our
Savior Christ, to his Church, wherein he says: portae inferi non preual^bunt
aduersus eam: Math. 16*
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. For how was it true, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail, if they have prevailed so much, as utterly to
abolish the Church or at least, to bannishe it quite out of the world, for so
long a time? grau^ting therefore (which every Christian must needs grant) that
the prophesies and promises of our Savior, are always fullfilled, and that
they are infallibly true: we may not doubt, but that the Church, has ever
been, since Christ his time, and shall never cease to be in the world.

Thirdly, I may confirm the same out of other scriptures, where the
perpetuity of the Church is either affirmed, or promised, of which kind of
testimonies, being very many, I will only rehearse some few, of the Church (if
we will believe S. Austen his exposition) it is said: Psalm. 47.
Deu^ fundauit eam in aeternum; God has established it for ever. And of it,
signified by the name of the kingdom of Christ, the prophet Daniel says:
Suscitabit Deus caeliregnum quod in aeternum non dissipabitur. Dan. 2.
The God of heaven shall raise up a kingdom, which shall not be broken in
pieces for ever. Luc. 1.
As is also said in S. Luke: regni eius non erit sinis: there shall be no end
of his kingedome.

Lastly, I might confirm the same, with the testimony of the ancient Fathers
Origin, S. Chrysostom, S. Bernard: and especially of S. Austen, In Psalm. 101.
Conc. 2.
who disputing against the Do^atistes, says thus, as rehearsing one of their
speeches: Sed illa Ecclesia, quae fuit omnium gentium, iam non est, perijt:
That Church, which was of all nations, is not now; it is perished. Unto which
their speech he answers: O impudentem vocem. Accounting it great impudency,
to say, the Church is perished. And in the same place, he brings in the
Church, as speaking personally, thus; Ibidem.
Quamdiu ero in hoc siculo? annuncia mihi propter illos qui dicunt: Fuit, and
iam non est: apostatauit, and perijt Ecclesia ad omnibus gentibus. Et annunci
auit, nec vacua fuit vox ista. Quis annunciauit mihi nisi ipsa via? quando
annunciauit? ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem
seculi. How long shall I be in this world? tell me in regard of them who say;
the Church indeed was, but it is not now: it is become apostata, and is
perished out of all nations. And he told me, neither was this word in vain,
who told me, but the way it self? (to wit Christ, who faieth, I am the way)
when did he tell? Behold I am with you until the end of the world.

CHAP. XII. That this Church, which must be to us the rule of faith, as it must
always continue; so it must also always be visible.
NOW having proved that the true Church of Christ must always continue,
without interruptio^, till the worlds end: it remains that I show also in
what manner it is to continue; to wit, whether it shall always be visible.
That is to say, whether, in all ages, it was and shall be a company of men, who
may be seen, and in some sort, plainly known to be that company, which men
are to believe, by faith, to be the true Church of Christ: or that it shall be,
sometime at least, invisible; that no man can see those me^, nor know them, to
be that company, which we must believe, to be the true Church of Christ.

In which matter
My Assertion is, that the true Church of Christ (of which the places of
Scripture before cited do speak) must always be visible.

This I prove.
Is^* ^.61.
First by that plain Prophecy of Isaias in the 61. chapter. (Which chapter to
be understood of our Savior Christ and his Church, we may gather out of S.
Luke, where our Savior himself cites some words out of that chapter, Luc. 4.
and expounds them to be fulfilled in himself) the words of the Prophecy
are these Faedus perpetuum feriam eis, Isa. 61.
and scietur in gentibus semen eorum, Omnes qui viderint eos cognoscent illos,
quoniam isti sunt semen cui benedixit Dominus. I will make a perpetual
covenant or league with them, and their seed shall be known among nations,
all that shall see them, shall know them, that they are the seed, which our
Lord has blessed. How could he more plainly have foretold the visiblenes of
the Church?

Secondly our Savior has ordained this his Church to be the light of the
world; according as he says, vos estis lux mundi you are the light of the
world, Math. 5.
and to be a rule or means, by which, all men, at all times, may come to the
knowledge of that One, infallible, entire faith, which is necessary to
salvation, as has bin proved. But how can it be the light of the world, if it
self be invisible? ( nemo accendit lucernam, and ponit eam sub modio. No man
lights a candle, and when he has done, sets it under a bushel, where it
cannot be seen.) And how can it be a means, by which, at all times, the
infallible truth may be made known, to all sorts of men; if it self* at any
time, could not be known of men? Or if you say, that, some times, it could
neither be known it self, nor be a means* by which the true faith might be
made known; then, since that I proved that it is a necessary means, and so
necessary, that, without it, according to the ordinary course, there is not
sufficient means provided by almighty God, to instruct all men infallibly in
all points of faith. Then (I say) men, that lived at that time, wanted
necessary means, whereby they might attain to the knowledge of true faith, and
consequently, whereby they might come to salvation, which if it were so. How is
it universally true, which is universally said in Scripture? ^. Tim. 2.
D^us vult omnes homines saluos fieri. and ad agnitionem veritatis venire. God
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For
how can he be said, to have a true will to save all men? if he have not, at
all times, provided means sufficient, whereby, all men may come to the
knowledge of true faith, and thereby, by degrees, to salvation. Since
especially, he has power to provide these means: and knows, that without
these means provided, it is impossible for men to attain true faith, and
eternal salvation. For knowing it impossible, he cannot be said to will it;
since no wise man wills that, which he knows perfectly to be altogether
impossible; and much less may Almighty God be said, to will any thing, which
is absolutely impossible, considering that his wisdom is infinite, and that
his will is always joined with some work or effect, by which, that which he
wills, at least, is made possible to be done. Wherefore to verify that
Almighty God would have all men saved, we must needs say, that he has
provided, for all men, those means, which be necessary, and without which, it
is impossible for them, to come to the knowledge of true faith, and thereby to
salvation; One of which means, is a visible Church, of which they must hear,
and learn the true faith; which is the first, and a necessary step to
salvation. The Church therefore must needs be always visible.

Thirdly if the universal Church of Christ, should, for any space of time, be
invisible: it should, for that space, cease to profess outwardly that faith,
which, in heart, it did believe. For if it did outwardly profess; how should it
not, by this profession, be made visible and known? But if the universal
Church, should, for such a time, fail to profess the faith; hell gates
(contrary to Christ's promise) did mightily prevail against it. For, were it
not a mighty prevailing, that the whole church should fail in a thing, so
necessary to salvation? as we know, outward profession of faith to be
necessary, both by that of our Savior: Math. 10.
Qui negauerit me coram hominibus, ego negabo illum coram Patre meo. He, that
shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father. Luc. 9.
And: Qui me erubuerit and sermones meos, hunc Filius hominis erubeseet. He
that shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, him, the son of man will be
ashamed of. And by that of Saint Paul: Romans 10.
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem. With heart we
believe to justice, with mouth we confess to salvation. Which place learned
men inteprete to signify, that profession of faith is, sometimes, necessary to
salvation; and they say further, that, this sometimes, is so often, as either the
glory of God, or the profit of our neighbor, does, of necessity, require it;
the which cases of necessity do happen very often, and great marvel it were,
(or rather impossible) that they should never have happened, for so long a
time, as the Protestants would have their Church to have been invisible.

Fourthly if the Church were not visible, we could not fulfill that
commandment of our Savior, wherein he said: Dic Ecclesiae. Tell the Church.
For how can we tell the Church any thing, Math. 18.
if we can not tell where to seek it; neither if we did by chance meet it,
could we know it to be the Church.

Fifthly, it is certain, that once, the true Church of Christ, was visible; to
wit, when it first began in Jerusalem in the Apostles and Disciples of our
Savior Christ, and that company, which by their preaching was converted to
the faith. But there can no reason be showed, why it should be visible then,
and not now.

If it were needful to be visible then, because otherwise it could not be a
Church, that is, A Society of men lincked together, in the profession of one
faith: in the use of the same Sacraments* under the government of lawful
Pastors. For the same reason, it must needs be vi^^ble now; because, (as in
the last chapter is proved) there must be a Church now; and therefore it must
be a society of me^, professing the same faith: using the same Sacraments:
living under the government of lawful pastors. For all this pertains to
the very essence of the Church.

If also it were needful to be visible the^, that those offices and
functions, which must be done in the Church, might be well performed: to
wit, as there were in the Church some pastors, and some sheep; (as S. Gregory
Nazianzene says) some to command, Oratione de moderat. in disput. habenda.
some to obey: some to teach, some to be taught; some to feed the flock of
Christ, some to be fed: so (that every one of these, might do what pertained
properly to his duty) it was needful, that the pastors must know their
sheep and the sheep their pastors; and that those that should teach, and
rule, and minister the Sacraments, must see, and know them, whom they were to
teach and rule, and to whom, they were to give the Sacraments. And on the
contrary side, the other had need to have known those, of whom they must be
taught, whom they must obey, and, from whom, they were to receive the
wholesome food of the holy Sacraments. If (I say) this reason prove, that it
was needful then, that the Church should be visible and known: for the same
reason, it will be also needful to say, that the Church must be visible, now,
and at all times. For at all times, there m^st be pastors and sheep in the
Church, being the sheepefolde of Christ. And, at all times, these pastors must
govern, instruct, and minister the holy Sacraments: and the other must receive
government, instruction, and the food of the holy Sacraments, at their hands.
And consequentely, there had need be some visible tokens, at all times, by
which the pastors may know their sheep, least, for want of this knowledge;
they may unawares, dare sanctum canibus, Matthew. 7.
and pr^i^cere margaritas ante porcos, give that which is holy to dogs, and
cast margarites before hogs, which our Savior commands them not to do.
And on the other side, there had need be some visible marks, by which the
sheep may know and discern their lawful pastors, and true preachers, from
false teachers, and intruding usurpers. For otherwise, they could not tell,
whom to hear, and obey, and whom to repair to for the Sacraments: and
contrary, whom to take heed of, as of false prophets: whose voice to
neglect, as of strangers: and whose poisoned food of polluted Sacraments to
reject, no less then a bait laid to kill them by thieves and robbers; as it
imports greatly every one to do.

If lastly it were needful to be visible, then, that those, which were out of
it, might join themselves unto it, and become members of it; thereby to
participate the graces and benedictions, which Christ our Lord communicated
only to it; and to escape the deluge of eternal damnation wherewith, all was
sure to be drowned, that were found, out of it, as it were, out of another Noe
his arc. This reason also requires and urges, that the Church must be
visible now, and at al other times. For if, at any time, it were not visible;
how could men, that were out of it, come unto it? or how could they attain
salvation, if they did not enter into it? since at all times, the merits and
fruits of Christ's Passion are enclosed in it: and the means, of salvation,
and to escape eternal damnation, are only found in it. The Church therefore is
visible at all times. For at all times, that Prophecy of Isaias must be true,
wherein our Lord speaks thus to the Church, Isa. 60.
Aperientur portae tuae iugiter, die ac nocte non claudentur; vt afferatur ad
te fortitudo gentium, and reges earum adducantur; Gens enim and regnum quod non
seruierit tibi peribit. Thy gates shall be continually opened, day and night they
shall not be shut; that the strength of nations and the kings thereof may be
brought unto thee; for the nation and kingdom which shall not serve thee,
shall perish.

Sixthly the only reason and ground, by which, heretics hold the Church to be
invisible, is, because they imagine the Church to consist only of the elect or
only of the good. But this is a false ground, as appears by the name of
Church in Greek Ecclesia which even by the etymology of the word does
signify, the company of men called; now sure it is, that more are called then
elected, as our Savior says, Math. 20.
multi vocati pauci electi. Again, this ground is showed to be false, by those
parables, in which the Church is compared to a floare, Math. 3.
wherein wheat and chafe are mixed. Math. 23.
And to a marriage, to which came good and bad. And to a net, Math. 13.
wherein are gathered al sorts of fishes, good and bad. And to ten Virgins,
whereof five were foolish and excluded from the celestial marriage. Math. 25.
This ground is also showed to be false out of S. Paul, ^. Cor. 5.
who commands the Corinthians, to expel an incestuous person out of the
Church. Ergo, before this expulsion, there was such a person in the Church, and
therefore, the Church does not consist, only, of those, that be good.

Lastly, the ancient Fathers did teach, that the Church is visible. Hom. 30. in
math.
Origin says Ecclesia plena est fulgore ab orient vsque ad occidentem. The
Church is full of brightness from the East to the West. Ecclesia (says S.
Cyprian) Domini luce perfusa, radios suos per orbem spargit. Lib. de Vnitate
Ecclesiae.
The Church being bright, with the light of our Lord, does spread her beams
throughout the world. Facilius est (says S. Chrysostom) solemn extingui quam
ecclesiam obscurari. Lib. 4. in cap. 6. Isa.
It is more easy that the Sun should be extinguished, then that the Church
should be obscured, that is to say darkened and quite without light. S.
Augustine also alluding to (or rather expounding) those words of our Savior
Non potest ciuitas abscondi supra montem posita. Says, Lib. 3. and ep. parm.
cap. 4.
Ecclesia supra montem constituta abscondi no^ potest. The Church being built
upon a mountain, cannot be hid. And again, in another place, he says. Tract.
2. in epist. Joan.
Quid amplius dicturus sum quam caecos, qui tam magnu^ montem non vident; qui,
contra lucernam in ca^delabro positam, oculos claudunt? What shall I say more,
but that they are blind, who do not see so great a mountain: who shut their
eyes, at the candle, set upon the candle-sticke?

CHAP. XIII. How we should discern and know, which is the true visible Church
of Christ.
HITHERTO I have showed that the rule of faith, (which all men ought to seek,
that, by it, they may learn true faith) is the doctrine of the Church of
Christ: and that this Church does continue: and is always visible, that is to
say, such as may be found out and known* Now the greatest question is (since,
there are diverse companies of them that believe in Christ; every one of which,
challenge to themselves, the title of the true Church) how every man may come
to know assuredly, and in particular, which company is indeed the true visible
Church of Christ, whose doctrine we must, in all points, believe and follow.

To this question I answer that every company which has the name of
Christians, or which challeng to themselves the name of the Church, are not
always the true Church. For of heretics we may well say; as S. Austen does,
non, quia ecclesia Christi videntur habere nomen, idcirco pertinent ad eius
consecrationem. They do not therefore pertain to the consecration of the
Church of Christ, because they seem to carry the name of the Church of Christ.
For (as the same S. Austen says in another place) heretics are only whited
over with the name of Christians. Lib. and ep. parm. cap. 7. Lib. de prescript.
When indeed Si haeretici sunt (as Tertullian says) Christiani esse non
possunt. If they be heretics, they cannot be true Christians. The reason
whereof, the same Tertullian insinuates to be, because, they follow (...) that
faith, which came from Christ (to his Apostles and Disciples, and which was
delivered by them, from hand to hand, to our forefathers, and so to us) but
they follow that faith, which they chose to themselves; of which election or
choice, the name of heretic and heresy did arise.

The way therefore, to discern, which is the true Church, is, first to set
down, which be the certain marks, by which, all men may easily know the
Church: and then to examine to whom these marks do agree. The which, that I
may the better perform, in the chapters following, here I think good, first
briefly to note, what belongs to the nature of a good and sufficient mark.

Note, therefore that two things are required in every sufficient mark. The
first is, that it be not common to many, but proper, and only agreeing to the
thing, whereof it is a mark. As for example, it is no good mark whereby to
know any particular man; to say, he has two hands, or two ears; because this
is common to many and therefore no sufficient note or mark, whereby one may be
distinguished or known from all other. But a mark, whereby we may discern
one special man, from all other, must be some one thing, or more, which he
has, and others have not. Taller. bigger.
As if he were longer, larger, or fairer the^ the rest; or if some others were
as long, Tall. Tall.
and other some as fair, yet none were long and fair both, but only he. The
second thing, required in a good mark, is, that it be more apparent, and easy
to be known, then the thing. For example, If I were to describe and make
known a certain man, who were otherwise unknown. I must not think it
sufficient to give the definition of his essence, or to assign the secret
disposition of his heart, liver and other inward parts, which are commonly
harder to be known, the^ the man himself. But I must declare some apparent
thing in his face, hands or some outward part of his body: or in his voice,
apparel, behavior, or such like; which agreeing only to that man; and being
easy to be known, may be a means to make us know the man we seek for.

Wherefore, when we will assign some good marks, by which, all sorts of men
may, in some sort, discern, which particular company of men is the true
Church, we must have special regard to assign those things, which, in some
matters, may be apparent to all sorts of men; since all sorts of men had need
to seek out, and according to their capacity discern which is the true
Church: we must also assign those things, which agree to no other company,
but that, which is the true Church, to the intent that a man shall see all those
things, which be assigned as marks, to agree to any company, he may
streightwaies conclude, that company to be the true Church: as on the
contrary side, if he perceive, either all, or any one of them to be wanting,
in any company, he may be sure, that, that company is not the true Church.

CHAP. XIIII. That those marks of the Church, which Haeretiques assign, be
not good marks.
OVT of that, which in the former chapter, I briefly noted, about the nature
of a good mark, we may easily gather, that those marks, which some
Haeretiques assign, to wit, the true doctrine of faith: and the right use of
the Sacraments, are no good marks, by which all sorts of men may come to
know, which is the true Church; but are means (as Haeretiques use them) to
cast a myste over the whole matter, when as they know, that they can, most
easily, convert all the Sacraments, and holy words of Scripture, Lib. 3. de
bapt. and donat. cap. 19.
Ad imagines phantasmatum suorum, unto their own imaginations and
fantastical opinions (as out of S. Austen we may gather, that the manner of
Haeretiques is,) especially when the authority of the Church, (which should
correct those deprauations and false expositions) is not first, by other
marks, known and admitted.

The doctrine of faith, therefore (I say) and the right use of Sacraments, be
not good marks, whereby men may discern which is the true Church.

This I prove.
First, for that by the true doctrine of faith (which they assign for a mark
of the Church) either they mean, true doctrine in some points only, or in
all. True doctrine in some points only, is no good mark, because the
Haeretiques teach the truth in some points. This therefore being not proper
to the Church; but agreeing rather to Haeretiques, can be no good mark of the
true Church: because it wants the first condition of a mark, which is, to be
proper, and agreeing only to the thing, whereof it is a mark. True doctrine
also in all points, although it be proper (if we join to it the right use of
Sacraments, with obedience to lawful pastors) and agree only to the true
Church, yet it is no good mark; because, it fails in the second condition,
which is required in a good mark, that is to say, it is not apparent or easy
to be known, of al those, who should seek out the true Church. As I may
easily prove, because to know which company teaches the truth in all
points, requires first learning, whereby one may understand the terms, and
state of the question, or controversy. besides, judgment, to discuss and
weigh prude^tly the worth and sufficiency of the authorities and reasons of
both parts; that, upon this pondering of reasons, he may prudently conclude
which is the better part. Moreover one had need to have a supernatural light
of Gods grace and the assistance of his Spirit, whereby he may discern and see
those things, which be above all natural rules and reasons. Ad haec quis
idoneus? Who can say that himself is sufficiently furnished with these
helps? who can be infallibly sure, that he has all these, in such sort, as
is requisite, for obtaineing, by his own industry, true and infallible faith;
in all points? surely, at least, the unlearned must needs confess, that, in
diverse mysteries, they do not so much as understand the terms and state of
the question: and much less are they able, to examine sufficiently the worth
of every reason: neither are all such, as can persuade themselves, that they
are singularly enlightened, and immediately taught of Gods Spirit: neither, if
they did thus persuade themselves, could they be infallibly sure, that in this
their persuasion they were not deceived; since it is certain, that some of
them, that most strongely persuade themselves to be thus taught, are in this
their persuasion deceived; neither can the unlearned sufficiently know the
truth, in every particular point, by giving credit to some one, or other
learned man, or any company of the learned; unless, that company, be first
known, to be of the true Church, and consequently to be guided in their
teaching, by the holy Ghost, as I proved before. So that it is most hard or
rather impossible for a man, and especially for an unlearned man, in all
points, Lib. 3. and Faust. cap. 13.
liquidam a tot erroribus discernere veritatem, to discern the plain truth
from so many errors, as S. Austen says. It is also most hard for a man of
himself to judge, which use of Sacraments is right, if he be not first taught
by the Church; since this is a principal point of the true doctrine of faith,
which is (as I said) very hard or rather impossible to be perfitely known by
a man's own self. But to know, first, which company is the true Church; and
then, by giving credit to it, to learn, which is the true faith; and which use
of Sacraments is right, there are not so many things required, nor any great
difficulty, as shall be declared. For the Church is that direct way, which
Isaias speaks of, when he says: Haec erit vobis directa vta, Isa. c. 35.
ita vt stulti non errent per eam. This shall be to you a direct way, so that
even fools, (to wit simple and unlearned men) may not err in it.

Secondly I prove the same, because, when we seek for the true Church, we
seek it principally for this end, that by it, as by a necessary* and
infallible means we may hear, and learn of it, the true, faith in all
points, which otherwise in it self is hidden, obscure and unknown to us;
according to that of S. Paul. Animalis homo non percipit ^a, 1. Cor. 2.
quae sunt Spiritus Dei: the sensual man does not perceive those things,
which are of the Spirit of God. For, since, none, by the only power of natural
wit, (which in understanding uses the help of outward senses,) can obtain the
supernatural knowledge of divine mysteries, which we believe by our faith:
neither does the Spirit of God who, as the principal cause, infuseth this
gift of faith into our souls) ordinarily instruct any man, in the knowledge
of true faith, immediately by himself alone, or by an Angel sent from heaven;
we must needs, if we will have true faith, seek first for that, which it
pleases almighty God to use, as the ordinary instrument and as a necessary
means, by which men may learn true faith; the which is no other, but the
preaching and teaching of the true Church, according to that saying of S.
Paul. Romans 10.
Quomodo credent ei quem non audierint? quomodo audient sine praedicante?
quomodo praedicabunt nisi mittantur? How shall they believe him, whom they have
not heard? how shall they hear, without a preacher? how shall they preach,
unless they be sent. Therefore the true Church, which only has preachers
truly sent of God, must first be found out, that by it we may hear and know
which is the true faith. Therefore of the two, the true Church is rather a
mark, whereby we may know the true preaching, and, consequently the true
doctrine of faith, then contrary, that, (as heretics say) the doctrine should
be a mark, whereby all men must know, which is the true Church.

Thirdly, true faith is included in the true Church, and, as it were enclosed
in her belly; as S. Austen says, upon those words of the Psalm Errauerunt ab
vtero, In Ps. 53.
^^quu^i sunt falsa. In ventre ecclesiae (says he) veritas manet; quisquis ab
hoc ventre separatus fuerit, necesse est, vt falsa loquatur. Truth remains in
the belly of the Church; whosoever is separated (to wit by difference in
doctrine) from this belly of the Church, must needs speak false. Therefore like
as, if a man had gold in his belly, we must first find the man* before we can
come to see the gold it self: so we must first, by other marks, find out the
true Church, which has the gold of true faith, hidden in her belly, before we
come to see the gold of true faith it self Since especially, we cannot see it,
unless she open her mouth, and deliver it unto us, and that we cannot (being
spiritually blind) certainly know it to be true, and not counterfeite, but by
giving credit to her testimony of it. According as the same S. Austen says
Euangelio non crederem, Lib. and Ep. Fund. cap. 5.
nisi me ecclesiae authoritas commoueret. I should not believe the Gospel it
self, unless I were moved by the authority of the Church. For if we had not
the testimony of the Church, how should we have bin infallibly sure, that there
were any Gospel at all? or how should we have known, that those books, which
bear title of the Gospel, according to S. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Are
true Canonical Scripture* rather then those books, which are written in the
name of Nicodemus, and S. Thomas, bearing the same title or inscription of
Gospel.

Fourthly, if the true doctrine of faith, in all particular points, must be
fore known, as a mark, whereby to know the true Church; then (contrary to
that which has bin proved) the authority of the Church, should not be a
necessary means, whereby men must come to the knowledge of the true faith.
For if before we come to know, which is the true Church, we must, by other
means, have known, which is the true faith; what need then is there, for
getting true faith already had, to seek or bring in the authority of the same
Church.

Fifthly, If, before we give absolute and undoubted credit to the true Church we
must examine and judge, whether every particular point of doctrine, which it
holds, be the truth, with authority to accept that only, which we like, or
which seems, in our conceit, right and conformable to Scripture: and to
reject, whatsoever we mislike, or which, in our private judgment, seems not
so right and comfortable; then we make our selves examiners and Judges over the
Church; and consequently, we prefer our liking or disliking, our judgment
and censure, of the interpretation and sense of Scripture, before the
judgment, and censure of the Church of God. But it is absurd, both in reason
and religion, to prefer the judgment of any private man (be he never so witty
and learned, or never so strongly persuaded* in his own mind, that he is
taught by the Spirit) before the judgment and definitive sentence of the
Church of God; the which is a company of men, many of which, both are, and
always have bin, virtuous, wise, and learned, and (which is chief) is such a
company, as, according to the absolute and infallible promises of our Savior,
has, undoubtedly, the holy Spirit among them, guiding them, and teaching them
all truth, and not permitting them to err, as before has been proved.

But you may perhaps say that in Scripture we are willed, not to believe every
spirit, 1. Ioh. 4.
but to try spirits, whether they be of God or no* and that therefore, we must
examine and try the spirit of the Church, by looking into every particular
point of doctrine, which it teaches.

I answer. That, in that place of Scripture, it is not meant, that it
belongs to every particular man to try all spirits; but in general, the
Scripture gives the Church warning, not to accept* every one, that boasts
himself to have the Spirit, and wills, that they should try those spirits;
not, that every simple or private man, should take upon him to try them: but
that those of the Church, to whom the office of trying spirits does appertain,
to wit, the Doctors and Pastors, which almighty God has put in his Church, of
purpose, Ephesians. 4*
Vt non circumfera^ur omni vento doctrinae that we may not be carried away with
every wind of doctrine, and Vt non simus paruuli fluctuantes that we may not be
little ones wavering, with every blast of those, that boast themselves to be
singulerly taught by the Spirit. So that this trying of spirits is only meant
of those spirits, of which men may well doubt, whether they be of God or no;
and the^ also this trial belongs to the Pastors of the Church. But when it is
certain that the spirit is of God, we neither need nor ought doubtfully to
examine, or presu^ptuously to judge of it but submitting obediently, the
judgment of our own sense and reason, we must believe the teaching of it, in
every point. Now it is most certain, that the Spirit of the true visible
Church is of God, as, out of holy Scripture, has bin most evidently proved.
And therefore our only care should be, to seek out those marks, by which, all
men may know, which particular company of me^, is the true Church of Christ,
whose doctrine, we neither need, nor lawfully may examine* and try, in
doubtful manner, but must obediently and vndoubtfully, in all points, believe,
as the only assured and infallible truth.

CHAP. XV. That these four properties, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica,
that is to say, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, are good marks, by which
men may know, which is the true Church.
SINCE, our Savior Christ, has thought good; to plant a visible Church upon
earth, which he would have to continue, until the worlds end, for this
special in^ent and purpose, that all men, in all ages, by means of it, may
learn the doctrine of the true faith: the true worship of God: the right use
of the Sacraments: the wholesome laws of good life: and generally all good
things, that appertain to the glory of God, and the salvation of our souls;
we have not any reason to doubt, but that the same our Savior, (for the
exceeding love, which, (of his part, without exception, or respect of persons)
he bears to al mankind) has ordained some marks or notes, by which all
sorts, and consequently even simple men, may sufficiently discern, which
company (among many, which challenge to themselves the title of the true
Church) is indeed the true Church. For since, he would have every one to
hear, and learn things necessary to salvation, only of the true Church; we
must needs think, his wisdom and goodness to have marked this his Church
with such manifest signs and properties, that all men may easily know it, and
discern it from others, whom he knew would take upon them, (though falsely)
the title and profession of the true Church.

This seems to have been expressly foretold by the Prophet Isaias, when he
says: Isa. c. 61.
Scietur in gentibus semen eorum, and germen eorum in medio populorum. Omnes
qui viderint ^os, cognoscent illos, quia isti sunt semen, cui benedixit
Dominus. Their seed shall be known in the nations, and their offspring in the
midst of people; all that shall see them, shall know them, because these are
that seed, which our Lord has blessed. Which is as much, as if he should say,
that the Church shall have such manifest marks, that it shall be easy for every
one to know them to be the true Church.

Some of these marks are set down by S. Austen, Lib. and Ep. Fund. cap 4.
who calls them bands or chains, which do hold a faithful man in the
Catholic Church, although for the slownes of his wit, or for some other
cause, he does not evidently see the truth of the doctrine, in it self.

Of these marks, diverse authors have written at large. I (for brevity sake)
have chosen out only these four: Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica: One,
Holy, Catholic, Apostolic: because I hope these will be sufficient, and
because I find these, e^pecially, set forth in Scriptures: comme^^ed by
Councels: and generally admit^ed, of all sorts, both Catholics and
Protestants, as now I am to declare.

First, for the general admittance of these properties of the true Church, I
need no other proof, but that both Catholics and Protestants, allow of the
Nicene, and Constantinopolitane Creed, where^n we profes to believe the true
Church, ^he which Church, is there described, with these only four
properties, which before I named, as though, by those only, every man might
sufficiently know that Church, which, in every point, they are bound to
believe. Now if besides this proof, out of the generally received Councels,
some precise man would have ^eproue, The first mark Vna proved out of
Scripture. Cant c. 6 Cypr. l. de vnitate Ecclesiae. Aug. l. 6. in Joan. Ioh. c.
1^
these properties to agree to the true Church, out of the Scripture it self,
this also I may easily do.

The true Church is signified to be One, by those words of the Canticle: Vna
est (...) mea, if we will believe the exposition of S. Cyprian and S. Austen.
Also we may gather the same out of those words of our Savior, in which he
calls his Church vnum ouile one sheepfold. Also by those places of S. Paul,
where he terms the Church vnum corpus one body. Rom 12. 1. Cor. 10
Moreover Christ our Savior praying for his Church, did specially entreat,
and without doubt obtained, Ioh. 17.
vt omnes vnum sint, that all the members thereof should be one thing, to wit,
that at the least they should al profess one and the same faith: all partake
of one and the same baptism, and other Sacraments, all live under one and the
same Lord, in due subordination and subjection to that uniform and orderly
government of lawful pastors, ordained and appointed in the Church by him.
The true Church of Christ therefore is one.

Contrary, the conuenticles of Heretics are destitute of this mark of
unity, Lib. de Prescript.
according as Tertullian affirms, saying. Denique penitus inspectae Haereses
omnes, in multis, deprehenduntur cum auctoribus suis dissentientes. Finally all
Heresies, if they be well looked into, are found to differ, in many things,
from their first founders. And the reason of this disagreeme^t among
Heretics, the same Tertullian assigns very well, in the same place, saying.
Variant inter se Haeretici, Ibidem.
dum vnusquisque pro su^ arbitrio modulatur quod accepit: quemadmodum (...) pro
arbitrio composuit ille qui tradidit. Heretics do differ (in points of
doctrine) among themselves, while as every one ta^eth upon him to fashion the
faith, which he received, according to his own liking (...) fancy: like as
he, that first delivered it unto them, did invent it, according to his own
will and pleasure.

The true Church is also proved to be ^^ly, by that of S. Paul. The second
mark. Sancta.
Templum Dei sanctum est, quod estis vos. The temple of God is holy, which
temple you are. 1. Cor. 3.
By which place notwithstanding S. Paul did not ^eane to signify, that every
one of this company was holy. For a little after, in the same Epistle, he
says to the same company, Omnino auditur inter vos fornicatio, 1. Cor. 5.
and ^^lis fornicatio, qualis nec inter gentes. There is plainly heard
fornication among you, and such fornication as the like is not among the
heathen. He does not therefore (I say) mean that every one of the Church is
holy, but that the whole company is to be termed holy; because the profession
thereof does, of it self, wholly tend to holiness; the doctrine being such, as
withdraws from all vice, and instructs and moves men to virtue; the
Sacraments also do not only signify, but, in the virtue, which they have from
Christ his Passion, they also work, in us, (as isntrumental causes) true and
inward sanctity. Wherefore although every one, that is in the Church, be not
holy, yet, no doubt, always some are; the which their holiness, it pleases
almighty God to testify and make known sometime by miracle, and ordinarily,
he uses to make it apparent enough, by the light of their virtuous actions,
which, at all times, in many members of the true Church, do so shine before
men, that* by it, men are moved to glorify God, and sometimes to imitate in
their own life, that, which, in others, they admire. And whatsoever member of
the Church fails from this holiness of life, it is evident, that the fault is
only in himself, who lives not according to the prescript of his profession,
nor uses, in due sort, those means, which it has of the holy Sacraments,
which, as I said before, are effectual instruments of sanctification.

Contrariwise, no sect of Heretics, is truly holy; neither was there ever
any person, that did invent, or obstinately adhere unto, any sect of heresy,
which ^ad in him true sa^ctity. And no merueile. Because the very profession
and doctrine it self of every heresy, is opposite to the very roots of true
sanctity; the which roots be true Christian faith and humility. For how can
he be truly holy and just? who being possessed with the spirit of heresy, must
needs be deprived of true faith, without which, the just man cannot live,
according to that saying of S. Paul. Hebr. 10. Mat. 18.
Iustus ex fide viuit. Or how can he be holy? that does not only, not humble
himself, like a little one, submitting himself to every humane creature, for
Gods sake: 1. Pet. 2.
but does proudly oppose himself, against the universal Church it self, whom
God has willed and commanded us to hear, Luc. 10.
no otherwise then himself. For wanting this humility, Iac. 4.
and consequently the grace of God, which is denied to the proud, and given to
the humble, there is no doubt, but that howsoever such a man seems in his
outward behavior, he can have no true sanctity within him; the which true
sanctity failing inwardly, it is hard for him to bear himself so, but that,
sometime or other, by one occasion or other, he shall even outwardly manifest
this his inward want; as in these our days, heretics commonly do, in such
apparent manner, that it is no hard matter to discern, that they be not (as
some of the^ would have the Church defined) a company of Saints.

The third mark Catholica.
The true Church is proved also to be Catholic, that is to say universal;
first, in time; by most plain prophesies and promises of scripture, as I have
already showed in the eleauenth chapter; unto which here I will only add those
words of Isaias Hoc faedus meum cum eis dicit Dominus, Isa. c. 59.
spiritus meus qui est in te, and verba mea, quae posui in ore tuo, non
recedent de ore tuo, and de ore seminis tui, and de ore seminis seminis tui,
dicit Dominus, amodo vsque in sempiternum. This is my covenant with them, says
our Lord; my Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed, and
from the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says our Lord, from hence forth for
ever.

It may also be easily proved to be universal in respect of place, Psalm. 21.
by these plain testimonies of holy Scripture. Conuerten^^r ad Dominum
vniuersi fines terrae, all the ^ounds of the earth shall be converted to (...)
Lord. Dominabitur a mari vsque admare, Psalm. 71.
(...) a flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum. He (to wit Christ) shall
rule and have dominion from sea to sea, and from the flood, ^ntill the
furthermost limits of the earth. Omnes gentes seruient ei. Ibidem.
All nations shall serve him. Upon all which places and some other, see S.
Austen in his exposition of the Psalms, and among other things, which he
speaks to the purpose, note his interpretation of those words a slumi^^ vsque
ad terminos orbis terrarum. Which words (says he) does signify, that the
dominion of Christ began a slumine Iordano from the flood of Jordan; where he,
being baptized, was made manifest, by the descending of the holy Ghost, and the
sound of his Fathers voice; from whence he began to choose his Disciples; and
from hence (says he) Doctrina oius incipi^^s dilatatur, vsque ad terminos
orbis terrae, Aug, in Psalm. 71.
cum praedicatur Euangelium regni in vniuerso orb, in testimonium omnibus
gentibus, and tunc veni^^ finis. His doctrine beginning, is dilated or spread
abroad, unto the furthest parts of the earth, when the Gospel of the kingdom
is preached over the whole world, for a testimony to all nations, after which
done, the end (of the world) shall come. See also the same S. Austen in his
book de vnitate Ecclesiae, especially in the ninth and tenth chapter, where he
cites and urges that place of Saint Luke, where our Savior says Necesse est
impleri omnia quae scripta sunt in lege, Luc. 24.
Prophetis, and Psalmis de me etc. quoniam sic scriptum est, and sic oportebit
Christum pati, and resurgere a mortuis, and predicari in nomine eius
poenitentiam and remissionem peccatorum in omnes gentes, incipientibus ab
Ierosolima. It is needful that all things should be fulfilled, which are
written of me, in the Law, the Prophets and Psalms etc. for so it is written,
and so it was needful, that Christ should suffer, and rise again from the
dead the third day, and that penance and remission of sins should be preached
in his name throughout all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. By which place
and diverse others, he shows plainly, that the true Church of Christ, cannot
be contained in a corner of the world, but must be universal, that is,
diffused and spread, throughout the whole world, as the same S. Austen, beside
his other proofs, gathered out of the very name Catholica, the which name
(says he) was imposed on the Church by our forefathers, Aug. 1. de Vtilitate
Ecclesiae.
vt ex ipso nomine ostenderent ^^ia per totum est, secundu^ totum enim Catholon
^race dicitur. That by the very name, ^hey might show, that the Church is
throughout the whole world. For (says he) the word Catholon in Greek
(whereupon Catholic is derived) signifies a thing which is general or
agreeing to the whole.

But we must note here, that when we ^aye, the true Church is Catholic or
^^ffused throughout the whole world; it is meant, that, at least, by succession
of time, it has been or shall be dilated more and more in every nation, till it
have gone throughout the whole world. Moreover it is termed Catholic, not
only because it shall be spread over the whole world in process of time, but also
because, even in every age, it has been and shall be always in very many
nations; and indeed in every nation, where any Christian religion is, which
is, in a sort to be spread over the whole world. This does S. Austen in his
book de vnitate Ecclesiae most diligently prove out of the Scriptures
themselves. The effect of his argument is this* The Church must be such as it
is described in Scripture. But in Scripture it is described to begin at
Jerusalem: and to proceed into al Iewrie: Act. c. 1.
and to go forward into Samaria: and to streatch it self further and further
vsque ad vltimum terrae even unto the uttermost of the earth. And (says he)
the seed of the Gospel once sown in the field of the world, Collos. 1.
fructificat, and crescit, does (not, universally, or for the most part,
perish, but) fructify and grow or increase, in omni mundo in the whole world,
and does continue to grow or increase, Mat. 13.
vsque ad messem until the harvest of the consummation of the world, as our
Savior signifies, the which consummation will be, when this seed is come to
the full grouth praedicabitur Euangelium in vniuerso mundo, Mat. 24.
in testimonium omnibus gentibus, (says our Savior) and tunc veniet
consummatio, the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony
to all nations, and then the consummation shall come. This is Saint Austens
discourse, by which he proves that the true Church of Christ, is not contained
in a corner of (...) world, but must be dilated and spread, (...) a sort, over
the whole world.

On the contrary side, the congregation (...) Heretics is not Catholic
neither in (...) nor place. And first for time it is e^^dent, because true
doctrine was first ^^eached and believed, as the good seed ^as first sown in
the field, and afterward (...) cockle, that is, false doctrine was over ^^wed.
S. Paul did, for three years space, ^^ith the Ephesians the true doctrine of
^^ith, and had co^uersed among them like (...) lamb, Act. 20.
seruiens Domino cum omni humilita^^ serving our Lord with all humility; but
after his departure, he said, he knew that ^^^enous wolves would enter in
among ^^em, not sparing the flock, and that, eue^ (...) of their own
company, there would (...) viri loquentes peruersa, Ibidem.
vt abducant disci^^is post se, men speaking perverse things ^^at they may
lead away disciples after ^^emselues. And, as this happened at ^^^esus, so
doubtless in all other places, ^here there has been any alteration of
Christian doctrine; first the true faith was ^anted by some Apostle or
Apostolic ^an. and afterward the contrary was ^^ought in, by some speaking
perverse things, thereby leading away disciples after themselves. So that it is
certain, that no Heresy is so ancient, as the true faith: neither is any one
of them of so long continuance, for the time to come, as S. Paul signifies,
when, having described Heretics of the latter days, he adds, Sed vltra non
proficient, insipientia enim eorum manifesta erit omnibus, 2. Tim. 3.
but they shall prosper no further, for their folly shall be manifest to all.
The same does S. Austen aptly express, expounding those words of the Psalm,
Aug. in Psalm. 57.
Ad nihilum deuenient tanquam aqua decurrens. Non vos terreant, sratres (says
he) quidam fluuij qui dicuntur torrentes; hyemalibus aquis implentur; nolite
timere, post paululum transit, decurrit aqua, ad tempus perstrepit, mo^
cessabit, diu stare non possunt, Multae Haerese, iam emortuae sunt, etc. My
brethren let not certain floodes called landebrookes terrify you; they are
filled with winter waters, fear them not, after a while the water does pass
and run down, for a time it makes a noise, but it will cease by and by,
those floodes can not stand long; Many Heresies are now already dead, etc. Now
if we will have respect of place, it is certain that no Heresy is by process
of time to spread it self absolutely over the whole world, as I have proved,
that the true Church shall do, and the reason hereof may be assigned, because
as Saint Austen says, diu stare non possunt, they can not continue so long,
as were needful, to get them so universally spread over the whole world,
especially considering, that as S. Paul says, when they have continued a
while, 2. Tim. 3.
Insipientia earum manifesta fit omnibus, their folishenes is made manifest to
all, and so no marvel, si vltra non proficiant, if they prosper not, nor make
no further progress. Neither ordinarily, in any one age, is Heresy so
universal in place as the true Catholic religion, but, for the most part, it
is contained in one or two countries, as it were in a corner of the world. So
that of heretics we may well say, as S. Austen does, that they are those,
which say: Ecce hic est Christus, ecce illic. Aug. l. de Vnitate Ecclesiae.
cap. 3.
Behold Christ is here, behold he is there. (that is to say, the true
doctrine of Christ is only truly preached in this country, or that country)
of which kind of people, our Savior gives us warning, and bids us, saying,
nolite credere, believe them not. Mat. 24.
We may well say also of these (as the same S. Austen does) Quaecunque
congregatio cuiuslibet Haeresis, Aug. l. 4. de Simb. cap. 10.
in angulis sedet, concubina est, non matrona. Whatsoever congregation of what
Heresy soever, sits in corners, (that is to say, is but in few provinces,
and in the rest of the Christian world, either is not at all, or at least is
not manifestly known to be) is a concubine, not a matrone, to wit it is not
the spouse of Christ, nor the lawful mother of the children of God. Wherefore
since there is this difference betwixt heresy, and true Christian religion;
that, as the same S. Austen says.) Singulae Haereses in multis ge^tibus vbi
Ecclesia est non inueniuntur: Aug. l. de Vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 3.
Ecclesia autem, quae vbique est, etiam vbi illae sunt, inuenitur. Heresies are
not found in many nations, where the Church is: but the Church, which is every
where, is found in those nations, where Heresies are. This difference (I say)
being betwixt Heresy, and the true religion, we need not doubt, but that to be
Catholic, or universally received in the Christian world, especially at all
times, is a note of the truth. And that therefore the company which professes
the faith, which, at all times, and, in a sort, in all places, has bin
received of Christians, is undoubtedly the true Church of Christ.

Lastly the true Church is also Apostolic, that is to say, such as has her
foundation from the Apostles, according to that saying of the Apostle S. Paul.
Ephesians. 2.
Non estis hospites and aduenae sed estis ciues sanctorum and domestici Dei,
superaedificati supra fundame^t^m Apostolorum and Prophetarum, ipso summo
^^gulari lapide Christo Jesus. You are not strangers and forreiners, but you
are citizens of the saints and the domesticals of God, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
highest corner stone. This we may gather out of that which is already said.
For if the apostles were they which were appointed, by our Savior, to be, under
him, Act. 1.
the fou^ders of his Church which by their preaching, began at Jerusalem, and
from thence, by them, Act. 2.
and those that received auctority from them, Aug. l. de Pastor. cap. 8.
tanquam vi^is crescendo vbique diffusa est (as Saint Austen speaks) like a
vine, by growing was spread abroad every where; and being thus first planted,
and spread abroad, was afterward, by the ministry of lawfully succeeding
pastors and doctors, continued, without interruption, till now, and shall be
also so continued, till the worlds end: there is no doubt, but that this
company (descending thus lineally from the Apostles, and depending of them, as
their lawful progenitors, and being built upon them, as (after Christ
himself) upon principal foundations) may well be called Apostolic, that is
to say, such as derive their pedigree from no other author or founder, latter
then the Apostles themselves. All this does Tertullian briefly, but pithely
comprehend in this short sentence Apostoli apud vnam-quamque ciuitatem
ecclesias condiderunt: Lib. de prescript.
ab his autem ciuitatibus seu ecclesijs ab Apostolis constitutis, traducem
fidei, and semina doctrinae, caeterae exinde ecclesiae mutuatae sunt and
quotidie mutuantur vt ecclesiae fiant, ac per hoc and ipsae Apostolicae
deputabuntur vt soboles Apostolicarum ecclesiarum. The Apostles (to wit either
immediately by themselves, or by means of others) founded Churches at every
City: from which cities or Churches, being thus founded by the Apostles, other
Churches afterward did borrow, and do daily borrow the offspring of faith, and
the seeds of doctrine, that they may be made Churches, and, by this means,
these also shall be accounted Apostolic, as being the issue of the
Apostolical Churches.

Contrariwise no conuenticle of heretics can be Apostolic, by reason that
heresy (being an vpstart nouelty, contrary to the former received faith of the
Church) cannot have any Apostle or Apostolic man, for auctor and founder, but
is forced to acknowledge some other, of whom, as it received the first being,
so most commonly, either the doctrine or the men that follow it, or both,
receive also their name, as of Arrians came Arrianisme, and the Arrians, of
Montanus came the Montanists, and Montanisme, and there was never yet
heretic, which could derive the pedigree of his congregation, by
uninterrupted succession, from the Apostles; which makes Tertullian to urge
them so earnestly, saying, Lib. de prescript.
Edant haeretici origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum ita
per successiones decurrentes, vt primus ille Episcopus, aliquem ex Apostolicis
vi^is, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseuerauerit, authorem habuerit, and
antecessorem. Let the hetikes show the beginning of their Churches (or, as they
had rather say, of their Congregations) let them unfold the order of their
Bishops (or superintendents) so running down by successions, that the first of
them shall have for his auctor (in doctrine) and predecessors (in place) any
Apostolic man, who did persevere, and did not forsake the Apostles. Thus did
Tertullian urge them because he knew well, that they could never make this
proper note of the true Church to agree to their company.

It appears therefore plain enough, that these four properties One Holy
Catholic and Apostolic agree only to the true Church; and since it is no
hard matter for any to see or know, which company of Christians has these
properties (as in the next chapter I shall declare.) It is also plain, that
these four One, Holy Catholic, Apostolic (being proper to the true
Church: and apparent enough) are good notes or marks, by which me^ may
discern, which company of those, which have the name of Christians, and which
profess (as every company professes themselves) to teach the true doctrine of
Christ, is indeed the true Church, which, doubtless, teaches, in all points,
the true doctrine of Christ.

CHAP. XVI. That the Roman Church is One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, and
therefore the true Church.
THVS far my discourse has gone along all in generalities, in showing the
necessity of true faith: and that this faith is to be learned of the true
Church: and that this Church continues always and is visible, as being a
visible company of men professing the true faith of Christ: partaking his
Sacraments: and living under the government of lawful Pastors his
substitutes: and that, (whereas diverse companies of men take upon them the
title of this Church, whereby some do stand in doubt, which company is the true
Church) there be certain marks, by which, the true Church may be certainly
known, and discerned, from all other companies or congregations: and finally,
that these marks be those four One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, which are
certainly known to be the properties of the true Church, both by the Nicene
Creed, and also by plain testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers.

Now it will be good to see, if we can, by these general grounds, conclude,
which particular company of men is the true Church of Christ. A conclusion of
exceeding great consequence, as touching all matters in controversy concerning
the doctrine of faith, as may appear, by the drifte of all my former
discourse. For the framing of which conclusion, we shall not need to bring in
comparison, all the companies or sects of diverse religions, that have bin and
are in the world; because every one can easily discern of themselves, and
especially by the help of that, which has been said, that neither Turks
nor Jews nor whatsoever other Infidels, can be the true Church of Christ,
because these neither have the name of Christians, neither do they profess to
have the name of Christ. Neither am I now to meddle with heretics and
schismatiques of former ages, the which, as they have bin condemned, by the
general consent of the Church, so, in continuance of time, they have been
worn out by the same Church, in so much, that even the memory of them (God be
thanked) seems to be perished with them.

My chief question and comparison, therefore, shall be, betwixt the Romain Church
(that is to say, that company, which com^unicateth, and agrees in profession
of faith, with the Church of Rome, and lives under the obedience (as touching
spiritual matters) of the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops and pastors under
him) and the Protestants (that is to say, that company, which from Luther his
time hitherward, have opposed themselves against the Roman Church) either all
or any one sect of them; my question (I say) or comparison shall be, to which of
those two, the four forenamed marks agree, and consequentely, which of them
is the true Church.

SECT. I. That the Roman Church only is one.
FIrst I find that the Protestants Church is not perfitely One, or uniform in
dogmaticall points of faith, but variable, according to the variety of times
and persons, now holding one thing, then an other, and that the learned men
thereof, are so much at Jar among themselves, in matters of faith, that it is
hard to find three, in all points, of one opinion, and, (which is chiefly to
be pondered, as principally appertaining to the mark of Unity) they have no
means to end their controversies, so to return to unity, and to continue
therein. For while as they admit no rule of faith, but only Scripture: which
scriptures diverse men expound diuersely, according to the diverse humors and
affections, opinions and fantasies of every one, never one admitting any one
head or cheef ruler infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, in his doctrine, to
whose censure in matters of faith, every one should of necessity submit
themselves vt capite constituto, Lib. 2. and Iouin.
schismatis tollatur occasio; that, (as S. Hierome speaks) a head or chief
ruler being ordained, occasion of schism or division may be taken away.
Whilst they do thus (as they all do thus, al proclaiming to be ruled by only
Scripture, and yet almost in every one, in one point or other, expounding
Scripture diuersely, and one contrary to an other, according to the diverse
seeming of every ones sense, and never one admitting any one superior,
infallibly guided by the ^oly Ghost, to whose definitive sentence ^e and the
rest will be bound to submit ^^eir doctrine and expositio^s): whilst (I say)
^hey do thus, it is impossible that they should, in fidei occurrere vnitatem,
S. Hier. in cap. 4 ad Ephesians.
meet (as S. Hierome consaileth) in the unity of faith. The which unity in
profession of faith notwithstanding, is one principal thing ^ertaining to the
unity of the Church: and Unity of the Church, is one chief mark, by which we
must discern which is the true Church.

Contrary wise the Roman Church is always one and uniform in faith, never
va^ying, or holding any dogmaticall point contrary to that, which in former
times, from the beginning it did hold. The lear^ed men thereof, though
sometimes differing in opinion, in matters not defined by the Church, yet in
matters of faith all conspire in one. And no marvel, because they have a most
convenient means to keep unity in profession of faith, since they do
acknowledge one chief pastor appointed over them (to wit the successor of S.
^eter) to whose definitive censure, in matters concerning religion, they wholly
submit themselves, knowing that to Saint Peter (and his successors) Christ
our Savior promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven: Math. 16.
and that he would upon him (and his successors) as upon a sure rock, build
his Church. Knowing also that the same our Savior did specially pray for S.
Peter (and every one his lawful successor) that this faith should not fail
(at least so far* as to teach the Church a false faith) to the intent, Luc. 22.
that he might be always able to confirm his brethren, if, at any time, they
should fail in the doctrine of faith. Chrysostom. lib. 2. de Sacerdotio. S. Leo
Ser. 2. de anniuers. assumpt. suae. ad Pontif. Joan. 21.
Knowing lastly, that to S. Peter, and his successors (which word I add, not
without sufficient authority and reason) Christ our Lord gave most ample power
over his universal Church, saying, pasce ou^s m^as, feed my sheep: that is
to say: Rule or govern, as chief pastor under me, my sheep; that is, all
those, that pertain to the sheepefolde, which is the Church; giving him and
his successors charge to feed them, with the food of true doctrine of faith:
and consequently binding these his sheep, to receive obediently this food of
true doctrine of faith at their hands: and consequently tying himself so to
assiste him, and his successors, ^ith the guiding of the holy Ghost, that ^^ey
should always propose unto the ^ocke of Christ, which is his universal
Church, the food of true faith, and that ^hey should never teach ( ex
Cathedra) any ^^ing contrary to true faith, since if he should not thus assist,
but should pemitte ^^em to teach the Church errors in faith, ^^e^ the Church,
which Luke 10. Mat. 23. Mat. 16. Ioh. 16.
he has bound (...) hear this Pastor in all points, might, ^ontrary to his
purpose, err, nay, should, (...) him, be bound to err, which, without
^lasphemy, cannot be said. All Catholic ^earned men, therefore, knowing this,
do ^cknowledge that the definitive sentence, (...) this chief Pastor (either
alone or at ^^ast with a general council) must needs ^ee, always, an
infallible undoubted (...); and that therefore, they may safe^y, yea, they must
necessarily, submit all ^^eir judgments and opinions, either in ^^terpreting
Scripture, or otherwise in ^^tters concerning religion, to the cen^^re of this
Apostolic seat. The which ^hile they do, (as they must always do, (...)
they will be accounted Catholic men, (...) will not cast out themselves, or be
cast out of the company of Catholics) how is it possible, that one should
dissen^ from another, in matters of faith, or a^ least obstinately (as
heretics do) err in any point of faith;

So that this difference may be assigned betwixt any sect of heretics and the
Roman Church; that heretics are a company not united among themselves by any
like, which is able to contain and continue them in unity of faith: whereas
the Roman Church is Plebs Sacerdoti adunata and grex Pastori suo adhaerens (as
S. Cyprian says a Church should be) a people joined to their Priest and a
flock cleaving to their Pastor, Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 9
whom whilst it hears, as it is always bound to do) it is impossible, but
that it should retain the unity of faith; like as, on the contrary side,
according to the saying of S. Cyprian non aliunde haereses obortae sunt, Lib.
1. Epist. 3.
aut nata schismat^, quam inde, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec vnus
in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, nec vnus iudex vice Christi cogitatur. Not from
any other root have heresies and schisms sproung up but from this, that men
do not obey the Priest of God, neither do they consider, how that in the
Church there is one Priest, and one Judge, for the time in steed of Christ.

II. That the Roman Church only is Holy.
SECONDLY, I find that the Protestants Congregation is not Holy. Because, not
only most of their men be eui^ently more wicked, then men, which ^oth in old
time, and in latter years, li^ed in the Roman Church; as those can tell, which
have seen both, and is confessed (...) Luther himself, who says thus; Sunt
(...) homines magis vindict cupidi, In postilla super Euang dom. primae
aduentus.
magis (...), magis ab omni misericordia remoti, magis ^^^desti, and
indisciplinati, multoque deteriores (...) fuerunt in Papatu. Men are now more
^euengfull, more covetous, more vnmer^^full, more immodest and unruly, and ^uch
worse then when they were Pa^ists. The like testimony you may find ^^uen by
another of their Doctors called ^^idelinus, which for breuity sake I omit. ^ut
chiefly their company is not holy, Conc. 4. super cap. 21. Luc.
because there was never yet Saint or holy ^an of it: neither is their doctrine
such, (...) may, of it self, lead the most precise obseruers of it, to
holiness, but does, (by ^^uers points which have bin taught) rather incline men
to liberty, and loosene of life. As for example, it enclineth them to break
fasting days; and to cast away secret confession of sins to a Priest; both
which are known to be sovereign remedies against sin. Also it enclineth them
to neglect good works; for they hold them either not to be necessary or no^
meritorious of life everlasting, which must needs make men less esteem the
practice of them. Also it makes men careless in keeping Gods commandments,
because diverse Protestants (if not all) hold them impossible to be observed;
and (as it is said) impossibilium non est electio* No man chooses or labors
to atchiue that which he thinks to be altogether impossible. It makes men
also not to fear, or to be careful to avoid sin, because it is held among
them that whatsoever we do is sin, and that we cannot choose but continually
sin, and that all sins are of themselves mortal, which whosoever thinks,
how can he be afraid to sin, since stultum est timere, quod vit ari no^ potest,
it is foolishnes to fear that, which no way can be avoided. Finally their
doctrine of predestination is able to make men careless or desperate in all
actions and consultations, since some of them hold all things so to proceed of
Gods eternal predestination, that man (in matters of religion, at least) has
no free will to do well, or to avoid ill, but that God himself is author, and
moves them, effectually and forcibly, not only to good works, but in the
same sort, unto the act of sin. Lo whither this doctrine leads a man,
which gives grounds, which of themselves incline a man, to neglect all
endeavor, in the study and practice of virtue, and to cast away care of
avoiding sin and vice: and consider whether this can be a good tree, which
of it own nature brings forth so bad fruit. Mat. 7.
And see whether this company, which teaches and believes such points of
unholy doctrine, can possibly be a Holy Church.

In the Roman Church, I confess there be some sinful folk, all in it are
not good. For the Church is called nigra and formosa, Cant. 1.
black and fair, in it are mixed good and bad, as out of diverse parables of
our Savior I proved before. But there are two differences betwixt the sinful,
which are in the Roman Church and those which are among Sectaries.

The first difference is, that among heretics there are none, which we may
call truly holy, of which, as of the better or more worthy part, their
congregation may be termed holy: as the Roman Church may. It may be perhaps,
that one may find diverse of them, who abstain from gross outward sins, as
stealing, swearing, etc. And that some of them, do many works morally good,
as to give alms to the needy, and that they live, at least in outward show,
in upright and moderate sort. But alas, these be not sufficient or certain
signs of sanctity; all this, and perhaps far more, we may read of heathen
Philosophers; these outward actions may proceed of natural and sometime of
sinful motives: and consequently, they may be very far from true holiness,
which must be grounded in true charity; ^. Cor. 13
for as S. Paul says to distribute all that one has to feed the poor, or to
give ones body to burn, does nothing avail without charity: which charity
must proceed de cord puro, ^. Tim. 1.
and conscientia bona, and fide non ficta out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and an unfeigned faith. The which things being most inward; and
consequently hidden and secret, cannot sufficiently be showed to others, by
those outward actions, which may come from other causes as soon as from these.
Nay, they can not be known certainly of the party himself. Eccles. ^.
For n^s^it homo vtrum odio vel ^more dignus sit a man knows not whether he
be worthy of hate or love: and quis potest dicere mundum est cor meum? Prou. ^^.
who can say my heart is clean? but these things are reserved to him only qui
scrutatur cord^, who searches the hearts, to wit almighty God, and it cannot
be perfitely known of men, who have them truly, and consequently, who be
truly saints, unless it please him to reveal it, by miracle, or some other
certain way unto us. But hitherto it was never heard that almighty God did,
by miracle, See Staphil. in absolu^. respons. Cochlae. in actis Lutheri. A^.
152^ Bolse^. i^ vita Calvin. c. 13
or any such certain way, give testimony, that either Luther or Calvin, or any
of their fellows or followers had in them this true holiness, or that they were
Saints: but rather, while as they presumptuously attempted to work miracles,
it has pleased God, by giving either none, or evil success, to testify that
they were not Saints. Whereas, on the contrary side, it has pleased God, to
give testimony by miracles of the faith and holiness of life of diverse, which
professed the Roman faith; of which sort I might bring in many examples, but
I will at this time only name S. Bernard, S. Dominike, S. Frauncis, who, on
the one side, were certainly known, to have bin professors of that religion,
which was then, and is now, professed at Rome; as may appear, both by that,
which is left written of their lives, and also by this, that they were chief
fathers and founders of certain Religious orders of Monks and Friars, which
yet continue there: and, on the other side, they are certainly known to be
holy men, partly by their sober, chaste, and virtuous life, partly by the gift
of miracles, in so much, Luther. lib. de capt. Bab. Philip in Apol. art. 5 and
27.
that even Luther himself, and other of our adversaries, confess them to have
been Saints. The which being confessed of these, must needs infer the like
confession of the sanctity of many other who were also professors of the same
Roman faith, whose names we may find registered in the Calender, even in
books set out by Protestants, and whose virtuous life, holy death, and
miraculous deeds, we may find in good authors. See Saint Athanas. in vita S.
Antonij apud Surium. S. Bernard in vita S. Malachiae. S. Antoninus 3. part
hist. titulo 23. and 24. Surius throughout his large volumes of the lives of
Saints and others. Now this being confessed, that diverse, whom we know to have
been members of the Roman Church, are saints: we may well infer, that, at
least, some part of this Church is holy, and that therefore of this part ( per
synecdochen) the whole may be termed holy: especially considering that the
faith of this part, (which was a principal root, out of which their holiness
did spring) is all one in substance with the faith, which we all profess: and
therefore, we may say that our faith and profession enclineth and leads to
the same holiness of life that theirs did. And therefore though many, through
their own fault, fail in the practice of virtue and holiness, yet our
profession (being all one with the profession of these holy men) is to be
termed holy, as theirs was. Of which holy profession in some sort, all our
whole company may be called holy, as of the art of painting or any other art,
all that profess them are commonly termed by a name proper to their
profession, though it happen that diverse of them, be not very skillful, nor do
not much exercise his art.

And from hence rises the second difference, betwixt Protestants and us, to
wit, that the very doctrine it self, which Protestants teach, does (as I
showed before) induce men to liberty, and consequently to lewd life: whereas
the Roman faith, which we profess, both expressly forbids all vice: and
prescribes laws contrary to liberty and loosenes of life; and contains most
sovereign means, to incite and move a man, to all perfect virtue, and holiness
of life. As for example. It teaches, that, notwithstanding the presence or
predestination of Almighty God, man has free will, wherewith (being aided by
Gods grace, which grace, through the merit of Christ's Passion, is ready for
all, that with humble, devout and perseuerant prayer will ask, and by
frequenting, in due sort, the holy Sacraments, will seek for it) he may avoid
sin and embrace virtue, the which takes away despair of shunning evil and
doing well, which easily follows of the contrary opinion. It teaches also
that Gods comma^dements be not impossible to be observed; nay nor hard (through
help of grace, which is always at hand) to be observed of one, which has but
a good will; 1. Ioh. 5.
according as S. John says mandata eius grauia non sunt his comma^deme^ts be
not heavy, yea that they may, by the same grace, be easily observed, according
to that of our Savior Iugum meum suaue, Mat. 11.
and onus meum leave my yoke is sweet, and my burden light. The which moves a
man to conceive great hope of eschewing evil and living well, which hope, (and
consequently heart) to do well, a man cannot have, who persuades himself, that
Gods commandments be impossible to be observed, as I showed before. Again it
teaches, that, as a man may, by grace, avoid sin, and easily keep Gods
commandments, and by doing good works, live well: so this good life is
pleasing and acceptable unto God, and these good works (as proceeding from
grace, and receiving virtue from the merits of Christ, of which this grace does
depend) are meritorious, and such, for reward whereof, God will give, to them
that perseuerantly do them, everlasting bliss in the kingdom of heaven. The
which doctrine will, doubtless, if it be duly considered, breed in a man's
mind great love and delight to do well, as the contrary must needs breed, at
least, a coldness in devotion, if not a contempt and loathing of good deeds, and
specially of those good deeds, which have any difficulty annexed to them. It
teaches also that for sinners are prepared exceeding great punishments in the
next life; and that though there be means in the Church to get remission of
sin, and pardon of the pain, yet it teaches that a man cannot ordinarily be
absolutely certain, that he has so used those means, as that he has
thereby gotten that remission or pardon; which is a great motive to make men
wary not to fall into sin, and to move them Cum metu and tremore operari
salutem with fear and trembling to work their salvation whereas Protestants
upon supposed certainety of salvation cast away this wholesome fear, Philip.
cap. 2.
and so may easily become careless of avoiding any sin. Furthermore it
prescribes wholesome laws and customs, of fasting and prayer, and of other
exercises of virtue and piety, whereby the flesh may be subject to the spirit,
and the spirit to God. It maintains also secret confession of sins to a
Priest, as being a thing necessary, and commanded by our Savior himself, the
which both is a great bridle to hold men back from sin (as experience
teaches) and is a special means, whereby the Pastors of the Church knowing
the inward conscience of their flock, may better, apply fit remedies to
their spiritual diseases, and prescribe, to every one, fit exercises, for
their practice and progress in virtue. Finally the profession of this Church
is such, that even simple Protestants, when they see any Catholic do a thing
amiss, will ordinarily say You should not thus, or a man of your profession
should do otherwise. So that those which be sinful in the Roman Church,
cannot, in any sort, ascribe their sins to any defect, or peruersity of the
doctrine of the Church, but must needs acknowledge the^ to proceed from their
own frailty or malice, contrary to the teaching of the Church, and sometimes
eue^ contrary to their own conscience, and actual knowledge.

Wherefore I may conclude, that although there be some sinful men in the
Roman Church, yet it may well be called Holy; because the doctrine which it
believes and professes, of it own nature, enclineth and directs a man to
the true holiness, and consequently is of it self holy: and also because there
be many holy persons in it, some of which are certainly known in particular
to be such, by proof of miracle, others are only known by this probable
reason, to wit that they hold the same faith, which was holden by those, who
have bin certainly known holy men, and houlding the same faith (which must
needs be the true faith, since none are truly holy, or can possibly please God,
without the right faith, which is but one) they have in them a root, out of
which true holiness is apt to spring, and therefore, when we see no apparent
evil fruit, whereby we may discover some evil root, but only good, which
is apt to spring of this good root, and especially when we see the fruit of
their good works, to be conformable, and like to the works of those, which
are known Saints, we have great cause to judge, that they also are just men,
and in some sort holy, if not perfectly Saints. Since therefore many men which
have bin and are members of the Roman Church, have been and are known,
either by absolute proof of miracle, or at least, in this other manner, to be
holy; Of these as of the better, more worthy and principal part, the whole may
be (as I said before) termed holy; as a tree, that having a root apt to give
life to the branches, some of which being dead, others have life, is
absolutely said to be alive; which, if we should see to have a corrupted
root, and could not perceive it to have any living branches, we should have
cause to affirm absolutely, that it were dead, and not alive.

. III. That the Roman Church only is Catholic.
THIRDLY I find that the Protestants company is not Catholic; that is to say
universal, neither in time, nor in place; for it came up of late, and is but
in few places of Christendom: neither in points of doctrine; for their
doctrine consists chiefly of negatiues, that is to say in denying diverse
points, which have been generally held in former ages, as appears by the
Chronicles of the Magd^burgenses their own doctors, who confess that the
ancient Fathers held this and that, which they now deny. And there is no
learned Protestant (unless he be too too impudent) but he will confess, that
there cannot be assigned a visible company of men professing the same faith,
which they do) ever since Christ his time, continuing, without interruption,
till now. And therefore, will he, nill he, he must confess, that the
Protestants Church is not universal, and therefore not Catholic (as out of
Scripture, I showed Christ's true Church must be.

But the Roman Church is Catholic. For first, it has been continually
without ceasing since Christ and his Apostles time, still visibly (though
sometimes in persecution) professing the same faith which is received from the
Apostles, without change til^ this day. It is therefore Catholic or
universal in time. It has also had and has at this day, some in every
country, where there are any Christians, (which is almost; if not absolutely
every where) that communicates and agrees with it, in profession of faith.
Therefore it is also Catholic or universal in place. It teaches also an
universal and most ample uniform doctrine of God, of angels, of all other
creatures, and specially of man of man's first framing, of his final end, of
things pertaining to his nature, of his fall by sin, of his reparation by
grace, of laws prescribed unto him, of virtues, which he ought to embrace, of
vices, which he ought to eschew, of Christ our Redeemer, his Incarnation,
life, death, resurrection, ascension, and coming again to Judgment, of
Sacraments and all other things, that any way pertain to Christian religion.
Neither does it, at this day, deny any one point of doctrine of faith, which,
in former times, was universally received, for a verity of the Catholic
Church. The which if any man will take upon him to gainesaye, let him show and
prove, if he can, what point of doctrine the Roman Church does deny, or
hold contrary to that, which by the Church was universally held before. As we
can show diverse points, that the Protestants so hold or deny. Let him (I say)
show and prove by setting down the point of doctrine, the author, the time,
the place, and what company did oppose themselves against it, and who they
were that did continue (as the true Church must still continue) in the
profession of the former faith, lineally, without interruption, till these our
days: as we ca^ show and prove against them. Let him also show what country
there is, or has been, where Christian faith either was first planted, or
afterward continued, where some, at least, have not holden the Roman faith.
As we can show, even at this day, diverse places, where there religion is scarce
heard of, especially in the Indian, Iaponian, and China countries, which were,
not long since, first converted to the Christian faith, only by those, who
were members o^ the Roman Church, and chiefly by Iesuite^ sent thither by the
authority of the Pope* And to go no further then our dear^ country England.
We shall find in the Cronicles, that it was converted by Au^ustine a Monk,
sent by S. Gregory the Pope, See the History of Saint Bede. lib. 1. cap. 23.
and that it continued in that faith, without knowledge of the Protestants
religion, which then, and for diverse hundred years after, was never heard of,
as being then ^nhatched. The like record of other countries converted by means
of those only, who either were directely sent by ^he Pope or Bishop of Rome,
or, at least, communicated and agreed in profession of ^aith, with him, we may
find in other hi^tories. Lastly let him show some space of time, in which the
Roman Church was ^ot since Christ and his Apostles time; or (...) which it
was not visible and known. As we can show them many hundred ^eares in which
theirs was not at all. Let ^im (I say) therefore show and prove, (which ^euer
any yet did or can prove) that ever ^he Roman Church did either fail, to be
(...) to be visible, or being still visible, when ^he profession of the ancient
faith, which (...) received from the Apostles, did fail in (...) and when, and
by whom the profession ^f a new faith began in it. As we can show ^hen, where,
and by whom, this new (no) ^ith of theirs began.

Certain it is that once the Roman Church had the true faith, and was a true
Church, to wit, when S. Paul writ to the Romans, Romans 1.
saying, vestra fides annunciatur in vniuerso orb, your faith is renowned in
the whole world. When therefore, I pray you, (as the learned and renowned M.
Campian urges) when (I say) did Rome change the belief and profession of
faith which once it had. In ration. redditis acadaem. ^a. 7.
Quo tempore? quo Pontifice? qua via? qua vi? quibus incrementis vrbem and
orbem religio peruasit aliena? Quas voces? quas turbas, quae lamenta ea res
progenuit? Omnes orb reliquo sopiti sunt dum Roma, Roma inquam, noua
Sacramenta, nouum sacrificium, nouum religionis dogma procuderet? Nullus
extitit Historicus, neque Latinus, neque Graecus, neque remotus, neque citimus,
qui rem tantam vel obscure iaceret in commentarios? At what time? under what
Pope, what way? with what violence or force? with what augmentation or increase
did a strainge religion ouerflow the city and the whole world? What speeches
or rumors? what tumults or troubles? what lamentations (at least) did it
breed? was all the rest of the world a sleep, when Rome (the Imperial and
mother city, whose matters for the most part are open to the view of the
whole world) when Rome I say, did coin new Sacraments, a new sacrifice, a new
doctrine of faith and religion? Was there never one Historiographer, neither
Latin nor Greek, neither far off nor near, who would at least obscurely
cast into his commentaries, such a notable matter as this is.

Certainly it is not possible, if such a thing as this had happened, but that
it should have been resisted, or at least recorded by some For suppose it were
true, (which Protestants imagine) that some points, of the faith and religion,
which Rome professes at this day, were as contrary to that, which was in it,
when Saint Paul commended ^he Roman faith as black to white, darkness to
light; or so absurd, as were now Iudaisme or Paganism (as one of their
Historiographers accounts it worse, saying, that indeed Augustine the Monk
converted the Saxons from Paganism, but, Hollinshead in the description of
Britany. fol. 11.
as the proverb says (says he) bringing them out of Gods blessing into the
warm Sun) Suppose, I say this were true. Then I would demand, if it were
possible, that any Prince, in any Christian city, and much more that the Pope
in Rome the mother city, could, at this day, bring in any notable obsurde
rite of Jewish or Paganish religion; for example to offer up an Ox in
sacrifice, or to worship a Cow as God, and not only to practice it privately in
his own Chapel, but to get it publicly practiced and preached, in all
Churches, not only of that city, but also, in all the rest of the Christian
world, and that none should, in Christian zeal, continually oppose themselves,
that no Bishop should preach; no Doctor write against this horrible innovation
of faith, and the author thereof; that none should have constancy to suffer
martyrdom, which Christians have bin always most ready to endure, rather then
to yield to a profession and practice, so contrary to their ancient faith;
that there should be no true hearted Christians, who would speak of it, or, at
least, lament it, nor no Historiographer that would so much as make obscure
mention of it. Could all be so a sleep, that they could not note or so cold
and negligent, in matters concerning their souls good, as, generally, without
any care to yield unto it? Noe certainly, though there were no promise of
Christ his own continual presence; no assurance of the infallible assistance
of his holy Spirit: Yet it is not possible that such a gross error should
arise among Christians, and ouerwhelme the whole world, without some
resistance. The Bishops and Pastors could not be so simple, or so unmindful
of their duty, but they would first note such an evident contrariety, to the
ancient and universally received faith; and noting it, they would, doubtless,
with common consent, resist, contradict, and finally, according to Saint Paul
his rule, accurse it. Gall. 1.
If therefore this could not happen now, nor ever heretofore was heard, that
any such absurd error or heresy did or could arise, without noting or
resisting; what reason can any man have, to say, that this has happened at
Rome? not being able to allege any writter, that did note the thing, the
person, the time, and what oppositio^ was made and continued against it, as in
all heresies that have spronge up of new, we can do. If there could not a
little ceremony be added to the Mass, but that it was set down in history,
when and by whom; how could the whole substance of the Mass, (which consists
in consecration, oblation, and consumption of the sacred Host) be newly
invented, and no mention made, when or by whom, or that ever there was any such
new invention at all? If also historiographers were not afraid to note
personal and private vices of the Popes themselves; which they might well
think Popes would not willingly have made open to the world; why should they
have feared to have recorded any alteration in religion? Which if it had been,
had been a thing done publicly in the view of the whole world; or if there
were any fear or flattery, which might tie the tongues and pens of those,
that lived near hand, that they durst not or would not mention such a matter,
yet, doubtless, others, which lived in places further off, should not have had
those causes, and consequently would not have kept secret such an open and
important a thing as this. If lastly the histories which make mention of these
private vices of Popes, and other Christian Princes, could not only first come
out, but also continue, without touch, till these latter times; what reason can
any have to doubt or dream, but that the like would have been set out about
the alteration of religion, if it had happened? and that, if any such history
reporting any true accident of alteration or change of religion had come out;
it should, partly by Gods providence, partly by humane diligence; have bin
preserved, till these our days; especially considering, that such records had
been so requisite, for discerning the ancient, unchanged, true Christian
religion, from vpstart nouelty, which must needs be false.

So that we may well conclude; that, if Christian religion had, since the
Apostles time* altered in Rome; it would have bin recorded in histories, as
other things, and especially such notable alterations are recorded: and those
histories would have been preserved till this day, as other Christian
monuments have been preserved, even in time of persecution, yea, even then,
when the persecutors made particular enquiry for Christian books, to burn or
consume them. But in those ancient histories, there is no mention made of any
such alteration of religion in Rome. Wherefore it follows that there was no
such alteration or change at all. No such alteration being made, it is evident
that the same faith and religion, which was in Saint Paul's time, has always
continued, and is there now. That which was there then, was the true faith and
religion, as appears by that high commendation, which Saint Paul has left
written of it. Therefore that which is there now, must needs be the only
true holy and Catholic faith; and that company which professes it, must
needs be the Only true Holy and Catholic Church.

Neither can I see what answer can, with any probability, be forged against
this reason. For to say, that the errors of the Church of Rome crept in by
little and little, and so, for the littlenes of the thing, or for the
negligence of the Pastors, were not espied; is an Idle fiction already refuted.
For first those matters, which the Protestants call errors in the Roman
Church, be not so little matters, but that less, even in the like kind, are
ordinarily recorded in stories. Nay, some of them are in the Protestants
conceits, (and consequently if men of old time had been Protestants, they
would have been also in their conceits) as gross superstition as Paganism
it self, namely to adore Christ our Savior as being really and substantially
present in the Blessed Sacrament, the which Sacrament Protestants hold to be,
(really and substantially) but a bare piece of bread. Also the Protestants
account the use of the Images to be Idolatry, and say (very ignorantly or
maliciously) that we adore stocks and stones, as the Panims did. The which
things, could not so have crept in, by little and little, but they must needs
be espied: Neither could the Pastors of the Church, at any time, be so simple
and ignorant, so sleepy and negligent, but they must needs have seen: and
seeing must needs in some sort have resisted, as before I have said. For to
imagine all the Pastors, of any one age, to have been in such a deep
Lethargicall and deadly sleep, that they could not only not perceive, when
the enemy should over sow Cockle in the hearts of some; but also when this
Cockle of false belief should grow to outward action, and especially to
public practice, the which could not be but most apparent; to imagine (I say)
all the Pastors to be so simple and sleepy, not then to mark, or not to
resist, is rather the dream of a proud man in his sleep, who is apt to
think all men fools beside himself, then a judicial conceipte of a waking
man of any understanding, who ought to think of things past, either according
to the verity recorded in stories, or when this fails, by comparing the
likelihood of that which he thinks was done by men of that time, with that,
which most men of their quality, would do in like case.

Finally if these were so, and that the Church did, by this means, for so long
space, in such important matters, universally err, Lib. de Prescript.
neglexerit Officium Spiritus Sanctus (as Tertullian speaks refuting the like
cavil of heretics) the holy Ghost should have neglected his office, which
is, (as I have proved before out of Scripture) not to permit the universal
Church to fall into error, but to suggest unto it all things, Ioh. 14. Ioh. 16.
that Christ said unto it, and to teach it all truth.

. IIII. That the Roman Church only is Apostolic.
FOurthly I find that the Protestants Church is not Apostolic. Because, they
can not derive the Pedigree of their preachers, lineally, without interruption,
from the Apostles: but are forced to acknowledge some other as Luther, or
Calvin, or some such, for their first founders, in this their new faith; from
whom they may perhaps show some succession of the preachers of their faith:
but they can never show, that Luther or Calvin themselves (wsto lived within
this hundred years) did either lawfully succeed, or was lawfully sent to
teach this new faith, by any Apostolic Bishop or Pastor. Nay Luther himself
does not only confess, but also brag, that he was the first preacher of
this new found faith, Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audemns gloriari (says
he) we darre boast, Epist. ad Argent. an Dom. 1525.
that Christ was first published by us. For which his glorious boasting, me
thinks, he deserves well that title which Optatus gives unto Victor the
first Bishop of the Donatists, Lib. and parm.
to wit, to be called filius sine patre, Discipulus sine magistro a son
without a father, a disciple without a master.

On the contrary side the Roman Church can show a lineall succession of their
Bishops, without interruption, even from the Apostle Saint Peter, unto Clement
the eight the Bishop of Rome, which lives at this day. The which succession
from the Apostles, which we have, and the Protestants want, the ancient fathers
did much esteem, and used it as an argument, partly co confound the
Heretics, partly to confirm themselves in the unity of the Catholic
Church. So does Irenaeus who says. Traditionem ab Apostolis, and annunciatam
hominibus fidem, Lib. 3. c. 3
per successiones episcoporum peruenientem vsque ad nos, indicantes,
confundimus omnes illos, qui quoquo modo, vel per sui placentiam malam, vel per
vanam gloriam, vel per caecitatem and malam sententiam, praeterquam oportet,
colligunt. Showing the tradition from the Apostles, and the faith coming unto
us, by succession of Bishops, we confound all them, who, any way, through
evil co^placence of themselves, or vain glory, or through perverse opinion,
do collect (and conclude) otherwise, then they ought. So also does Saint
Austen, who says. Tenet me in Ecclesia Catholica, Et Epist. Fundamenti. c. 4.
^b ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli, cui pascendas oues suas Dominus commendauit,
vsque ad praesen^^^ Episcopum, successio Sacerdotum. The succession of Priests
from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, to whom our Lord commended his
sheep to be fed, until this present Bishop, does hold me in the Catholic
Church. See the same Saint Austen Epist. 150. Optatus l. 2. cont. Parmen. Saint
Epiphan. Haer. 275. Saint Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 6. S. Athanas. Orat. 2. contra
Arrianos, who pronounces them to be Heretics, Athanas. orat. 2. and Arrian.
qui ^^unde quam a tota successione Cathedrae Ecclesiasticae origine^ fidei
suae deducunt who derive the beginning of their faith, from any other ground,
then from the whole succession of Ecclesiastical chair. And this says he is
eximium and admirabile argumentum ad haereticam sectam explorandam an excellent
and admirable argument, whereby we may epsy out, and discern an heretical
sect. The which argument these Fathers would never have urged and extolled so
much, if they had not thought that this succession was an undoubted good mark
of the Church, and that with this lawful, uninterrupted, Apostolical
succession of Doctors and Pastors, the true Apostolic faith and doctrine, was
always conjoined. The which to be conjoined we may easily prove out of Saint
Paul himself, who says Dedit Pastores and Doctores ad consummationem
sanctorum, Ephesians. 4.
in opus ministerij, in aedificationem Corporis Christi, donec occurramus omnes
in vnitatem fidei and agnitionis Filij Dei, in virum perfectum, in mensuram
aetatis plenitudinis Christi. Signifying that Christ our Savior has appointed
these outward functions of Pastors and Doctors, in the Church, to continue
until the worlds end, for the edification and perfection thereof, and
especially for this purpose vt non simus paruuli fluctuantes and circumferamur
omni vento doctrinae that we may not be little ones wavering, Ibidem.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Wherefore that this ordinance
and appointment of Pastors and Doctors, in the Church, made by our Savior
Christ, may not be frustrate of the effect intended by him; we must needs
say, that he has decreed, so to assist and direct these Pastors in teaching
the doctrine of faith, that the people, their flock, may always, by their
means, be preserved from wavering in the ancient faith, and from being
carried about with every wind of new doctrine. The which cannot be, unless
with succession of Pastors be always conjoined succession in true doctrine, at
least in such sort, that all the Pastors cannot, at any time, universally err,
or fail to teach the ancient and Apostolic faith. For if they should thus
universally err, then all the people (who do, and ought, like sheep, follow
the voice of their Pastor) should also generally err, and so the whole
Church, which (according to Saint Gregory Nazianzene) consists of sheep and
Pastors, should, Orat. de moderatione in disput. habendo*
contrary to diverse promises of our Savior, universally err. So that we may
be sure, that the Ordinary Pastors shall never be so forsaken of the promised
Spirit of truth, that all shall generally err, and teach errors in faith; or
that there shall not be, at all times, some sufficient company of lawful
succeeding Pastors, Ioh. 2^*
adhering to the succession of S. Peter (who was by our Savior, appointed
chief Pastor) of whom we may learn the truth, and by whom we may always be
confirmed and continued in the true ancient faith, and preserved from being
carried about with the wind of vpstart error. The which being so, it
follows that the true Apostolic doctrine is inseperably conjoined, with the
succession of lawful Pastors, especically of the Apostolic sea of Rome.

Wherefore we may, against all Heretics of our time (as the ancient Fathers
did against Heretics of their time) urge this argument of succession,
especially of the Apostolical succession of the Bishops of Rome. We may say
to them as Saint Augustine says to the Donatistes. Aug. in Psa. cont. partem
Donati.
Numerare Sacerdotes ab ipsa sede Petri, and in ill^ ordine Patrum, quis, cui,
successit, videte. Number the Priests from the seat it self of Peter, and in
that Order or row of Fathers, see, which succeeded which. We may say with
Irenaeus Hac ordinatione et successione Episcoporum, Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3.
traditio Apostolorum ad nos peruenit; and est plenissima ostensio vnam and
eandem fidem esse, quae ab Apostolis vsque nunc confirmata est. By this orderly
succession of Bishops, the tradition of the Apostles has come unto us; and
it is a most full demonstration that the faith, which from the Apostles is
confirmed even until now is one and the same. We may tell them with
Tertullian. Lib. de Prescript.
Nos communica^us cum ecclesijs Apostolicis, quod nulla aduersa doctrina facit;
and hoc est testimonium veritatis. We do communicate with the Apostolic
Churches, which no contrary doctrine does, and this is a testimony of the
truth.

CHAP. XVII. The Conclusion of the whole discourse.
NOW, to make an end, considering all this, which I have said and proved, to
wit, that there is but one, infallible, entire faith, the which is necessary to
salvation, to all sorts of men: the which faith every one must learn by some
known, infallible, and universal rule, accomodate to the capacity of every
one: the which rule cannot be any other but the doctrine and teaching of the
true Church: the which Church is always to continue visible until the worlds
end, and is to be known by these four marks Vna, Sancta, Catholica,
Apostolica, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic: the which marks agree only to
the Roman Church, (that is to say, to that company, which does communicate, and
agree in profession of faith, with the Church of Rome) whereupon follows,
that this Church or company is the only true Church of which, every one must
learn that faith which is necessary to salvation. Considering (I say) all this,
I would demand of the Protestants, how they can persuade themselves, to have
that faith, which is necessary to salvation, since they will not admit the
authority and doctrine of this Church, of which only they ought to learn
this faith? or how they can (as some of them do) challenge to themselves the
title of the true Church, since their company has never one of the four
marks, which, by common consent of all, must needs be acknowledged for the
true marks of the Church? how can their congregation be the true Church? which
neither is One, because it has no means to keep unity, nor Holy, because,
neither was there ever any man of it, which, by miracle or any other evident
testimony, can be proved, to have been truly holy, neither is their doctrine
such, as those that must purely observe it, do, without fail, thereby become
holy: nor Catholic, because it teaches not all truths, that have been held
by the universal Church in former times, but denies many of them; neither is
it spread over all the Christian world, but being divided into diverse sects,
every particular sect is contained in some corner of the world; neither has
it been in all times ever since Christ, but sproung up of late, See Prateolus
verbo Lutherani.
the first founder being Martin Luther an Apostata, a man, after his Apostasy
from his professed religious order, known, both by his writings, words,
deeds, and manner of death, to have been a notable ill liver. nor
Apostolic, because the preachers thereof can not derive their Pedigree,
lineally, without interruption, from any Apostle, but are forced to begin
their line, if they will have any, from Luther, Calvin, or some latter. How can
they then brag, that they have the true, holy, Catholic, and Aphstolique
faith? since this is not found in any company, that differs in doctrine, from
the only true, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. For if it be true
(which Saint Austen faith) that in ventre Ecclesiae veritas manet the truth
remains in the belly of the Church, In Ps. 53.
it is impossible that those, who are disioined, by difference of belief from
that company, which is known to be the true Church, should have the true
faith. For true faith (as before has been proved) is but one; wherefore he
that differreth in belief from them which have the true faith, either he must
have a false faith, or no faith at all. Again, one can not have true faith,
unless he first hear it, according to the ordinary rule of Saint Paul, Romans
10.
saying, Fides ex auditu, faith comes of hearing: but how can one hear true
doctrine of faith sine praedicante without one to preach truly unto him? and
how should one preach truly, at least in all points, nisi mittatur, unless he be
sent, and consequently assisted by the Spirit of God? now, how should we
know, that Luther, or Calvin, or any other that will leap out of the Church,
and leave that company, wherein is undoubted succession, and by succession
lawful missio^, or sending from God; how should we (I say) know that these men
teaching a new, and contrary doctrine, were indeed sent of God? Nay certainly
we may be most sure, that they were not sent of God. For since Almighty God
has, by his Son, planted a Church upon earth, which Church he would have
always continue, until the worlds end, and has placed in it a visible
succession of lawful ordinary pastors, whom he will, with the assistance of
himself, and his holy Spirit so guide, that they shall never universally
fail, to teach the true faith, and to preserve the people from errors; we
are not now, to expect any to be sent from God, to instruct the people, but
such only, as come in this ordinary manner, by lawful succession, order, and
calling, according as Saint Paul says: Heb. c. 5.
Nec quisqua^ sumit sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo tanquam Aaron. Neither
does any man take to himself the honor, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was: to wit, visibly, and with peculiar consecration, as we read in
Leuiticus, cap. 8. to which accords that which we read 2. Paralipp. cap. 26.
where Azarias said to king Ozias: ^. Paral. cap. 26.
Non est tui officij, Ozia, vt adoleas incensum Domino, sed Sacerdotum, hoc est
filiorum Aaron, qui consecrati sunt ad huiusmodi ministerium; egredere de
Sanctuario, etc. It is not thy office, O Ozias,, to offer incense to our Lord,
but it is the office of Priests, to wit, of the sons of Aaron, who are
consecrated to this function or ministry; go out of the Sanctuary. Which
bidding when Ozias conte^ned, and would not obey, he was presently stricken
with a leprosy, and then being terrified, feeling the punishment inflicted by
our Lord, he hastened away, as in the same place is declared. By which places,
we may learn that it does not belong to any one to do priestly functions, (as
to offer ince^se or sacrifice to God, or take upon the^ the authority to
preach and instruct the people) but only to Priests called visibly, and
consecrated for this peculiar purpose, as Aaron and his children were. For
though the Priesthood of the Pastors of the new law be not Aaronicall; yet it
agrees with the Priesthood of Aaron, (according to Saint Paul his saying, in
the foresaid place) in this, that those, that come to it, must not take the
honor of themselves, but must be called unto it, of God, as Aaron was, to wit,
visibly: and by peculiar consecration. In which ordinary manner whosoever
comes, he may be truly called Pastor ovium a Pastor of Christ's flock; Ioh.
10. Ibidem.
because intrat per ostium he enters in by the door, to wit, by Christ
himself, who first visibly called, consecrated, and sent immediately the
Apostles: and the Apostles, by authority received from him, did visiblie, 1.
Tim. 4.
by imposition of hands, call, consecrate, and send others: and those, in like
manner, others, from time to time, without interruption, until these present
men, who now are Priests, of the Catholic Roman Church. These therefore
enter in by Christ, who is the door, and therefore these be true Pastors; and
whosoever enters, not thus in at the door, but comes in another way, Ioh.
10.
our Savior tells us, how we should account of him, when he says. Qui non
intrat per ostium in ouile ouium, sed ascendit aliunde, ille fur est and latro.
he that enters not in by the door, into the sheepfold, but asce^deth by some
other way, he is a thief and a robber; who comes not to feed the sheep,
but to steal, kill, and destroy them. So that we have not (I say) to expect
any to be sent of God to feed us, with the food of true doctrine of faith, but
such only, as come in this ordinary manner; (as it is certain that Luther, and
Calvin, when they left their former profession, and took upon them to preach
this new faith; did not come visibly, called, consecrated and sent, for this
purpose, by any lawful authority, according to the ordinary manner) or if it
should please God to send any one, in extraordinary manner, it appertains to
his providence, to furnish him with the gift of miracles, as he did his Son
our Savior Christ; or with a miraculous conception, and with strange and
extraordinary sanctity of life, as was seen in S. John Baptist: or finally
with some evident token, that it may be plainly known, that he is assuredly
sent of God. Otherwise the people should not be bound to believe him, but
might, without sin, Ioh. 10.
reject his doctrine; according as our Savior said of himself Si non facio
opera patris mei nolite credere mihi If I do not the works of my Father, Ioh.
^5.
do not believe me. And again Si opera no^ fecissem in eis, quae nemo alius
fecit, peccatu^ non haberent. If I had not done works among the^, that no other
has done, they should not have sinned, to wit, in not believing. Nay, the
people should now, (an ordinary course being, by our Savior set down, to
continue till the worlds end, as before has been proved) the people (I say)
should now sin, in believing any one, that shall come, and tell them that he
is extraordinarily sent of God, if he teach contrary to that doctrine, which by
ordinary Doctors and pastors of the Catholic Church is universally taught:
for although it should happen, that the lives of these Pastors should not be
so commendable, or be sometimes evidently bad; yet their doctrine must always
be regarded and observed, Mat. 23.
according to that saying of our Savior, Super cathedra^ Moysi sedorunt
Scribae and Pharisaei: omnia ergo quaecunque dixerint vobis, seruate and
facite: secundum vero operae eorum nolite facere. Upon the chair of Moses the
Scribes and Pharisees have sitten; all things therefore whatsoever they say to
you, observe ye and do; but according to their works do ye not. By which
saying we are assured, that notwithstanding the Pastors of the Catholic
Church should, at any time in their lives, be like Scribes and Pharisees; yet
we may always safely, yea we must necessarily follow their doctrine, and must
not in any wise admit any that shall offer to teach us to a contrary doctrine,
Gal. 1.
according as we are willed by S. Paul, who says: Si quis vobis
euangelizauerit praeter id quod accepistis, anathema sit. If any shall
euangelize or preach unto you, beside (or contrary to) that which you have
already received, be he anathema. So that since the people did once receive,
from the ordinary pastors that doctrine, which has descended from hand to
hand, from Christ and his Apostles themselves, 2. contra Julian.
(according to that of S. Austen: Quod inuenerunt in Ecclesia, tenuerunt: quod
didicerunt, docuerunt: quod a patribus acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt. That
which they found in the Church, they held: that which they learned, they
taught: that which they received from their fathers, that they delivered to
their children) whosoever he be, that shall euangelize any thing opposite to
this received doctrine, whether he seem to be an Apostle, or an Angel, and
much more if he be an other, to wit one of these new masters, who fail very
much (to say no more) from Apostolical perfection, and Angelical purity of
life, according to S. Paul, anathema sit, be he anathema. Yea, such a one,
that does not only not bring this Catholic or generally received doctrine,
Epist. 2.
but brings in a new and contrary doctrine, we should not (according to S.
John) salute him (unless upon some need or for some good respect) or say aue
unto him, and much less should we give credit to his words, or use him, as a
rule of our faith, or prefer his teaching before the teaching of the
Catholic Church.

And surely, me thinks, though there were none of these evident proofs, which
I have brought out of Scripture; yet even reason it self would teach, that we
ought to give more credit to the universal company of Catholics, which have
been at all times, and are now spread over all the Christian world, then to any
particular private man, or some few, his fellows and followers. It is a
proverb common amongst all men, Vox populi, vox Dei, the voice of the people
or whole multitude, is the voice of God? that which all men say, must needs be
true. And on the contrary part, to that particular man or his private company,
which will oppose themselves against this general voice of all (like Ismael,
of whom it is written, manus eius contra omnes, and manus omnium co^tra eum,
his hands are against all men, and the hands of all are against him) it may
well be objected, that which Luther (who was the first in this our age which
did so) confesses was objected to himself, by his own conscience, or rather
principally by the mercy and grace of the almighty God, seeking to reclaim
him from his error, In Praef. Li. de abrog. Missae, priua^^^ ad frat^es Aug.
Ordin. in caenoo. Wittenberg.
while there was any hope. Number tu solum sapis? Art thou only wise? Luthers
words be these. Quoties mihi palpitauit tremulum cor, and reprehendens obiecit
fortissimum illud argumentum, Tu solus sapis? Totne errant vniuersi? Tanta
secula ignorauerunt? Quid si tu erres, and tot tecum in errorem trahas
damnandos aeternaliter? How often did my trembling heart pant, and, reprehending
me, did object me that most strong and forcible argument: Art thou alone wise?
have there so many universally erred? have so many ages been blind and lived
in ignorance? What rather if thou thy self err, and drawest so many after
thee into error, who (therefore) shall be damned eternally. This did almighty
God object to Luther, the which might doubtless have done him good, but that he,
(presuming upon his own understanding of Scripture, and preferring his own
judgment, before the judgment of the Church) hardened his heart against such
heavenly inspirations, which he termed Papisticall arguments. And this same
may well be objected to any private man, or any few, who, leaving the Kings
broad street, or beaten hye way of the Catholic Church, will seek out a
by-path, as being, in their conceit, a better, easier, and more direct way to
heaven. To them (I say) well may be said Are you only wise? are all the rest
in former ages fools? have you only, after so many hundred years after Christ
found out the true faith, and the right way to heaven? have all the rest lived
in blindness, darkness, and error? consequently, are you only they that please
God, and shall be saved? (for as I have proved before, without true and entire
faith, none can be saved) and were then all the rest, so many millions, your
own forefathers and ancestors, (many of which, were most innocent men and
virtuous livers, and some of which shed their blood for Christ his sake) were
(I say) all these hated of God? did al these perish? were they all damned?
shall all these endure unspeakable pains, in hell, for ever? O impious,
cruel, and incredible assertion. Nay surely; I am rather to think, that you
are unwise, who pretending to travail toward the happy kingdom of heaven, and
to go to that glorious city the heavenly Jerusalem, will leave the beaten
street, in which, al those have walked, that ever heretofore went thither, who
by miracles sometimes, as it were by letters sent from thence, have given
testimony to us, that remain behind, that they are safely arrived there. You
(I say) are unwise that will leave this way, and will adventure the lives not
only of your bodies, but of your souls, in a path found out, of late, by your
selves, never ^racked before, in which whosoever have yet gone, God knows
what is become of them; since we never had letter of miracle, or any other
evident token, or ever heard any word from the^, to assure us, that they safely
passed that way: me thinks* I may account you most unwise men that will
adventure such a precious Jewel, as your soul is, to be transported, by such
an uncertain and dangerous way. I must needs think, that, since there is but
one right way; and that the way of the Catholic Church is a sure and
approved safe way, you are very unadvised, who, with the adventure of the
irreparable loss of your dearest and peerlesse treasure your soul, will leave
this safe and secure way, to seek out a new uncertain and perilous way. I
must needs think, since the Catholic Rom^ne Church is, (as I have proved)
the light of the world, the rule of faith, the pillar and sure ground of truth:
that, you leaving it, leave the light, and therefore walk in darkness*
forsaking it, forsake the direct path of true faith, and therefore are
misse-led, in the mist of incredulity, into the wilderness of misbeleefe; and
finally that you, having thus lost the sure ground of truth, do fall into the
mierie ditc^^e of many absurdities, and must needs be drowned in the pit of
innumerable errors; and erring thus from the way, the verity, and the life,
which i^ Christ Jesus residing, according to his promise, in the Catholic
Church, must needs (unless you will (which I heartily wish) return to the
unity of the same Church) incur your own perdition, death, and damnation of
body and soul, from which sweet Jesus deliver you, and us all, to the honor,
and perpetual praise of his holy name. AMEN.

Laus Deo.



