To the godly Readers, Grace, and peace from God. etc.
TWo treatises ye have here ensuing (beloved in Christ) which ye must read
without 1. These. 5. 21 Ia. 1. 19. 20. Iam. 2. 1.
parcialitie or blind affection. For otherwise you shall neither see their
meaning: nor refrain your selves from rashlye condemning of them, without
infre cause. For certain men there are of great countenance, which will not
lightly like of them, because they principally concern their persons and
vaiusre dealings: whose credit is great, and whose friends are many, we
mean the Lordly Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes Deanes, University
Doctors, and Bachelors of Divinity, Archdeacons, Chau^celors, and the rest of
that proud generation, whose kingdom must down, hold they never so hard:
because their tyrannous Lordship can not stand Math. 15. 13 Luke. 16. 15
with Christ's kingdom. And it is the special mischefe of our English
church, and the chief cause of backewardnesse, and of all breach and
dissension. For they whose authority is Math. 20. 25. 26. Math. 23. 8. 9. 10.
Mark. 10. 4.2. 43. Lu. 22. 15.
forbidden by Christ, will have their stroke without their fellow seruau^ts,
yea, though vngratiously, cruelly and Pope-like they take upon them to Math.
24. 48. 49.
beat them, and that for their own childishe Articles, being for the most part
against the manifest truth of God: First, by experience their rigor has
too plainly appeared ever since their wicked reign, and specially for the
space of these five or six years last past together. Of the eno^mities, which
with such rigor they maintain these treatises do in part make mention,
justly craving redress thereof. But the matters do require a larger discourse.
Only ye authors of those, thought it their parts to admonish you at this time,
of those inconveniences which men seem not to think upon, and which without
reformation, cannot but increase further dissension: the one part being
proud, pontifycall and tyrannous: and the word of God for the other part
express and manifest, as if it pleased the state to examine the matters, it
would be evident. And would to God, th^^ free conference in these matters might
be had. For how so ever learned and many they seem to be, they should and may
in this realm find inowe, to match them, and shame them to, if they hold on
as they have begone. And out of this realm, they have all the best reformed
churches thorowout Christendom against them, they were once of our mind, but
since their consecration they be so transubstanciated, that they are be come
such as you see. But in a few words to say what we mean. Either must we have a
Math. 9. 37. 38.
right ministerye of God, ephesians. 4. 11. 12
and a right Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17.
government of his church, according to the scriptures set up (both which we
lack) or else there can be no right religion, nor yet for contempt thereof can
Prou. 29. 18 Amos. 8. 11. 12. etc. Math. 21. 23. etc. 1. Cor. 11. 30
Gods plagues be from us any while deferred. And therefore though they lincke
in together, and slanderously charge pore men (whom they have made pore) with
grievous faults, calling them Puritanes, worse than the Donati^tes,
exasperating and setting on, such as be in authority against them: having
hitherto miserably handled them, with reuilings, deprivations, imprisonments,
banishments, and such like extremities, yet is these poor men's cause never
the Math. 10. 16. 26
worse: nor these chalengers the better: nor god his Esaias. 59. 1
hand the further of, to lincke in with his against them: nor you (christian
brethren) must never the rather without examination Exo. 23. 1. 2 Math. 7. 1. 2
Iam 4. 11. 12
condemn them. But thankfully take this taste which God by these treatises
offers you, and weigh them by the word of God, and do your endeavor every one
in his 1. Cor. 5. 7. 1. Cor. 7. 20
calling to promote his cause. And let us all with more Psalm. 50. 15 Math 7. 7
1. Tim. 2. 1. 2
earnest prayer then we are wont, earnestly commend it to God his blessyng:
and namely, y^ it will please him by his spirit, to lighten the heart of our
most gracious sovereign, and the rest in authority, to the benefyte of his
small flock, and the overthrow of their proud e^^emies, that godliness may
by them proceed in peace, and God his glory through Jesus Christ, be thoroughly
advanced. Which we call God to witness, is our only labor and suit. And so
presently we leave you, heartily beseching God to grant it. Amen.

An Admonition to the Parliament.
Seeing that nothing in this mortal life is more diligently to be sought for,
and carefully to be looked unto 2. Reg. 23 2. Chro. 17. 2. Chro. ^9 30. 31. Ps
1^2. 2. 3. (...) 21. 12. John. ^. 19.
than the restitution of true religion and reformation of Gods church: it
shall be your parts (dearly beloved) in this present Parliament assembled, as
much as in you lies to promote the same, and to employ your whole labor and
study, not only in abandoning al popish remnants both in ceremonies and
regiment, but also in bringing in and placing in Gods church those things only,
which the Lord himself Deuteronomy (...) Deuteronomy 1^. 32.
in his word comm^undeth. Because it is not enoughe to take pains in taking
away evil, Psalm. 37. 27 Romans 12. 9
but also to be ocupied in placing good in the stead thereof. Now because many
men see not al things, and the 1. Cor. 2. 14.
world in this respect is maruelously blinded, it has ^ea thought good to
proferre to your godly consyderations, a true platform of a church reformed,
to the end that it being laid before your eyes, to behold the great unlikeness
betwixt it and this our english church: you may learn^ either with perfect Psalm.
31. 6 Psa. 139. 22.
hatred to detest the ^^e, and with singular love to embrace, and careful
endeavor to plant the other: or else to be without excuse before John. 15. 22
the majesty of our God, who (for y^ discharge of our conscience, and
manifestation of his truth) has by us revealed unto you at this present, the
sincerity and simplicity of his Gospel* Not that you should either 2. Tim.
3. 8
wilfully withstand, or ungraciously tread Mat. 7. 6
the same under your fete, for God does not disclose his will to any such end,
but that you should yet now a ye length with all your main and might, endeavor
that Ch^iste (whose Mat. 11. 31.
easy yoke and light burden we have of long time cast off from us) might
rule and reign in his church by the scepter of his word only.

May it therefore please your wisdoms to understand, that we in England are so
far off, from having a church rightly reformed, according to the prescripte of
Gods word, that as yet we are scarce come to the outward face of the same.
For to speak of that wherein the best consent, and whereupon al good writers
accord. The outward marks whereby a true christian church is known, are
preaching of the word purely, ministering of the sacraments sincerely, and
Ecclesiastical discipline which consists in admonition and correction of
faults severely. Touching the first, namely the ministry of the word,
although it must be confessed that the substance of doctrine by many
delivered, is sound and good, yet here in it fails, that neither the
ministers thereof are according to gods word proved, elected, called, or
ordained: nor the function in such sort so narowly looked unto, as of right it
ought, and is of necessyrie required. For whereas in the old church a trial
was had, Act. 2. 21. Act. 6. 3. 1 Timothy 3. 2. 7 Tit. 1. 6.
both of their ability to instruct, and of their godly conversation also:
now, by the letters commendatorie of some one man, noble or other, tag and
rag, learned and unlearned, of the basest 1. Reg. 12 31
sort of the people (to the scla^der of the gospel in the Romans 2. 24.
mouths of the adversaries are freely received. In those days Hebr. 5. 4.
Eze. 44. 10. 12. 13. Ierem. 23.
no idolatrous sacrificers or heathnish priests were appointed to be preachers
of the Gospel: but we allow, and like well of popish mass mongers, men for all
seasons, King Henry's priests, Queen Maryes priests, who of a truth (if Gods
word were precisely followed) should from the same be utterly removed. Then 1.
Tim. 4. 11.
they taught others, now they must be instructed themselves, and therefore like
young children they Ninisters of London enjoined to learn M. Nowels Catchisme.
must learn cathechismes, and so first they consecrate them and make them
ministers, and the^ they set them to scole. Then election was made by the
Elders with the common Act. 1. 26.
consent of the whole church: now every one picketh out for himself some
notable good benefyce, he obtains the next aduowson, by many or by favor,
and so thinks himself to be suffyciently chosen. Then the congregation Act.
6. 2. 3.
had authority to call ministers: in stead thereof now, they run, they ride, and
by unlawful suit and buying, prevent other suitors also. Then no Act. 14. 23.
2. Cor. 8. 19.
minister placed in any congregation, but by the consent of the people: now,
that authority is given into the hands of the bishop alone, who by his sole
authority thrusreth upon them such, as they many times as well for dishonest
life, as also for lack of learning, may, and do istly dislike. Then, none
admitted to the ministry, but Act. 1. 25.
a place was void before hand, to which he should be called: but now, bishops
(to whom the right of ordering ministers does at no hand appertain) do make
60. 80. or a 100. at a clap, and send them abroad into the country like
masterlesse me^. Then, after just trial and vocation they were admitted to
their function, by laying on of the hands of the company of the 1. Tim 4. 14.
eldership only: Now there is (neither of these being looked unto) required a
surples, These are required by their Pontifical.
a vestiment, a pastoral staff, beside that ridiculus and (as they use it to
their new creatures) blasphemo^s saying, receive the holy ghost. Then every
pastor Act. 20. 28. Ephe 4. 11. Titas. 1. 5. 1. Peter. 5. 2
had his flock, and every flock his shepherd, or el^ Act. 14. 23.
shepherds: Now they do not only run fysking from place to place (a miserable
disorder in Gods church) but Esaias. 5. 8
couetously join living to living making shipwreck 1. Tim. 1. 19.
of their own consciences, and being but one shepherd (nay, would to God they
were shepherds and not wolves) have many flocks. Then the ministers were phi.
2. 20. 25 Coloss. 1. 7. Luke 9. 2.
preachers: now bare readers. And if any be so well disposed to preach in
their own charges, they may not without my Lords license. In those days
known 1. Sa. 9. 18. mat. 26. 4. 8. math 26. 73
by voice, learning and doctrine: now they must be discerned from other by
popish and Antichristian apparel, as cap, gown, tipper. etc. Then, as God gave
utterance John. 6. 38. John. 12. 49 1. Cor. 11. 23.
they preached the word only: Now they read homilies, articles, injunctions
etc. Then 1. Tim. 3. 1.
it was painful: now gainful. Phil. 4. 11. 2. Cor. 6. 4. 4. 10.
Then pore and ignominious in the eyes of the world: now rich and glorious. And
therefore titles, livings, and offices by Antichrist devised are given to them,
as Metropolitan, archbishop, Lords grace, Lord Bishop, Suffragan, Deane,
Archdeacon, Prelate of the garter, Earl, County Palatine, honor, high
commissyoners, justices of peace and quorum. etc. All which, together with
their offices, as they are strange and unhard of in Christ's church, nay
plainly (...) 23. 11. 12 (...). 22. 25 1. (...). 11. Pet. 5. 2. 3 1. Tim. 1. 2
in gods word forbidden: So are they utterly with speed out of the same to be
removed. Then ministers were not so t^ed to any one form of prayers, but as
the spirit (g) moved them, and as necessity of time required, so they might
pour forth hearty supplicatio^s to the Lord. Now they are bound of necessytie
to a (...).
prescript order of service, and book of common prayer in which a great number
of things contrary to Gods word are contained, as baptism (...)
by women private 1. Cor. 11. 18.
Communions, Ierrish Act. 15. 10.
purifyings, observing Apod. 20. 9
of Holydaies, etc. potched (if not all together, yet the greatest piece) out
of the Popes portius. Then 1. Pet. 5. 2
feding the flock diligently: now teaching quarterly. Then preaching 2. Timo.
4. 2
inseason and out of season: Now once in a month is thought of some
suffycient, if twice, it is judged a work of supererogation. Then nothing
taught but Gods word, Now Princes pleasures, men's devices, popish
ceremonies, and Antichristian rites in public pulpits desended. Then they
phil. 2. 20. 23
sought them, Now they seek theyrs.

These, and a great many other abuses are in the ministry remaining, which
vniesse they be removed and the truth brought in, not only Gods justice shall
be powered forth, but also Gods church in this realm shall never be builded.
For if they which seem to be workmen, are no workmen in deed, but in name,
or else wor^ not so diligently and in such order as the works me from
commands, it is not only unlikely that the building shall go forward, but
altogether impossible that ever it shall be perfyred. The way therefore to avoid
these inconveniences, and to reform these deformities is this: Your wisdoms
have to remove aduousons, patronages, impropriations, and bishops authority,
claiming to themselves thereby right to ordain ministers, and to bring in y^
old and true election, which was accustomed to be Act. 1. 26. 6. 2. 3. 14. 23.
made by the congregation. You must displace those ignorant and unable
ministers already placed, and in their rowmes appoint such as both can and will
by Gods assystauce feed the flock. You must pluck down and utterly overthrow
without hope of restitution, 1. Pet. 5. 2
the court of faculties, from whence not only licenses to enjoy many benefyces,
are obtained, as Pluralities, Trialities, Totquote etc. but all things for the
most part, as in the court of Rome are set on sale, licenses to marry, to eat
flesh in times prohibited to lie from benefyces and chargrs, and a great
number beside, of such like abhon^^^ations. Appoint to every congregation a
learned and diligent preacher. Remove homylies, articles, injunctions, and that
prescripte order of service made out of the mass book. Take away the Lordshyp,
the loytering, the pomp, the idleness, and livings of bishops, but yet employ
the^ to such ends as they were in the old church appointed for. Let a lawful
and a godly seignorie look y^ they preach, not quarterly or monthly, but
contynually, not for fylthy luker sake, but of a ready mind. So God shall be
gloryfyed, your conscyences discharged, and the flock of Christ (purchased
Act. 20. 28.
with his own blood) edyfyed.

Now to the second point, which concerns mynystratyon of Sacraments. In the
old time, the word was Math. 3. 1
preached, before they were minystred: now it is supposed to be suffycyent, if
it be red. Then, they were minystred in public Mar. 1. 5 1. Cor. 11. 18
assemblies, now in private houses. Then Mat. 28. 19. 1. Corin. 4. 1.
by ministers only, now by midwiues, and Deacons equally. But because in
treating of both the sacraments together, we should deal confusedly: we will
therefore speak of them seuerallye. And first for the Lords supper, or holy
communion.

They had no introite, for Celestinus a pope brought it in, about the year.
430. But we have borrowed a piece of one out of ye mass book. They read no
fragments of the Epistle and Gospel: we use both. Note, y^ we co^demn not the
doctrine contained theriu.
The Nicene Creed was not red in their Communion: we have it in ours. There
was then, accustomed to be an examination of the communicants, which now is
neglected. Then they ministered the sacrament with common Acts. 2. 42. 46. Act.
20. 7.
and usual bread: now with wafer cakes, brought in by Pope Alexander, being in
form, fashyon and substance, like their god of the altar. They received it
Mat. 26. 20 Mar. 14. 18. Luke 22. 14 John. 13. 28.
sitting: we kneeling, according to H^norius Decree. Then it was delivered
generally, and in definitely, Take ye mat. 26. 26. mark. 14. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 24.
and eat ye: we perticulerly, and syngulerly, Take thou, and eat thou. They
used no other words but such as Christ left: We borrowe from papists, The
body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee. etc. They had no
Gloria in exceists, in the ministrerie of the Sacrament then, for it was put
Telesphonis in Anno. 130.
to afterward. We have now. They took it with conscience. We with (...). They
shut men by reason of their 1, Cor. 5. 11.
sins, from the Lords Supper. We thrust them in their sin to the Lords
Supper. They ministered the Sacrament plainly. We pompously, with singing,
piping, surplesse and cepe wo^^ing. They simply as they 1. Cor. 11. 23.
received it from the Lord. We sinfully, mixed with man's inventions and
devises. And as for baptism, it was enough with them, if they Acts. 8. 35. 36.
37. Act. 10. 47.
had wa^er, and the party to be baptized, faith, and the minister to preach the
word, and minister the sacraments.

Now, we must have surplesses devised by Pope Adaien, interrogatories
ministered to the infant, holy sorts invented by Pope Pi^s, crossyng and such
like pee^es of Popery, which the church of God in the Apostles times never
knew (and therefore not to be used) nay (which we are sure of) were and are
man's devises, brought in long after the purity of the primative church. To
redress these, your wisdoms have to remove (as before) ignorant ministers,
to take away private communions and baptismes, to enjoin Deacons and Midwiues
not to meddle in ministers matters, if they do, to see them sharply punished To
join assystance of Elders, and other officers, that seeing men will not
examine themselves, they may be examined, and brought to 1. Co. 11. 28. 1. Pet.
3. 15.
render a reason of their hope. That the statute against waffer cakes may more
prevail then an Iniunction. That people be appointed to receive the Sacrament,
rather ^^tting, for avoiding of superstition, than kneeling, having in it the
outward show of evil, from 1. These. 5. 22
which we must abstain. That Exco^^^^cation he restored to his old former
force. That papists nor other, neither constrainedly nor cus^^^ably,
communicate in the mysteries of salvation. That both the Sacrament of the
Lords supper and Baptism also, may be ministered according to the ancient
purity and simplicity. That the parties to be baptized, if they be of the
years Mat. 3. 6.
of discretion, by them selves and in their own persons, or if they be
infantes, by their parents (in whose rowme if upon necessary occas^ons and
businesses they be absent, some of the congregation knowing the good behauior
and sound faith of the parents) may both make rehearsal of their faith, And
also if their faith be sound, and agreeable to holy scriptures, desire to be in
the same baptized. And finally, that nothing be don in this or any other thing,
but that which you have the express warrant of gods word for.

Let us come now to the third part, which concerns ecclesiastical
discipline. The officers that have to deal in this charge, are chiefly three,
ministers, preachers, or pastors of whom before. Seniors or elders, and
Deacons. Concerning Seniors, not only their office but their name also is out
of this english church utterly removed. Their office was to Act. 15. 4. 1. Cor.
12. 28.
govern the church with the rest of the ministers, to consult, to admonyshe,
to correct, and to order all things appertaynyng to the state of the
co^gregatyon. In frede of these Segnyors in Romans 12. 8.
every church, the pope has brought in and we yet maintain, the Lordshyp of
one men over many churches, yea over sundry Shyeres. These Seygnyors then, did
execute their offices in their own persons without substytutes. Our Lord
Bishops have their under officers, as Suffraganes, Chancelors, Archdeacons,
Offycyals, Commissaries, and such like. Touching Deaco^s, though their names be
remainyng, yet is the office sowly perverted and turned vpsyde down, for their
duty in the primative church, was to Romans 12. 8.
gather the alms dilygently, and to dystrybute it faithfully, also for the
sick and impotent persons to provide paynefully, having ever a dylygent care,
that the charity of godly men, were not wasted upon l^yterers 2. These. 3. 10.
and idle vagabonds. Now it is the first step to the ministry, nay, rather a
mere order of priesthede. For they Pontifi. tit. The orderring of deacons.
may baptize in the presence of a bishop or priest, or in their absence (if
necessity so require) minister the other Sacrament, likewise read the holy
Scriptures and Homilies in the congregation, i^struce the youth in the
Cathechisme, and also preach, if he be commanded by the bishop. Again, in
the old church, every Philip. 1. 1. John. 13. 27. Act. 6. 5. 1. Tim. 3. 8.
congregation had their Deacons. Now they are ^yed to Cathedral churches
only, and what do they there? gather the alms and distribute to the pore:
nay, that is the least piece or rather no part of their function. What then?
to sing a gospel when the Bishop minystreth the Communion. If this be not a
perverting of this office and charge, let every one judge. And yet least the
reformers of our time should seem utterly to take out of Gods Church this
necessary function, they appointe somewhat to it concerning the poor, and
that is, to search for the sick, needy, and impotent people of the parish,
and to intimate their estates, names, and places where they dwell to the
Curate, that by his exhortation they may be relieved by the parish, or other
convenient alms. And this as you see, is the nighest part of his office, and
yet you must understand it to be in such places where there is a Curate and a
Deacon: every parish can not be at that cost to have both, nay, no parish so
far as can be gathered, at this present has. Now then, if you will restore
the church to his ancient officers, this you must do. In stead of an Archbishop
or Lord bishop, you must make 2. Cor. 10. 7 Coloss. 1. 1. Philip. 1. 1. 1.
These. 1. 1.
equality of ministers. In freade of Chancelors, Archdeacons, Offycialles,
Commissaries, Proctors, Summoners, church wardens, and such like: You have to
pl^t in every congregation a lawful and godly seignorie. The Deaconsh^p 1.
Tim. 3. 8.
must not be confounded with the ministry, nor the Collectors for the poor,
may not vsur^e the Deacons office: But he that has an Romans 12. 7 1. Cor. 7.
20.
office, must lo^ke to his office, and every man must keep himself within
the bounds and limmites of his own vocation. And to these three ^oyntly, that
is, the Ministers, Seniors, and deacons, is the whole regiment of the church
to be committed. This regiment consists especially in eccles^^stical
discipline, which is an order left by God unto his church, whereby men learn to
frame their wills and doings according to the law of God, (...) instructing
and admonishing one another, Iam. 5. 16 Mat. 18. 15
yea and by correcting and punishing all wilful persons, and con^^^s of the
same. Of this discipline there is (...) kinds, one private, wherewith we will
not (...) because it is impertinent to our purpose, an other public, which
although it has been long banished, yet if it might now at the length be
restored, would be very necessary and profitable for the building up of Gods
house. The final end of this discipline, is the reframing of the disordered,
and to bring them to repentance, and ^o bridle such as would offend. The
cheifest part and last punishment of this discipline is excommunication, by
the consent of the church determined, if the offender be obstinate, which how
miserably it has been by the Popes proctours, and is by our new Canonists
abused, who sees not? In the primative church it was in 1. Cor. 5. 4.
many men's hands: now one alone exco^municateth. In those days it was the
last censure of the church, and never went forth but for 1. Cor. 5. 11. 2.
These. 3. 14
notorious crimes: Now it is pronounced for every light trifie. Then
excommunication was greatly regarded and feared. Now because it is a money
matter, no whit at all esteemed. Then for 1. Tim. 1. 20. 1. Corin. 5.
great sins, severe punishment, and for small offenses, censures according.
Now great sins either not at all punished, as Leui. 24. 14. 16. Number. 15. 34.
etc.
blasphemy Deutro. 23. 19. 20.
vs^^y, drunkenness. etc, or else slightly passed over with pricking in a
bla^ket, or pinning in a sheet, as Leu. 20. 10. De^. 22. 22.
adultery, whoredom, etc. Again, such as are no sins (as if a man conform
not himself to popish orders and ceremonies, if he come not at the wh^stle of
him, who has by Gods word no authority to call, we mean Chancelors,
Offycials, and all that r^^le) are grievously punished, not only by
excommunication, suspention, deprivation and other (as the^ term if) spiritual
coertion, but also by banishing, imprisoning, reuilings, taunting, (...) what
not? Then the sentence was tempered according 1. Tim. 1. 20.
to the notoriousnesse of the fact. Now on the one side either hatred against
some persons, caryeth men headlong into rash and cruel judgment: or else
favor, affection, or money, mitigateth the rigor of the same, and all this
comes to pass, because the regiment left of Christ Mat. 18. 17 1. Cor. 12.
28 Romans 12. 8. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Acts. 15. 2. 4. 6. 22. 23.
to his church, is committed into one man's h^eeds, whom alone it shall be
more easy for the wicked by bribing to pervert, than to overthrow the faith
and piety of zealous and godly company, for such manner of men in deed Exo.
18. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
should the Seigniors be. Then it was said tell Mat. 18. 17.
the church: now it is spoken, complain to my Lords grace, primate and
Metropolitan of al England, or to his inferioure, my Lord Bishop of the
diocese, if not to him, show the Chancellor or Offyciall, or Commissarie.
Again, whereas the excommunicate were never received till they had 2. Cor. 2.
7.
publicly confessed their offense. Now for paying the fees of the court, they
shall by master Offyciall, or Chancelour, easily be absolved in some private
place. Then the congregation, by the wickedness of the offendour grieved, was by
his public penance satisfied. Now absolution shall be pronounced, though that
be not accomplished. Then the party offending should in his own person,
hear the sentence of Absolution pronounced. Now, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Chancelors, Offycials, Commissaries and such like, absolve one man for
another. And this is that order of ecclesiastical discipline which all godly
wish to be restored, to the end y^ every one by the same, may be kept within
the limmits of his 1. Cor. 7. 20
vocation, and a great number be brought to line in godly conversation. Not
that we mean to take away the authority of the civil Romans 13.
Magistrate and chief gouernoure, to whom we wish all vlessednes, and for the
increase of whose godliness we daily 1. Tim. 2. 2.
pray: but that Christ being restored into his kingdom, to rule in the same
by the scepter of his word, and severe discipline: the Prince may be better
obeyed, the realm more florishe in godliness, and the Lord himself more
sincerely and purely according to his revealed will served, then heretofore he
has been, or yet at this present is. Amend therefore these horrible abuses, and
reform Gods church, and the Psalm. 16. 8.
Lord is on your right hand, you shall not be removed forever. For he will
deliver and defend you from all your enemies, either at home or abroad, as he
did faithful Jacob Genesis 35. 5.
and good 2. chro. 17. 10
Iehosaphat. Let these things alone, and God is a righteous judge, he will one
day call you to your reckening. Is a reformation good for France? and can it be
evil for England? Is discipline meet for Scotland? and is it unprofitable
for this realm? Surely God has set these examples before your eyes to
encourage you to go forward to a through and a spedy reformation. You may not do
as heretofore you have done, patch and piece, nay rather go backward, and
never labor or (t) contend to perfection. But altogether remove whole
Antichriste, both head and tail, and perfectly plant that purity of the
word, that simplicity of the sacraments, and severity of discipline, which
Christ has commanded, and commended to his church. And here to end, we
desire all to suppose that we have not attempted this enterprise for
vaineglory, gain, preferment, or any other worldly respect: neither yet
indgyng our selves, so exactly to have set out y^ state of a church reformed,
as that nothing more could be added, or a more perfect form and order
drawn: for that were great presumption, to arregate so much unto our
selves, seeing that as we are but weak and simple souls, so God has raised
up men of profounde judgment and notable learning. But thereby to declare our
good wills toward the setting forth of Gods glory, and the buylding up of
his church, accoumptyng this as it were, but an entrance into further matter,
Philip. 1. 6
hopyng that our God, who has in us begone this good work, will nor only in
time hereafter makers strong and able to go forward therein: but also move
other, upon whom he has bestowed greater measure of his gifts and graces,
to labor more thoroughly and fully in the same.

The God of all glory so open your eyes to see his truth, that you may not
only be inflamed with a love thereof, but with a continual care seek to
promote, pla^t, and place the same amongst us, that we the Enlish people, and
our posterity, enjoying the sincerity of Gods gospel for ever, may say
always: The Lord be praised. To whom with Christ Jesus his son our only
savior, and the Holy ghost our alone comfortor, be honor, praise, and glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A view of Popish abuses yet remaining in the English Church, for the which
Godly Ministers have refused to subscribe.
Abide patiently the Lords leisure. Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he will
bring it to pass, he will do it.
The ieopardous time is at hand, that the wrath of God shall be declared from
heaven upon all ungodliness of those seducers that wtholde the truth in
unrighteousness, and set his commandments at naught, for their own
traditions.
WHereas immediately after the last Parliament, holden at Westminster, begone in
Anno. 1570. and ended in Anno. 1571. the ministers of gods holy word and
sacraments, were called before her majesty's high commissyoners, and enforced
to subscribe unto the Articles, if they would keep their places and liuyngs,
and some for refusyng to subscribe, were unbrotherly and uncharitably
entreated, and from their offices and places removed: May it please therefore
this honorable and high court of Parliament, in consyderation of the premises,
to take a view of such causes, as then did wythhold, and now does the foresaid
ministers from subscribing and consenting unto those forsaid articles, by way
of purgation to discharge themselves of all disobedience toward the church of
God and their sovereign, and by way of most humble entreaty, for the removing
away and utter abolishing of all such corruptions and abuses as withhelde
them, through which this long time brethren have been at unnatural war and
strise among themselves, to the hinderance of the gospel, to the joy of the
wicked, and to the grefe and dismay of all those that profess Christ's
religion, and labor to attain Christian reformation.

The first Article.
First, that the book commonly called the book of common prarers for the
church of England, aucthorised by Parliament, and all and every the contents
therein be such as are not repugnant to the word of God.

Albe^t, right honorable and dearly beloved, we have at all times borne with
that, which we could not amend in this book, and have used the same in our
ministry, so far sorth as we might: reuerencing those times and those
persons, in which and by whom it was first authorized, being studious of peace,
and of the building up of Christ's church, yet now being compelled by
subscription to allow the same, and to confess it, not to be against the word
of God in any point but tolerable: We must needs say as follows, that this
book is an imperfect book, culled and picked out of that popish dunghill, the
Portuise and Mass book full of all abominations. For some, and many of the
contents therein, be such as are against the word of God, as by his grace
shall be proved unto you. And by the way, we cannot but much marvel at the crafty
wilines of those me^ whose parts had been first to have proved each and every
content therein, to be agreeable to the word of god, seeing that they enforce men
by subscription to consent unto it, or else send them packing from their
callings.

1 They should first prove by the word, that a reading service going before, and
with the administration of the sacraments, is according to the word of God,
that private Communion, private baptism, baptism ministered by women,
holidays ascribed to saints, prescript services for them, kneeling at
communion, wafer cakes for their bread when they minister it, surplesse and
coape to do it in: churching of women, coming in vailes, which is not
commanded by law, but yet the abuse is great, by reason that superstition is
grown thereby in the hearts of many, and others are judged y^ use it not, Psalm.
121.
abusing the Psalm to her, I have lifted up mine eyes unto the hills, etc.
and such other fool she things, are agreeable to the written word of the
almighty. But their craft is plain. Wherein they deceive them selves, standing
so much upon this word repugnant, as though nothing were repugnant; or
against the word of God, but that which is expressly forbidden by plain
commandment, they know well inoughe and would confess, if either they were
not blinded, or else their hearts hardened, that in the circumstances each
content wherewith we justly find fault, and they too contentiously for the
love of their livings maintain, sinelling of their old popish priesthode, is
against ye word of God. For besides y^ this prescript form of service as they
call it, is full of corruptions, it maintayneth an unlawful ministerye, unable
to execute that office.

By the word of God, it is an office of preaching, they make it an office of
reading: Christ said Mat. 28. 1^. Mar. 16. 15
go preach, they in mockery give them the Bible, and authority to preach,
and yet suffer them not, except that they have new licenses. So that they make
the chefest part which is preching, but an accessory y^ is as a thing without
which their office may and does consist. In the scriptures there is attributed
unto the ministers of God, the knowledge of the 1. Cor. 4. 1
heavenly mysteries, and therefore as the greatest took of their love, they are
eni^yned to Ioh. 21. 16. 17
feed Gods Lambs, and yet with these, such are admitted and accepted, as only
are bare readers that are able to say service, and minister a Sacrament
according to their appointment. And that this is not the feeding that Christ
spoke of, the scriptures are plain. For reding ministers, view these places.
Mala. 2. 7 Esaias. 56. 10 Zach. 11. 15 Mar. 15. 14 1. Tim. 3. 6
For bare reading of the word and single service saying, is bare-feeding, yea
it is as evil as playing upon a stage, and worse too. For players yet learn
their parts without book, and these, a many of them can scarsely read wtin
book. These are empty feeders, Math. 6. 22
dark eyes, Math. 9. 18 Philip. 3
ill workmen to hasten in the Lords harvest Luke 14. 17
messengers that cannot call math. 23. 34
Prophets y^ cannot declare the will of the Lord, Math 5. 13
unsavory salt, Math. 15. 14
blind guides, Esaias. 56. 10
sleepie watchmen 1. Cor. 4. 1. Luke 16 1. etc
untrusty dispensers of Gods secrets, 2. Tim. 2. 15.
evil deuiders of the word, Tit. 1. 9.
weak to withstand the adversary, 2. Ti. 3. 15. 16
not able to consute, m 1. Cor. 4. 1. Luke 16 1. etc
and to conclude, so far from making the man of God perfect to all good
works, that rather the quite contrary may be confyrmed.

By this book, bare reading is 1. Cor. 3. 9
good tilling, and single service saying, is excellent 1. Cor. 3. 9.
building, and he is sheapheard good enough, that can as popish priests
could, out of their Portuise, say fairly their divine service. Nay, some in
the fullness of their blasphemy have said that much preaching brings the
word of god into contempt, and that four preachers were inoughe for all
London, so far are they from thinking it necessary, and seeking that every
congregation should have a faithful pastor. Paul was not so wise as these
politic men. When he said, we Romans 10. 14
can not believe except we hear, and we can not hear without a preacher. etc,
seeing we may hear by reading, and so believe without a preacher. Folishly he
spoke, when he said he 1. Tim. 3. 2
must be apt to teach, since every man of the basest sort of the people is
admitted to this function of such as 2. Chro. 13. 9
Jeroboam did sometimes make his priests. We will say no more in this matter,
but desire you to consider with us what small profyt and edifycation this seely
reading has brought to us these. 13. years paste (except perhaps by some
circumcelion or new Apostle, we have had now and then a fleeing sermon) surely
our sins are grown ripe, our ignorance is equal with the ignorance Esai. 24.
2. 5
of our leaders, we are lost Zach. 11. 15. 16. 17. etc.
they cannot find us, we are sick, they can not heal us, we are hongry, they
cannot feed us, except they lead us by other men's lights, and heal us by
saying a prescript form of service, or else feed us with homilies, that are
too homely, to be set in the place of Gods scriptures: are not the people well
nodifyed think you, when the homily of sweping the church is red unto them?
But drunken they are, and show their own shame, that strive so egarly to
defend their doyngs, that they will not only not acknowledge their
imperfections: but will enforce other men to allow them.

2 In this book also, it is appointed that after the Creed, if there be no
sermon, an homily must follow either already set out, or hereafter to be set
out. This is scarce plain dealing, Homilies.
that they would have us consent unto that which we never saw, and which is to
be set out hereafter, we having had such cause already to distrust them, by
that which is already set out, being corrupt and strange, to maintain an
unlearned and reading minysterie: and sith it is plain that men's works
ought to be kept in, and nothing else but the voice, of God and holy
Scriptures, in which only are contained 2. ti. 3. 16. 17. 2. Pet. 1. 19. 20.
21. Romans 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 18. and
all fullness and suffyciencie to decide controversies, must sound in his
church, for the very name Apocrypha testifies that they were red in secret
and not openly.

3 In this book, days are ascribed unto Saints, and kept holy with fastes on
their euenes, and prescript service appointed for them, which beside that, they
are of many superstitiously kept and observed, are also contrary to the
commandment Exodus 20. 9 Exo. 23. 12 Deuteronomy. 5. 13. Esaias. 1. 10. 13. 14. Leui.
23. 3. 2. Esra. 1. 13 Romans 16. 6 Gal. 4. 10. 11
of God. Six days shall thou labor, and therefore we for the superstition
that is put in them, dare not subscribe to allow them.

4 In this book we are enjoined to receive the Communion kneeling, Mat. 26. 20
Mar. 4. 1^1 Luke 22. 14. John. 13. 28.
which beside that it has in it a 1. These. 5. 22 Exodus 12. 11
show of popish idolatry, does not so well express a supper, neither agrees
it so well with the institution of Christ, as sitting does. Not that we make
sitting a thing of necessytie belonging unto the Sacrament, Gala. 4. 10 Galath.
5. 3. 4. 5. Hebrews in many places.
neither affirm we that it may not be received other wise, but that it is more
near the Institution, and also a mean to avoid the danger of Idolatry,
which was in times past too common, and yet is in the hearts of many, who have
not forgotten their bread god, so slenderly have they been instructed? Against
which we may set the commandment. Thou Exo. 20. 5 Half Communion.
shall not bow down to it, nor worship it.

5 As for the half Communion, which is yet appointed like to the commemoration
of the Mass, we say little of it, saving that we may note, how near the
translator bound himself to the Mass book, that would not omit it. We speak
not of the name of priest wherewith he defaceth the minister of Christ (because
the priest y^ translated it, would perhaps feign have the ministers of Christ
to be joined with him) seeing the office of Priesthode is ended, Christ being
ye last priest that ever was. To call us therefore priests as touching our
office, is either to call back again the old priesthode of the law, which is
to deny Christ to be come, or else to keep a memory of ye popish priesthode of
abomination still amongst us. As for ye first, it is by Heb. 5. 1. 6 Hebr. 9. 11
Christ abolished, and for the second it is of Antichrist, and therefore we have
nothing to do with it. Such ought to have Eech. 44. 10. 12. 13 ^erem ^. 23
Hebr. 5. 4.
no place in our church, neither are they ministers of Christ, sent to preach
his gospel, but priests of the Pope to sacrifyse for the quick and the dead,
that is to creade under their feet the blood of Christ. Such ought not to
have place amongst us, as the scriptures manifestly teach. Besides that we
never read in the new Testament, that this word priest as touching office, is
used in the good part, except it speak of the Leuiticall priesthode, or of
the priesthode of Christ.

6 Sixthly, in this book three or four are allowed for a fyfte number to
receive the communion, and the priest alone together with one more, or with the
sick man alone, may in time of necessytie, that is, when there is any common
plague, or in time of other visytation, minister it to the sick man, and if he
require it, it may not be denied. This is not I am sure like in effect to a
private mass: that scripture (...)
drink ye all of this, makes not against this, and private communion, is not
against the scriptures.

7 And as for private baptism, that will abide the touchstone. Mat. 28. 19
Go ye (says Christ and teach, baptising them. etc. Now teaching is
deuorsed from communions and sacraments. They may go alone without doctrine.
Women that may 1. Cor. 14. 24 1. Tim. 2. 11
not speak in a congregation, may yet in time of necessytie, minister ye
sacrament of baptism, and that in a private house. And yet, this is not to tie
necissitie of salvation to the Sacraments, nor to nowsell men up in that
opinion. This is agreeable with the scriptures, and therefore when they bring the
bapti^ed child, they are received with this special commendation. I certefye
you, that you have don well, and according unto due order. etc. But now we
speak in good earnest, when they answer this: Let them tell us, how this
gear agrees with the scriptures, and whether it be not repugnant or against
the word of God? But some will say that the baptism of women is not
commanded by law. If it be not, why do you suffer it, and wherefore are the
children so baptized accordingly? common experience teaches that it is used
almost in all places, and few speak against it. And this I am sure of, that
when it was put in the book that was the meaning of the most part that were
then present, and so it was to be understand as common practice without
controlment does plainly declare.

8 The public baptism, that also is full of childishe and superstitious
toys. First in their prayer they say y^ God by the baptism of his son Jesus
Christ, did sanctify the flood Jordan, and all other waters, to the mystical
washing away of sin, attributing that to the sign which is 1. John. 1. 7
Act. 20. 28. Romans 3. 24
propre to the^ work of God in the blood of Christ, as though virtue were in
water, to wash away sins. Secondly, they require a promise of the
godfathers and godmothers (as they term them (which is not Romans 7. 15. 18. 21.
Romans 9. 16.
in their powers to perform. Thirdly, they profane holy baptism, in toying
foolishly, for that they ask questions of an infant, which can not answer,
and speak unto them, as was wont to be spoken unto men, and unto such as
being converted, answered for themselves, and were baptized. Which is but a
mockery Gala. 6. 7
of God, and therefore against the holy scriptures. Fourthly, they do
superstitiously and wickedly institute a new sacrament, which is proper to
Christ only, marking the child in the forhead with a cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ. We have
made mention before of that wicked deuorse of the word and sacraments. We say
nothing of those that are admitted to be witnesses, what ill choice there is
made of them, how conuenyent it were, seeing the children of the faithful only
are to be baptized, that the father should and might, if conveniently, offer
and present his child to be baptized, making an open confession of that faith,
wherein he would have his child baptized, as is used in well reformed churches.

9 As for Matrimony, that also has corruptions too many. It was wont to be
compted a sacrament, and therefore they use yet a sacramental sign, to which
they attribute the virtue of wedlock. I mean the wedding ring, which they
fowly abuse and dally with all, in taking it up, and laying it down: In
putting it on, they abuse the name of the Trinity, they make the new married
man, according to the Popish form, to make an idol of his wife, saying: with
this ring I thee wedde, with my body I thee worship. etc. And because in
Popery, no holy action might be done without a mass, they enjoin the
married persons to receive the communion (as they do their bishops and
priests when they are made. etc.) other p^rtie things out of the book, we
speak not of, as that Abuses accidental.
women contrary 1. Cor. 11. 5
to the rule of the Apostle, come, and are suffered to come bare headed, with
bagpipes and ^idlers before them, to disturb the congregation, and that they
must come in at the great door of the church, or else all is ^arred. With
diverse other heathnish toys in sundry countries, as carrying of whea^e she affes
on their heads, and ca^^ing of corn, with a number of such like, whereby they
make rather a May game of marryage, then a holy Institution of God.

10 As for confyrmation, which the papists and our m^ say was in times past
Apostolical, grou^ding their opinion perhaps upon some dream of Hierome, yet
as they use it by the bishop alone, to the^ that lack both discretion and
faith, it is superstitious and not agreeable to the word of God, but popish and
peuishe. As though baptim were not already perfect, but neded confyrmation, or
as though the bishop could give y^ holy ghost. (...) They appoint a prescript
find of service to bury the dead: And that which is the duty of every
christian, they tie alone to the minister, whereby pr^ier for y^ dead is
maintained, and partly gathered out of some of the prarers, where they pray y^
we with this our brother, and all other departed in the true faith of thy holy
name, may have our perfect cons^^^^ation and bliss, both in body and soul.
We say nothing of the threefold peale because that it is rather licensed by
iniunction, then commanded in their book, nor of their strange mourning by
changing their garments, which if it be not hipocritical, yet it is
superstitious and heathnish, because it is used only of custom, nor of burial
sermons, which are put in place of trentalles, wherout spring many abuses, and
therefore in the best reformed churches, are removed. As for the superstitions
used both in country and city, for the place of buryall, which way they must
lie, how they must be fetched to church, the mynister meeting them at church
style with surplesse, with a company of greedy clerks, that a cross white or
black, must be set upon the dead corpse, that bread must be given to the
poor, and offerings in Buryall time used, and cakes sent abroad to friends, by
cause these are rather used of custom and superstition, then by the authority
of the book. Small commandment will serve for the accomplishyng of such
things. But great charge will hardly bring the least good thing to pass, and
therefore all is let alone, and the people as blind and as ignorante as ever
they were. God be merciful unto us, and open our eyes that we may see what
that good and acceptable will of God is, and be more earnest to provoke his
glory.

12 Churching of women after childbirthe, smells of Jewish purifycation:
their other rytes and customs in their lying in, and coming to church, is
foolish and superstitious, as it is used. She must lie in with a white
sheet upon her bed, and come covered with a veil, as ashamed of some folly.
She must offer, but these are matters of custom, and not in the book: But
this Psalm (as is noted before) is childishly abused, Psalm. 121
I have lift up mine eyes unto the ly^ls, ^ro^ whence comes my help. The
sun shall not burn th^e by day, nor the moon by night.

13 In all their order or service 1. Cor. 14. 16
there is no edification, according to the rule of the Apostle, but confusion,
they ^osse the Psalms in most places like ^ennice balls. They pray that al
men may be saved, and that they may be delivered from thundering and tempest,
when no danger is nigh. That they sing Benedictus, Nu^c dimittis and
Magnificat, we know not to what purpose, except some of them were ready to
die, or except they would celebrate the ine^ory of the virgin, and John
Baptist. etc. Thus they profane the holy scriptures. The people some standing,
some walking, some talking, some reading, some praying by themselves, ^^te^d
not to the minyster. He again posteth it over, as fast as he can galloppe. For
either he has two places to serve, or else there are some Games of Sodom.
games to be playde in the afternoon, as lying for the whetstone, heathnishe
dancing for the ring, a bear or a bull to be baited, or else Jack an apes to
ride on horssebacke, Standing at the gospel came ^ro^ Anastatius the pope, in
An. 404.
or an interlude to be plaide, and if no place else can be gotten, this
interlude must be playde in the church* etc. Now the people sit and now they
stand up. When the old Testament is read, or the lessons, they make no
reverence, but when the gospel comes, then they * al stand up. For why, they
think that to be of greatest authority, and are ignorante that the scriptures
came from one spirit. When Jesus is named, then of goes the cap, and down
goes the knees, with such a scraping on the ground, that they cannot hear a
good while after, so that the word is hindered, but when any other names of God
are mentioned, they make no courtesy at all, as though ye names of God were not
equal, or as though all reverence ought to be given to the syllables. We
speak not of ringing, when Mattens is done, and Accidental abuses.
other abuses incident. Because we shall be answered, that by the book they are
not maintained, only we desire to have a book to reform it. As for organes
and curious singing, though they be proper to Popyshe dens, I mean to
Cathedral churches, yet some others also must have them. The Queens chapel,
and these churches, (which should be spectacles of christian reformation) are
rather paternes and presidents to the people, of all superstitions.

14 Their pontifical (which is annexed to the book of common prayer, and
whereunto subscribing to the Articles, we must subscribe also) whereby they
consecrate Bishops, make ministers and deacons, is nothing else but a thing
word for word drawn out of the Popes pontifycal, wherein he shows
himself to be Antichrist most lively. And lit. 22. 25. 26 1. pe. 5. 3. 4. 5
Math. 20. 25. 26. Mat. 23. 8. 11. 12. Gala. 2. 6 Heb. 5. 4. Luke 16. 25 Ezech.
34. 4. 2. Cor. 1. 24.
as the names of Archbishops, Archdeacons* Lord bishops, Chancelers. etc. are
drawn out of the Popes shop together with their officers. So the government
which they use, by the life of the Pope which is the Canon law is Antichristian
and deuillish, and contrary to the scriptures. And as safely may we, hy the
warrant of Gods word subscribe to allow the dominion of the Pope universally
to reign over the church of God, as of an archbishop over an whole province,
or a Lord bishop over a diocese, which contains many shyres and parishes
For the dominion that they exercise the archbishop above them, and they above
the rest of their brethren, is unlawful, and expressly forbidden by the word of
God.

15 Again, in that they are honored with the Math. 23. 8. etc. Ioh. 13 15 16
John. 5. 44. 2. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 18.
titles of great rulers, as Lord, Lords grace* Metropolitan, primate of al
England, honor. etc. it is against the word of God.

Moreover, in that they have Lu. 9 60. 61 Luke 12. 14 Romans 12. 7 1. Tim. 6. 11.
2. Tim. 2. 3. 4
civil offices, joined to the Ecclesiastical, it is against the word of
God. As for an Archbishop to be a Lord president, a Lord bishop, to be a
county Palatine, a Prelate of the garter, who has much to do at S. Georges
feast, when the Bible is carried before the procession in the crosses place, a
justice of peace, or justice of Quorum, an high Commissioner. etc. and
therefore they have their prisonnes, * Bishops prisons, popish Eugenius the
first brynger of them in.
as clinkes, gatehouses, colehouses, towers and castles, which is also against
the scryptures. This is not to have keys but swords, and plain tokens they
are, that they exercise that, which they would so feign seem to want, I
mean dominion over their brethren. And which of them have not preached
against the Popes two swords: Now whether they use them not them selves* mat
18. 17. 18 Act. 11. 30. Act. 15. 2. 4. 6. etc.


16 In that the Lord Bishops, their suffraganes, Archdeaco^s, Cha^celers,
Officials, proctors, Doctors, sumners, and such ravening rablers, take upon
them, which is most horrible, Rom 12. 7. 8 Philip. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 12. 28. 1.
Th. 5. 12. 13 1. Tim. 4. 14 1. Tim. 5. 17.
the rule of Gods Church, spoiling the pastor (t) of his lawful jurisdiction
over his own flock given by ye word, thrusting away most sacrilegiously that
order which Christ has left to his church, and which the primative church
has used, they show they hold the doctrine with us, but in unrighteousness,
with an outward show of godliness, but having denied the power thereof,
entering not John. 10. 1.
in by Christ, but by a popish and unlawful vocation. We speak not Act. 6.
3. 4. Act. 14. 23 Acts. 20. 28. 30. etc. To. 12. 6. 7. 8 1. co. 9. 16. 17
how they make Ministers by themselves alone, and of their sole authority,
and that in secret places, of their election and probation, that it is of him,
to whom by no right it belongs. And that when they have made them, either
they may tariye in their College, and lead the lives of loytering losels, as
long as they live, or else gad abroad with the bishops bulls like to
Circumcelions, to preach in other men's charges where they li^t, or else get
benefices by friendship or money, or flattery where they can catch them, or to
conclude: If all these fail, that they may go up and down like beggars, and
fall to many follies: or else as many have don, set up bills at Paul's, or at
the Royal exchange, and in such public places, to see if they can hear of
some good masters, to entertain them into service. Surely, by the Canon law,
by which y^ bishops reign and rule, they ought to keep those ministers, which
they make as long as they have no livings and places. We know three or four
Bishops in this realm, would have kept such houses, as never none did in this
la^d, if this rule had been observed. They clapped them out so fast by hundreds,
and they make them pay well for their orders, and surely to speak the truth
they were worthy, for the Bishops (what ods so ever there were of their gifts)
yet in their letters gave them all a like commendation. They put on their
surplesses, or else subscribed like honest men. Fie upon these stinking
abominatio^s.

17 We should be too long to tell your honors of Cathedral churches, the
dens of or said of all loytering lubbers, where master Deane, master
Vicedeane, master Canons or Prebendaries the greater, master petty Canons, or
Canons the lesser, master Chanceller of the church, master treasurer,
otherwise called Judas the purssebearer, the cheese chauntor, singing men
special fa^ourers of religion, squeaking queresters, organ players,
gospellers, pi^telers, pentioners, readers, vergeries. etc. live in great
idleness, and have their abiding. If you would know whence all these came,
we can easily answer you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the Trojan
horses bellye, to the destruction of Gods kingdom. The church of God never
knew them, neither does any reformed church in the world know them.

18 And birds of the same fether, are covetous patrones of benefices,
persons, vicares, readers, parish priests, stipendaries, and riding
chaplains, that under the authority of their masters, spoil their flocks
of the food of their souls. Philip. 2. 21
Such seek not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies Jude. 12.
clouds they are without rain, trees without fruit Mat. 23. 27.
pa^^ted sepulchers full of dead bones, fatted in all abounda^ce of iniquitye,
and lean locustes in all feeling, knowledge, and sincerity.

19 What should we speak of the Archbyshops court, To prove y^ the regiment
of y^ church should be spiritual, read Calvin in his commentaries upon these
places.
sith all men know it, and your wisdoms can not, but see what it is. As all
other courts are subject to this, by the Popes prerogative, yea, and by
statute of this realm yet unrepealed, so is it the fylthy quaue mire, and
poisoned plashe of all the abominations that do infect the whole realm. We
speak not of licenses granted out of this court, to marry in forbidden
times, as in lent, in aduent, in the gang weke, when the priest in his
surplesse, singing gospels, and making crosses, rangeth about in many places
upon the Emberdayes, and to forbidden persons, Ephe. 11. 23.
and in exempt places. We make no mention of lycences, 1. These. 5. 13.
to eat white meat, 1. Tim. 5. 2.
and flesh in Lent, and that with a safe conscience, for rich men that can buy
them with money, Heb. 10. 30.
nor we say nothing how derely men pay for them. As for dispensations with
benefyc^d boys, tollerations for non residents, bulls to have two benefyces,
to have three, to have more, and as many as they list or can get, these are so
common, that all godly and good men are compelled with grefe of heart, to cry
out upon such abominations. We omit excommunication for money, absolution for
the same, and that by absoluing one man for another, which how contrary it is
to the scriptures the complaints of many learned men by propositions in open
schools proposed, by wrytings in printed books set out, and by preaching in
open pulpits, have been suffyciently witnessed. To conclude, this fylthy
court has full power together with the authority of this petty pope,
Metropolitan and primate of all England, to dispense in all causes, wherein
the pope was wont to dispense, under which are contained more cases and causes,
then we are able to reckon. As for the Archbishop of York, we deal not with
him. We refer him to that learned Epistle, which Beza wrote unto him about
these matters.

20 And as for the commissaries court, that is but a petty little srinking
ditche, that flows out of that former great puddle, robbing Christ's church
of lawful pastors, of watchful Segniors and Elders, and careful Deacons. 1.
Cor. 5. 4.
In this court as in the other, * one alone does excommunicate, one alone
sits in judgment, and when he will, can draw back the judgment which he
has pronounced, having called upon the name of God, and that for money which
is called the changing of penance. In this court, for non payment of two
pence, a man shall be excommunicated if he appear not when he is sent for, if
he do not as his ordinary would, from whom he had his popish induction and
institution, and to whom he has sworn, Canonicam obedientiam, Canonical
obedience, if he learn not his Catechism like a good boy without book,
when it were more meet he should be able to teach others. To conclude: if he
be not obedyent to all these Lord bishops officers, by and by he must be cut of
by excommunication. And as it is lightly granted and given forth, so if the
money be paid, and the court discharged, it is as quickly called in again.
This court poulleth parishes, scourges the poor hedge priests, ladeth
Churchwardens with manifest periuries, punysheth whoredoms and adulteryes with
toyishe censures, remitteth without satisfying the congregation, and that in
secret places, gives out dispensations for unlawful marriages, and commits
a thousand such like abominations. God deliver al Christians out of this
Antichristian tyranny, where the judges, advocates, and proctors, for the most
part are papists, and as for the scribes and notaries as greedy as cormorantes,
and if they all should perhaps see this writing, they would be as angry as
waspes, and sting like hornets. Three of them would be inowe to sting a man to
death, for why they are high commissioners. All this we say springs out of
this pontifical, which we must allow by subscription, setting down our
hands, yt it is not repugnant or against ye word of god, we mean this
antichristian hierarchy, and popish ordering of ministers, strange from the
word of god, and the use of all well reformed churches in the world.

21 We have almost let pass one thing worthy the remembrance, It contains
manifest blasphemy, as may appear.
which is, that they take upon them blasphemously, having neither promise nor
commandment to say to their new creatures, receive the Holy ghost. As
though the holy ghost were in their power to give without warrant, at their
own pleasure.

And thus much be spoken as touching this book, Ephesians. 1. 17.
against which to stand, is a wonder to two sorts of me^, the one ignorant,
the other obstinate. The Lord give those that be his, 2. Tim. 2. 7
understanding in all things, that they may have judgment: 2. Cor. 4. 4
as for the other whom the god of this world has blinded, least they Math.
13. 15
should see and confess the truth and so be saved, and that do in the full
growth of wickedness, maliciously resist the truth. God confound them, that
peace may be upon Israel, and his saving health upon this nation. Amen.

The.2. Article.
That the manner and order appointed by public authority about the
administration of the sacraments and common prayers, and that the apparel by
sufficient authority appointed for the ministers within the church of England,
be not wicked nor against ye word of God, but tolerable, and being commanded
for order and obedience sake, are to be used.

For the order of administration of Sacraments and common prayer, enough is
said before, all the service and administration is tied to a surplesse, in
Cathedral churches they must have a coape, they receive the Communion
kneelyng, they use not for the most part common bread Act. 2. 46.
according to the word of god, and the statute, Act. 20. 7
but starch bread according to the Iniunction. They commonly minister the
Sacraments without preaching the word.

And as for the apparel, Apparel.
though we have been long borne in hand, and yet are, that it is for order and
decency commanded, and yet we know and have proved that there is neither
order, nor cumlines, nor obedience in using it. There is no order in it, but
confusion: No ^^mlines, but deformity: No obedience, but disobedience, both
against God and the Prince. We marvel that they could epsy in their last
Synod, that a gray Amise, which is but a garment of dignity, should be a
garment (as they say) defiled with superstition, and yet that copes, caps,
surplesses, tippe^s and such like baggage, the preaching signs of popish
priesthode, the popes creatures, kept in y^ same form to this end, to bring
dignity and reverence to the Ministers and Sacraments, should be retained
still, and not abolyshed: But they are as the garments of the Idol, to which
we should say, h Esai. 30. 22. 1. These. 5. 22.
auant and get thee hence. They are as the garments of Balamites, of popish
priests, enemies to God and all Christians. They serve not to edifycation, they
have the show of evil (seeing the popish priesthode is evil) they work
discord, they hinder the preaching of the Gospel, they keep the memory of
Egypt still amongst us, and put us in mind of that abominatio^ whereunto they
in times past have served, they bring the ministry into contempt, they
offend the weak, they encourage the obstinate. Therefore can no authority by
the word of God, with any pretense of order and obedience command them, nor
make them in any wise tolerable, but by circumstances, they are wicked, and
against the word of God.

If this be not plain enoughe by that which is already set forth, we mind by
Gods grace to make it playner, and should do it better, if it were as lawful
for us (as for our adversaries) to publish our minds in Printe. Neither is the
controversy betwixt them and ^s as they would bear the world in hand, as for a
cap, a tippet, or a surplesse, but for great matters concerning a true
ministry and regiment of the church, according to the word. Which things once
established the other melt away of them selves. And yet consider I pray you,
whether their own argument does not choke them selves, for even the very
name of trifles does plainly declare that they ought not to be maintained in
Christ's church. And what shall our bishops win by it? Forsothe, that they be
maintainers of trifles, and trifling bishops, consuming the greatest part of
their time in those trifles whereas they should be better occupied. We strive
for true religion and government of the church, and show you the right way
to throw out Antichrist both head and tail, and that we will not so much as
communicate with the tail of the beast: but they after they have thrust
Antichriste out by the head, go about to pull him in again by the tail,
cunningly coloring it, least any man should epsy his foot steps, as Cacus
did when he stole the Oxen, For if it might please her majesty, by the advice
of you right Honorable, in this high Court of Parliament to hear us by
writing or otherwise, to defend our selves, then (such is the equity of our
cause) that we would trust to find favor in her majesty's sight: then should
appear what slender stuff they bring to defend themselves, that are so
impudent by open writing to defend it: then those patched pamphlets made by
sudden vpstartes, and new conuerts, should appear in their colors, and
truth have the victory, and God the glory. If this can not be obtained, we will
by Gods grace address our selves to defend his truth by suffering, and
willingly lay our heads to the block, and this shall be cure peace, to have
quiet consciences with our God, whom we will abide for, with all patience,
until he work our full deliverance.

The.3. Article.
That the articles of Religion which only concern the true christian faith,
and the doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a book imprinted: Articles,
where upon it was agreed by both Archbishops. etc. and every of them contain me
and godly christian doctrine.

For the Articles concerning y^ substance of doctrine using a godly
interpretation in a point or two, Doctrine.
which are either too sparely, The right government of y^ Church can not be
separated from the doctrine.
or else too darkely set down, we were and are ready according to duty, to
subscribe unto them. We would to god that as they hold the substance together
with us, and we with them: so they would not deny the effect and virtue thereof.
Then should not our w^rdes and works be deuorsed, but Christ should be suffered
to reign, a true ministry according to the word instituted, 1. Timot. 3. 2
Discipline exercised, Sacraments purely and sincerely ministered. This is that
we strive for, and about which we have suffered 1. Pet. 3. 17.
not as evil doers, but for resisting Popery, and refusyng to be stong with
the tail of Antichristian in^ection, ready 1. Pet. 3. 15.
to render a reason of our faith, to the stopping of all our enemies mouths.
We therefore for the church of Gods sake, which ought to be most dear unto you,
beseech you for our Sovereigns sake, upon whom we pray, that all Gods
blessyngs may be powered abundantly, we pray you to consider of these abu^es to
reform Gods church according to your duties and callynges, that as with one
mouth we confess one Christ, so with one consent, this reign of Antichrist
may be turned out headlong from amongst us, and Christ our Lord may reign
by his word over us. So your seats shall be esta^lished and settled in great
assurance, you shall not need to fear your ennemies: for God will turn away
his threatened plagues from us. Which he in mercy do, for his Christ's sake.
Amen.

FINIS.
To the Christian Reader, health in the Lord.
WE have thought good, in this latter end of our book, for sundry
consyderations, to certify you (beloved brethren) of the reasons that have
moved us, who are the authors of these treatises, to keep back our names, and
also to suppress the name of the Printer of them, because peradventure it may
seem strange otherwise, and also because we mean not by our example to allow
such as might abuse you with lewd matter under any such coulor. For we do utterly
mislike y^ there is not in every cuntry more straight loking to the Printers in
y^ respect, because our time is much corrupted with over much license there in.
Then thus it is, that in deed we are the least able among many, to speak of
these matters: and therefore we would not have it seem by setting to our names,
that we took upon our selves singulerly to teach any thing that none other can
do, has done, or does, but we. And yet we would wish, and in the name of the
Almighty do desire those y^ have the greater gifts of God, shortly to make
some larger discourse, then hitherto, either we or they have, concerning these
necessary matters of Christ's church. Again, though these matters have been
resolved upon already in all y^ best reformed churches: and also have been by
sundry in this our country, in their sundry lectures and sermons urged: Yet
hitherto they are not allowed such favor, as to be with out peril any way
propounded and set forth. And therefore, though we will not refuse to put forth
our selves to perils for such causes, yet we feared it would the m^re
exasperate and provoke the^ that we deal with if we should have set to our
names: besides that, we feared lest we should not yet, have done well to have
betrayed our selves unto them. And further, because we were and are content,
not to be thought such as willingly would come in trouble, and yet we would
not leave y^ vnvttered, which it is our duties to utter, and which is many
ways commodious for y^ whole estate of this our country to be put in mind of,
having respect also to the present Honorable assent of this high court of
Parliament. Moreover because we could not have had any that would have printed
our books if they so lightly should have been brought in danger, our former
reasons also semi^g to them to have weight to the contrary. Furthermore,
because without preuiledge also to have set too our hands, had not ben so
much material, and it was not possible for us to have that, because the bishops
have y^ matter in their hands, and therefore have hindered books which came
nothing near to displease them, like as these of ours: Although our books
should not seem to be against the Queens proceedings, For she seems none
otherwise, but that she would have Gods matters to proceed. And last of all,
because if we find it profitable for y^ church to utter our selves, we are
ready so to do. For these several respects we say; have we yet hitherto
forborne, and we trust that that which we have said will seem reasonable to
you. But would to God these matters were reformed, and in the mean while, for
as much as if we might without peril (until we may be disproued) set forth
that which we should learn out of the scriptures, submitting our selves to
the judgment of the best churches, we think it were far better that we were
suffered. And it is hard dealing, that we should be abridged of such lawful
liberty. For if they shall obiecte any inconvenience against us, it is none
other but such, as might stop the lawful course of all good books: seeing
there is none led with better reason to set forth their books, than we
are, and seeing far better men are stopped of their course by this inhibition.
But we appeal to our sovereign, and the whole state, that we may not so
unequally be dealt with, that they which are parties (we mean our bishops,
and the rest of that sort) should only be heard, and be judges in their own
cause too, and the (...) of God stopped of the course in all others. At their
hands we have little hope to find so much uprightness: for it is to be
doubted, they will Lu. 11. 52.
keep back the key of knowledge, as they have done, neither entering in them
selves, and yet (as to this day they do) forbidding them that do come in. God
of his gracious goodness, bless them that take this his cause into their
hands, 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5
and so direct them in the using of his spiritual weapons, that they being
mighty through him, to cast down holds, may overthrow the imaginations,
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bring
into bondage every thought, to the obedience of Christ, that he thereby may be
glorified, his church comforted and continued unto eternal glory. Amen.

FINIS.
THere be some men perhaps will marvel, why we have annexed the private
letters of these learned and reverend men to these Treatises, seeing that it
may seem some injury unto them, for that their consent is not there unto. And
besides, not written so aduisedlye, as the publyshing in Print would require,
whereout things may be drawn against both parties, being written for stay of
strife between both. But we trust that both the one and the other will bear
with us in this behalf. First, because the godly Brethren have been often
pressed with private letters, as not to be of the judgment of the best
learned, and that therefore we are singular, contentions, and so unstayed, that
we seek we can not tell what. Again, we have for our example the reverend
Bishops, who to get the better credit to their cause, have showed us a
president of imprinting some private letters, though we must needs say neither
in so good a cause, nor with half so much equity. And what thank they had
for so doing, as well D. Bullingers letter written to a Noble man in this
realm is witness, as also this of Master Gualters which follows. That
which they did, was in defense of corruptions, and no small discredit to the
Authors, that which we do is in defense of the truth, and to Gods glory, and no
doubt to a singular commendacion of the writers. Albeit we must needs say th^^
the truth of this cause craves no credit, neither of their letters nor
authority. For the scriptures are manifest, and the works of these godly and
learned men, I mean both of D. Bullingers, and M. Gualters, testify how
far of, they are from maintaining any of the forenamed filthy corruptions. We
beseech thee therefore gentle Reader to judge the best of our doings:
howsoever it fall out, this shall be our comfort the testimony of a good
conscience, wherein we mind to rest, and to suffer willingly what so ever shall be
laid upon us. These godly men I hope will not be offended with us, seeing we
do it for the truths sake, and to purge them from such a judgment to defend
corruptions as the Bishops by setting out their letters, would seem to charge
them. As for the former admonition, if in the print they find many faults, let
them remember it was done speedely, and as the extremity would suffer. For the
matter, if any thing be justly reproved, it shall be amended, for the Treatise,
if it be thought too short, it shall by Gods grace be enlarged. We thought at
the first only to give but a taste of these corruptions, to provoke the
patrons thereof to a more full defense, which when it shall be set out, we
mind more fully to show our meanings. In mean time we beseech God to
appease these troubles, to work his peoples deliverance from all Antichristian
slavery, to preserve our Queen in peace wholely to seek the Reformation of
his Church which shall be to his glory.

Fare well. Anno. 1572.
To the reverend Father in Christ. D. I. P. the most vigilant B. of N. and his
loving Father.
HEalth in Christ. When we heard at the first (reverend father in Christ) that
a controversy of the apparel of Ministers was risen among you: that matter did
greatly astonish us, because we feared, least that thing continuing and
increasing longer, should bring some greater mischief: and therefore we
labored as much as lay in us to pacifye some certain men, least about a
thing not of any such great waighte, they should trouble or disquiet them
selves. And surely this foretelling of our mind no whitte at all deceived us,
if those things be true that we hear, to wit: that many other things, besides
these garments are thrust upon the Churches, and those Ministers cast out from
the Churches, which will not subscribe unto the ordinances of certain men,
which either abuse the name of the Queen, or else by their yielding, make her
more bold in such like matters, so that according to her pleasure, she may
ordain what she will. It increases also our grief, for that we see our
letter to be imprinted, wherein we indeuorred to mitigate some one or other man,
and that the Godly brethren are pressed with the authority of our name, and
so we to come into suspicion with many, as though we allowed popish
fylthinesses or corruptions. In deed we counseled certain Ministers, that
they should not forsake their Churches for a cappe or a surplesse, but that so
far forth as they might. (Keeping godliness sound and untouched) they
should feed the Lords flock. In mean time we never have allowed either
their superstition or foolish toys, which thruste upon godly Ministers
such things, and out of the Popes school, or rather kitchen, scrape such
fylthinesses together, through which they make much trouble and business to
good pastoures, and give offense to the weak. But especially it seems hard
unto us, that the Bishops should show them selves to be the officers of this
execution, that by them, they which will not yield, should be cast out. I
would to God they would way, what the Lord would, when he speaks of that
same untrusty steward of the house, who whilst he ought to have fed his
household, banquetteth and plays with drunckardes, and beats his fellow
servants. For I see not how far they differ from his manners, who do so
easily allow the fantasies of superstitious courtiers, and handle godly
Ministers so discourteously. Neither would I ever have thonghte that any could
be found among the Bishops, which would have showed him self an officer of
this rashness, or at the least have confyrmed the same through cowardly
dissymulation. For me thought that all this matter had sprung from certain
men that abused the authority of the Queens most excellent Majesty, but we
hoped that the Bishops would have defended the cause of the Ministers, and
have sought means, whereby this mischief might have been redressed.

There are I grant among the brethren, certain men a little waywarde. But
notwithstanding, their cause is not evil, much less wicked or ungodly, yea
rather it were to be wished tbat their judgment might prevail, the which
thing because then it seemed impossyble unto us, we admonished them to be^d
them selves to things present, and that they should trust in the Lord, who
at length would give some occasion, whereby all things should be restored to
better. Now because I hear (my Father) your godliness to be especially
praised among the rest, as also the godliness of our father D. Pilkington
(who would not as yet turn out any) you for our old frendshippes sake
seem to be admonished, that you go forward constantly in the same
godliness. And that you remember that every one o^ us has sins ^nowe in
him self, so that there is no need that he communicate wy^h other men's
offenses. Christ is the husband of his own church, and a most sharp
revenger, and will not suffer the wrong that is done to his faithful
servants to escape unpunished. To this Christ one day shall an accounte of
this our function and office be made, not to a Queen, nor to the Pope, nor to
them which challendge to themselves Papisticall or Pontifycall authority in
the Church. Take in good part according to your accustomed gentleness,
these things written in deed upon the sudden without study, but not without
a care of brotherly love. As concerning our matters, I have written more in
those letters which you shall receive from the Mart. D. Bullinger saluteth you
most heartily. My Wife also has her hearty commendacions to you and to your
wife.

Fare you well at Tigurin, the.11. of September. Anno. 1566. Rodolphe Gualter,
Minister of the Church of God at Tigurin.

To the reverend father in Christ, E. G. Bishop of L. T. B. wishes grace and
health from the Lord.
Reverend father, besides that your letters came very late to my hands, it is
come to pass for want of messengers, that I also have been feign to come a
day after the fair in answering. But I yield you most hearty thanckes, both
for your most courteous letters, and also for your small gift (as you list to
term it) which notwithstanding. I will gladly keep, as a most excellent and
acceptable pledge of youres. And as for those Annotations of mine: I will then
take them to be such as you report them to be, when they shall have thoroughly
been corrected by the benefit of you, and other learned men. As concerning our
matt^rs: all things are yet well and quiet among us, through the singular
mercy and goodness of almighty God: whereas else this Church might well
cry out, that saying of David's, They have hated me without cause. But it is
well with us that we be ill spoken of, and falsely accused for Christ's names
sake. In which behalf it is an honor to suffer any thing. Some, (that is to
wit the papists and Vbiquitaries are they which maintain ye Christ is every
where by the bodily presence of his manhood.
Vbibiquitaries) not only i^ lame us, but also banne us as wicked folks and
heretics: and other some (namely such as are ashamed to have their
looseness restrained by our discipline such as it is) find fault with us
and abhor us as over s^uere. But I hope the day will come, that we shall
justify our case in both the points of this accusation, before the judgment
seat of the son of God. For as touching our doctrine, we are out of doubt:
it agrees with Gods word: and I think it will not be hard for us to show, y^ ye
simplicity of ye ceremonies of this church, (whereof we repent us not at all)
and the whole order of our Discipline, are drawn out of the same fountain,
allbeit that we willingly acknowledge our selves to be far off from that,
which ought to have been established ere this. Moreover, what heauing and
crafty dealing there has been a late at Augusta, against all the Churches
of these parts, and consequently also against your Churches, and the
Churches of France, all which we think to agree with us in all points of
doctrine: I suppose it has been reported unto you already. Which exceeding
great mischief was such, as though it should not touch you at all, yet ought
it of right to move you also, for the defacing of so many and so great
Churches. This therefore was the cause, that the last winter, all the Churches
of these our quarters, (only Basil excepted, because that they a little before,
had by themselves set forth a like confession in all points, in effect of
matter,) did give our consent to the common confession written by our brethren
of Zurike, which great consent we hope will yield most plentiful fruit of
concord. Afterward all the French Churches followed this president, by putting
forth a record of their agreing with us: now if it may please the Lord to
grant thus much more, that your and the Scottish churches might also testify
your agreeing with this common confession of ours, by some public writing: no
doubt but it would greatly avail to the hindering, or rather to the utter
overthrowing of their devices, which enforce our condemnation, upon trust of
multitude rather than of reasons: and also would stir up many men to try
out the true religion, who are now borne in hand, that our Churches are at
debate among themselves with innumerable discordes: that I may say nothing of
many weak ones, whom (it is not to be doubted of) should be very much
strengthened by the consent of many nations. Considering therefore reverend
Father, that this thing is very profitable for the Church of GOD, and right
agreeable to the charge of your self, and your reverend fellow officers: I
think it a worthy matter for you, not only to take care of, but also to
prefer by all means to the Queens Majesty: which charge I heartily desire
you, yea, and for Christ's own sake beseech you, that you will not refuse to
go through with, for the Church of God. But for as much as I am once entered
into this matter, I beseech you of your gentleness Reverend Father, that you
will gently and patiently suffer me to proceed a little further in a matter
not altogether unlike this, sith no ambition (as God help me) but only good
will toward the English churches, does move me thereunto. There is a report
brought unto us, and the same is confyrmed by certain men's letters both out
of France and out of Germany, that in your country, many Ministers of gods
word, (who otherwise were faultlesse as well in life as in doctrine) were put
out of office by the Queens majesty, even with the consent of you Bishops,
because they re^used to subscribe to some certain Ceremonies. The sum of
which Injunctions is reported to have been this. That they should admit again,
not only the garments which were the Priests badges in popery: but also
certain ceremonies which have been grown out of kind long ago into most
fylthie superstitions, as crossing and kneeling at the Communicating of the
Lords supper, and other things of the same stamp. It is reported moreover
(which is much greuouser, that Women are permitted to minister Baptism, that
there is authorit^e given to the Prince to bring in (...) Ceremonies upon
them. And finally that all power of ordering Ecclesiastical matters, is given
to the Bishops only, without giving the Ministers of several Churches, so
much as any leave to complain. I wrote again to those friends of mine, That
the church of God did persuade it self far other wise, both of the Queens
majesty, and also of so many learned and religious bishops: and moreover that
at the least many of these things were (to my seeming) either utterly devised
by some malicious persons, or at least wise miswrested. Nevertheless I
beseech you of your courtesye, that we may have some conference of these
matters betwixt our selves. I know there be two opinions concerning the
Reformation of Churches. For there be some of opinion, that nothing at all
should be added to the simplicity of the Apostolic church, and therefore that
(without exception) all things are to be done by us which the Apostles did, and
whatsoever the Church that succeeded next after the Apostles, has added to ye
former things, they think they must be abolyshed at once. Contrariwise, there
be other some, which think that certain of the old ceremonies ouermore, are
partly to be held still as profitable and necessary: and partly to be borne
withal for concordes sake, although they be not necessary. As for my part, I
am out of doubt, that the Doctrine of the Apostles was most perfect in all
points, and that it is not lawful for any man to take any thing from it, o^to
put any thing to it. But as for their Ceremonies, I judge a little otherwise
of them. For first of all, it is certain that at the first springing up of
churches: not eue^ the Apostles themselves were able to stablishe whatsoever
they thought expedient, and therefore that they proceeded step by step,
according as their ordaining of Deacons shows: in so much as they did suffer
for a time even many Iewishe things, like as it appears in their Stories.
Again, who doub^eth but that the Apostles had a singular regard of their
own times, and also of the places and persons, in outward ceremonies? in so
much as it is no likelyhoode, that the same ceremonies were in all points
observed in all places, according as it appears well enough by the notable
Epistle of Irene unto Victor. Besides this, even very necessity has
abolyshed some traditions of theirs, as those common refections. Wherefore I am
of opinion, that all that has been don by the Apostles in case of ceremonies,
is not by and by, nor without exception to be followed for a rule. Neither do I
marvel that those old Fathers, upon consyderation had to their own times,
have abated some of those first things, or put somewhat to them.

And to conclude changed some. But even they them selves that I may speak
with their leave plainly what I think, had not as me seems so good
consideration of Christian symplicitie, and pureness as was meet. For first
they ought to have considered, that the abolishing of the Ceremonies of Moses
by little and little, was not to set them up again in time by another
pretense: and also that the Heathenish ceremonies were to be plucked up by the
rotes, so as there might not any print of heathnishnes remain to be seen, were
it never so small, according as Moses advisedly charged the Israelites at their
entering into the land of Chanaan. And therefore I think them to have sinned
sore, how be it not upon malice which have followed both the law of Moses and
also the manner of the heathen, for a rule in ordaining the ceremonies of the
church: which thing how busily they have done, I suppose there is no man
ignorant. Again, they ought to have considered this also, that the abolishing
of the ceremonies of the law, was not to bring in another bondage of service
upon it (for that had not ben a taking away of the yoke of the law, but an
exchange of it) but rather to the end that all men should behold Christ
exhibited, from henceforth unclothed, and walking in the clear light, and
no more darkened with any figures or shadows. For (according as Austin
complaining very grievously of the same matter, has rightly deemed) this same
is the cause why our Lord ordained both fewer (that is to wit but two, instead of all the other former which were innumerable) and also simpler and
euidenter sacraments of the new testament. And therefore I say again, that they
sinned right grievously, as often as they brought any Sacramentalles, (that is
to say any ceremonies to import signification of spiritual things) into the
church of God. Therefore, at one word for all I am of opinion, that whatsoever
has been converted into the rites and customs of the chrystians, either from
the Jews or from the Painims, without Ch^istes ordinance, and the assured
example of the Apostles: and likewise, that all Sacramental ceremonies ought
to be thrust out of the church at once, whereunto they could never be brought by
any right: and that the church cannot be restored to her native beauty, so
long as they continue in it. Now remain only such ceremonies as pertain only
unto comeliness: In which case I (...) compelled eftso^e to find lack of
discretion in many, even of the auncientest bishops. For first of all, as
concerning the ministration of the sacraments whereas all ^^at ever is done
there, has covert importance, and it is no more lawful for men to ordain
sacraments, than to devise new promises of salvation: and whereas Christ the
author both of the word and of the sacraments, wo^ld of set purpose that the
ceremonies of them should be very simple and very few, insomuch that he
prescribed a rule certain of these holy doings, unto his true shepherdes in
these words: Do ye this: I cannot wonder inoughe what reason should move
diverse men to be of opinion, that all the whole furniture, wherewith even y^
ancientest fathers of all thought themselves to garnish Baptim and the Lords
supper, should be held still with toothe and nail: and some also should
think, that it ought to be set up again in places where it is taken away as
it ought to be. If antiquity be required: Christ is he that gave us the
Prophets and Apostles: and again, by the Apostles, shepherds and teachers. If
authori^e required: Christ is the foundation, the Apostles are the master
builders, and the shepherdes and teachers are bound to build gold and silver
upon that foundation. Therefore let the gold and silver abide still: and as
for the hay and chafe, seeing that the day of the Lord has discovered them,
why I pray you do we build them up again? Nay verily, why strive we so much
for chafe and stubble, or rather even for more trifling things than chafe and
stubble be: and if not utterly, yet at y^ least wise for y^ most part, why
neglecte we y^ substantial and precious building in deed? But this complaint
perchance agreed better to the times wherein the first successors of the
Apostles lived, than to this doting old age of the present world. For I
esteem the sins of those fathers as virtues in comparison of their
unlearned, heedelesse, and ambitious successors. For by what other terms
should I call them, who besides that they have made as great ado about
ceremonies only, as about the whole sum of Religion, wheruppon has insued
that horrible disfyguring of all the parts of doctrine) seem to have had the
over ruling of Gods house to none other intent, but to overthrow it quite,
being already decayed. They that could not away with the plain fashions of the
Apostles, have added a thousand ceremonies to the baptim of the new instructed.
It lyked some to have them anointed, as though they should have gone to
wrestling: some to have them plucked out of Satan's power by certain coniurings
and breathings, as folk passing out of the devils dominion into the kingdom of
God. Some to have wax candles given them lighted, as to fol^ conveyed out of
darkness into light: some to be clad in white raiment, as f^l^e that had put
of the old man and put on the new: and other some to have milk and honey
given them to taste aforehand, as folk coming by a new kind of life. All
which things if I listed to go through with, what end should there be of their
masking toys, rather then christen ceremonies? But (say they) so it behooved
the heathen to be allured unto Christ. As who would say, that Christ and the
Apostles after Christ, could not have provided these things. For surely, as
for those that make the apostles authors of these toys, they are not once
worth the disprouing, how aunciente so ever they be. I pray you what a thing
is this, that whereas it is the property of christian religion to do nothing
in huddermudder (for it is a trick of Satan's to shun the light): yet
notwithstanding, many of those auncientest thought it good to hide the holy
mysteries of the christians, as if they had been the mysteries of Ceres, inso
much as they admitted not the newly instructed to the sight of them: yea, and
as for that whole action, wherein look whatsoever thing was fygured under a
few plain tokens, the Lord himself both willed and commanded the same to
be openly preached and published by his word, allowed and expounded in such a
tongue as all men understood, according as he himself was wont to do: they
transformed it into certain secret conceits, and into certain ceremonies
scarcely understood of many of the priests themselves. But far greater was
the negligence of the bishops that succeeded: who conveyed that thing to the
Christen men's infants, which was ordained for their sakes that passed out of
Painimrie into Christianity, after traynement in the first principles of
Religion, being already men grown. If any man do^te whether this be so or no:
I pray you let him consider the manner of baptim according as the papists keep
it, and yet still by tradition from furthest antiquity, saving that they have
added a few things of their own, and held still the strange language, which
at that time was common in the West and the South. For there they that are to
be baptized, are bidden not only to render a reason of their faith: but also
come to be baptized. Which thing although many; (among whom Austin himself
is one) have gone about to excuse by some qualifycation: saying that the
Godfathers and Godmothers are demanded, and do make answer in the childrens
names: yet notwithstanding, who sees not, that this is but a weak device, to
cloak the thing by some color, which was crept in by abuse? for I beseech
you, if baptim may not be ministered, without present under taking for the faith
of the party that is to be baptized: for except that be granted; wherefore I
pray you is the child that comes to christening, demanded of his faith:) to
what purpose is baptim hastened? and why rather do we not delay baptim, until
such time as those that are to be baptized, may be able to profess their own
faith, as the Catabaptistes do, which God forbid. And I am out of doubt,
that this negligence of the Bishops, whom it behooued of necessytie to have
put a difference between the christenyng of babes, and the chrystening of
men grown, as in respect of some outward ceremonies) has caused many to
delay the christening of their children the longer, how be it that they did
not well in so doing: Notwithstanding, that the said error was not espied in
old time, (no not even of inanye Bishops) even this one thing declares, That
Nazyanzene being a Bishops son, was above twenty years old ere he was
christened. Much less had this opinion taken root, of the necessity of
Chrystening unto salvation, which opinion the Bishops of Afric brought in
afterward in resysting Pelagius. And the cause why I make mention of these
matters, is for that (among other things) it is said that in your Country
the little Babe that is to be Christened, is demanded of his faith by the
Minister. And I would gladlye learn of you reverend Father, upon what
probable reason, or upon what reason that pertains to the edifying of Gods
Church, the same custom is grounded. As for the signing^ of folk with the
cross, although it be very ancient: yet surely I see not what profit it can
bring: and all be it the same is wonderfully, and altogether over reachingly
commended (specially by Chrysostom,) as a certain sum of the christen
Religion: yet notwithstanding in as much as it is not grounded upon the
authority of Gods word, or upon any example of the Apostles, (for I make no
reckening of vnauthorised stuff) that is to say, forasmuch as it is utterly
destitute of Gods word, and pertains not in any wise unto comlynesse, but
(to be short) has been the first opener of the gappe unto that most
abominable superstition and worshipping of the cross, the horriblest of all
Idolatries: I can less find in my heart that it should be nombred among
those things indifferent, than the brazen serpent of Ezechias, whose example it
would become all christian Princes to follow, chefely in this case, that is to
say in overthrowing the Idols of crosses and crucifixes. But whereas childrenne
that are to be christened, are offered in the open congregation of the church,
rather in honest than in costly apparel: where as there is used a certain
convenient form of prayer, and exposition of baptim: whereas the godfathers and
godmothers are present to take charge of the holy bringing up of the child: and
finally whereas the children be sprinkled with clear water taken reverently in
clean hands according to the form appointed by Christ: considering that
these rites be simple, honest, and in no wise magical, and finally such as
can not give any occasion of superstition: who is he that dares condemn them,
except he will be reproved by the express words of Paul, who gives
commandment, that in the Lords house all things should be done fitly and
orderly? Furthermore as touching the Lords supper, who can refrain tears, to
declare how miserably it is transformed into that old stagelike frisking and
horrible Idol gadding? That the indiscreet zele of such as were not contented
with the simpleness of Christ and his Apostles, opened the first gap to this
corruption, I think it needs not many words to prove it, for as much as
both the old and the new services, as well of the East as of the West, which
are so much the vncleaner, as they be done with more solemnity, do most
manifestly prove the matter to be so. And here I dout not, but you have well
marked how wily satan has showed himself. For who would not think, that the
using of an altar, or of some table were an indifferent thing? Therefore by
little and little, Altares were brought in in stead of tables: verily because
the common tables, (which nevertheless the ancient fathers used even for
their bankets) seemed not to agree well with so stately service. Heerevppon
satan took first occasion to transform this holy action, (which was
ordained, not to give, but to receive Christ) into a propitiatory sacrifice,
that is to say, most shamefully to tread under foot the death of Christ,
which is there declared. They were not content with common and plain songs,
and therefore under pretense of beutifying this holy action, that busy and
curious prickesong and descanting was brought in, more mete for stage plays,
for the most part, then for an holy action, and more fyt to delight the ear,
then to stir up the mind. A thing surely for this respect not only
unprofitable, but also very hurtful, that in that noise, no man could well
mark what was said: so that the matter it self does plainly convince, that
the true worship of God was by this means especially transformed into vain,
and at the length mere stagelike songs. A simple and common furniture pleased
them not, nor was agreeable, therefore they sought out marble, they gilded
walls, they provided vessels of gold and silver, and their ministers
began to be attired in precious and Bishoppelike, yea, and Emperourelike
garments, and all forsothe to honor the sacrament with all. And so forthwith
these were the means and instruments to foster and cherishe riotousnesse, to
neglecte true charity, and to be short, to bring in folish and stagelike
furniture. They were not content with a simple breaking of the bread, which
notwithstanding is not the least part of this action, therefore little round
cakes began to be given to each, and the order appointed of the Lord, was
abrogated. It pleased them not to give the bread into their hands while they
were sytting or standing, as in old times it was, but it seemed them good to
have it holden up, as it were, to worship it, and afterward was kneeling used,
and chose rather to have a morsel put in to their mouth, for more reverence
sake forsothe. And that this was the first beginning of that most horrible
bread worship, which can not yet be aboly^^ed, who sees not? Now then seeing
these things are so, and the most doleful and sorrowful euente of these
honors unseasonably and preposterouslye given to our holy things does more
then suffyciently teach us, how far better it were for us to content our
selves with the simple institution of Christ, then with an untowardly zeal to
fashion or devise any of these things: he does best of all in my mind, which
abolysheth these things, (although not wicked of themselves, yet as not
necessary, and very little profitable, although they be well used, but very
much hurtful, as the most heavy state of churches shows and sets forth,)
with no less earnestness, then most euidente Idolatry. For I pray you, if
there were a stone set for some purpose in the parting of two ways, whereat
ntowithstanding, all men, unless they were very circumspecte, might fall with
danger of their lives, whether were it better to take that stone at once out
of the way, or to let it alone, and daily to warn the passengers on which
hand they were best to go, if they would not s^^mble? For if their directours
should be either slothful, or not circumspect inoughe, in vain might they
admonish a great number. Notwithstanding we think that rites which are
necessary for order and comeliness, are to be retained, as, that upon
certain days, and at certain hours, the sacramental signs, being taken
out of clean vessels, be reverently given and received, and what so ever is
of like sort, pertaining rather to an honest, than an ambicious manner. Now
if a man ask me, whether I think that nothing at all of these things, which
are of themselves indifferent, may be retained, at least for the weakes sake,
and whether the ministry ought to be forsaken, rather then any such thing
should be observed, especially if this caution be namely added, that these
things are either brought in, or as yet tolerate not properly to bind men's
consciences, but for other good consyderations. I answer, that I think not,
that congregations may be forsaken for garments and cappes, or some such like
mere indifferent and mean thing. But first of all, I think that there are manny
things, which of themselves being indifferent, yet for an opinion of worship
annexed unto them, can skarsly or not at all be eschued, ought to be counted
amongst superstitions, or surely amongste very needy occasyons of superstition.
Moreover this is to be observed, that many things may be tolerated for the
weak, which notwithstanding ought not to be renewed, after they are once taken
away. For that this were not to take away an infyrmitie: but rather, in some
respect, to restore it when it is taken away, and not to call it back, after
it is departed, so that I marvel not, that many men in this case show them
selves harder in the restoring of certain things, then perhaps they would have
been at the beginning, when they were in hand, to take them away. Moreover and
besides. I ad this that to my thinking, weakness is falsely pretended in that
kingdom, wherein so many years already, the gospel has been preached and
received, yea and confirmed with the blood of so many excellent martyrs. If so
be that the Apostle did rightly chide the Galathians, for that when they had
begone in the spirit, they went back again to the flesh, how much more may
it be lawful to say the same of you English men, if peradventure after that
ye have began in the spirit, you fall back again (as God forbid) not as they
did to the flesh, that is to say, to Moises his ceremonies, whereof God was
the author, but to the trifles and trashe of men's traditions. Last of all, I
will not be afraid to say this, trusting to your equity, if they do amiss
which had rather depart from their congregations, then to suffer those things
to be thruste upon them against their conscience, that they are in great
fault before God and his Angels, which had rather a bide to have flocks
deprived of pastors, and foundations laid of most horrible confusion by the
pastors forsaking of their congregations, then to see ministers otherwise
without fault, to use rather this then that apparel: and that in some places
there should rather be no supper given to the hungry sheep, then that
kneling should be omitted. Which things, if they should be there done amongste
you, (as God forbid that I should think that they are done) surely they
would be beginnings, not of former, but of far greter calamities. Again I
beseech you, reverend father, that if I offend herein, you would patiently
bear with me so offending not of ambition or malice, but (as the Lord
knows,) of rudenes and unskillfulness. If it be true that is commonly reported,
and I am not yet persuaded, that baptism is privately permitted to women
amongst you, I can not tell what is to go back from the gole to the barriers,
if this be not. For first of all from whence sprang this most filthy error, but
from a gross ignorance of the matter of the sacrament. Who so ever is not
washed in water, is condemned say they which are the patrones of this
profanation of baptism. If it be so, the salvation of infants shall come, not
from the covenant of god, (which notwithstanding is the endoubted ground of
our salvation) but from the seal annexed unto the conenaunte (and that not to
make it more certain in it self, but rather to certify us of it. And that
more wicked is, the salvation of infants shall wholely consist in the diligence
or negligence of y^ parents. But seeing, y^ excellent servant of God D. Peter
Martyr, as you right well know, reverend father, a good while a go disputed
of this matter at large in his commentaries written to that godly king Edward,
and that, as I think, with the consent of the whole English church in those
days, I would not now at large discourse upon this matter. This only I say,
if that report should be true, it were greatly to be lamented to see them now
to turn back as it were to the barryers, which should have rather been come
even to the gole, especially having had such guides and masters. But if those
things shall be true, which seem not to me probable, that Metropolitanes
practice and put in ure those most filthy abuses which are more intolerable
then ought else in the church of Antichrist, as pluralities of benefices,
licenses of not resydences, to contracte Matrimony, and for eating of flesh,
and such like, as it were surely not a corruption of christianity, which I
speak with horror, but a manifest falling away from Christ, and therefore they
were not to be condemned, but rather to be praised: which would oppose them
selves against such endeavors. Moreover by what right, whether ye respect the
word of God, or all the old Canons, may either the civil Magistrate by
himself, where congregations are already erected and established, bring in
upon them any new rites, or abrogate the old: or the Bishops without the
judgment and consent of their Eldership, of duty ordain any thing, I have
not yet learned. But because I see that these two plagues, that is to say, the
dishonest and ambitious flattery of former Bishops, partly abusing the virtuous
Princes, and partly serving their evil affections and vices have utterly undone
the Church, until the matter came to this pass, that the mightyest of the
Metropolitanes of the West, by the just judgment of God, so punishing
Magistrates and Bishops, had scratched and ravished unto himself all matters
both divine and humane. I must needs confess that I am astonished and
amassed, so often as I think of these things, and I forsee, that either the
same, or more grievous punishments do again hang over the most part of people,
which at the first, with great affection, embraced the gospel, and now by
little and little fall from it. And I dout not but the good in what place so
ever, do in like sort lament, whom the Lord hear, and for his son Jesus
Christ's sake give unto Kings and Princes a true, godly, and religious mind,
and grant them good and stout counselors, and to the governors of his church,
especially his holy spirit, and most abundant knowledge and zeal, and
moreover increase and preserve the people which have already professed the true
faith in sincerity of doctrine and rites, and godly manners.

You see (reverend father) how far this heat, as it were has enforced
me* But I beseech you, for* and according to your good nature, to take this
my doing in good part, and consider that it is the token of good love, that
such as love one another, are full of care and pensiuenes for their friends,
even then, when they seem to be in best case. But now of these matters too
much. It remains that I commend in most instant wise unto your worthy and
fatherly goodness the French Church, which next unto God, and her
majesty, is most bound unto you, that if so be the ennemies of the Gospel,
being to pass, that in all places, and by all means possible, they do
maliciously go about, the poor banyshed may yet at the least have some
refuge and succoure amongst you. I had thought to have written letters to the
same purpose, (so bold some time I am in my follies) to other, both
Ecclesiastical and also noble men, of the realm of England, and peradventure
to her own majesty, but I with held my self for many considerations. If
peradventure you shall perceive that this my little labor may profit, I will
not be afraid, God willing, not only to venture my estimation, but my life
also, rather then omit any occasion whereby the kingdom of Christ, may
either be preserved, or increased. Farewell, reverend father, and as you were
w^nt, continue your love and prayers for me and this whole Church and schole.

Geneue ^. Call. Iul. M.D.lxvi. Yours most assured in the Lord Theodore Beza
minister of the word in the Church of Geneue.

England repent, Bishops relent,
return while you have space,
Time is at hand, by truth to stand,
if you have any grace.
Join now in one, that Christ alone,
by scepter of his word:
May bear the stroke: least you provoke
his heavy hand and sword.

