A profitable Exposition of the Lords Prayer, by way of Questions and Answers
for most playnnes:

Together with many fruitful applications to the life and Soul, as well for
the terror of the dull and dead, as for the sweet comfort of the tender hearted.

By Geruase Babington.

With a Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.

PSALM 119. O how sweet are thy words unto my throat, yea sweeter than honey
unto my mouth.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Charde. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HIS VERY singular good Lord, Henry Earl of Penbrooke,
Lord Harbert of Cardiff, Marnion and S. Quintine, Lord President of Wales and
the Marches thereof, and of the most Honorable Order of the Garter Knight, and
to the Right Honorable and virtuous Lady the Countess his wife, G.B. wishes
all mercy and comfort in Christ Jesus, both here now, and for ever.
COnsider the old generatio^s of me^ ye children, said that wise Son of
Sirach (Right Honorable and my very singular good Lord) in his time, and mark
them well. Ecclesiast. 2.11.
Was there ever any confounded, that put his trust in the Lord? Or who has
continued in his fear, and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever despise, that
called upon him? Agreeably truly to all Scriptures, and experiences ever, if
they were searched. For such a thing is it to cleave unto the Lord with a
faithful heart, that the Bride may forget to trim her self the day she is
married, and the mother her Jnfant she bare of her body, and esteems full
dear, before the Lord of heaven can forget such. The Lord knows the days
of the upright men, and their inheritance shall be perpetual. They shall not be
confounded in the perilous time, Psalm. 37.
and in the days of famine they shall have enough. Though he fall he shall not
be cast of, for the Lord puts under his hand. The Lord shall exalt them, as
themselves shall see, and their end, says the Prophet, shall be peace.
Thousands of comforts has the word mo, and yet these are both many and great
ones, if we mark the^. Gain is not godliness, says the Apostle, 1. Timoth.
6.4.5. chap. 4.8.
but godliness is great gain, and has the promise both of this life and that
to come. Wherefore (Right Honorable) more joy in this, than in all the earth,
if it might be your own. For the earth must perish, and all the glistring
glory of it pass away as a tale that is told, burnt, and consumed, and
melted with heat, but the fear of the Lord shall set her servants before the
highest, for ever and ever. Now did the Apostle say to King Agrippa before so
many, O King Agrippa J know thou beleeuest? Surely I may say it before as
many, I know (Right Honorable) your L. believes, both Prophets and Apostles,
and whatsoever the child of God is bound to believe unto salvation. I say I
know it, and yet know I it not alone, but others with me, as well as J,
attending your L. both in like, and other places. And if we should all deny
it, yet would the world step in and say, it knew what we denied. God have
the glory, to who^ it is due, of his free election manifested both to your
self and others by a true calling unto sanctification. And it remains (Right
H.) that with a spirit flaming with thankful love to so gracious a God, you
let your light shine further and further to a greater glory to the Lord, and a
fuller comfort to your own soul. Perform your self therefore in all truth
of heart, before the judging eyes of a mighty God still more and more, as you
do already, an honorable maintainer and furtherer of his truth. A shield and
defense to all the godly in their griefs and distresses. Careful to have both
your self and your family governed by the precious and holy word of God,
maintayning and countenancing to that end, as most honorably you do, both at
home, and abroad, the Lords poor servants appointed to that ministry. Be a
rare example still, both worthy honoring and following of careful bestowing of
those livings whereof God has made your Lordship Patron. Multiply, as the
Lord shall assist, those your Honors zealous prayers, which some can witness:
for the peace of Jerusalem, that her righteousness may break forth as the
light, and salvation as a burning lamp. And still say with the Prophet David,
we wish you good luck ye that be of the house of the Lord. Your Honorable
services for a most gracious Sovereign as ever the earth had any, and for your
dear Country, let them still, as they are, be most sweet and joyful to you.
In your Honorable place and government carry your zeal as your L. does, even
more and more against the incorrigible adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, to
note their doings, to observe their drifts, and to overthrow their plots. Cut
off still with your sword of holy Justice, as with exceeding travel your
Lordship most honorably does, those contentions, disorders, and offenses that
corruption both breeds and feeds over much. And finally as the Apostle
says, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, to God, or to Prince, to
Country, or to any, Right Ho. think of that. For so shall your L. establish
your self both in earth and in heaven, both here and for ever. Yea your self
and your seed, as the former promises have given assurance. And so shall you,
to your God and your self, and as many as know your virtues, stand approved
ever, whatsoever either ignorance or unkindness may effect in some. Without
this course and care in a measure as the Lord shall give, well may a world
continue a while flattring and fauning with many delights, God being patient
and forbearing long, but the end is destruction, death and confusion, God being
just and paying at last. Your self Madame still more and more, as your Ladyship
does, partake with your own, what your place permits in these Honorable
actions, and make them also your own. Let it still be your honorable just and
true praise, that you fear the Lord, that you love his truth, favor his
followers and abhor his foes. For there is no praise shall continue as this,
there is no wisdom that may be compared to it. The fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter,
the praise of it indureth for ever. Again, let this be your wisdom, Deutro.
4.
said the Lord of heaven to that people once, even to hear my words, and to
work my will with a careful heart. For then shall all Nations say, you only
are wise, and you only have knowledge of the best course. Let it be your
Posie, (Right Honorable) as pleasant as ever it was: And now Lord what is my
hope, Psalm. 39.
truly my hope is even in thee: Though the Lord should kill me, yet will I
put my trust in him. Job. 13.15.
And let that plain Prophet strengthen your Ladyship still by his words to
King Asa and all Judah: The Lord is with you, while ye be with him, and if you
seek him he will be found of you, 2. Chron. 15.2
but if you forsake him he will forsake you. The like has dying David to his
dear son to be left behind him: And thou Solomon my son, know the God of
thy father, and serve him, 1. Chron. 28.9
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind. For the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of thoughts. Jf thou seek him, he will be
found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee away for ever. But what
spend J speech, where many given graces say spare thy speech, J know it well.
Then stay J so, and to you both (Right H.) J add but this, that as duty
binds, and many great and honorable favors both to me and mine require and
charge me, I rest before my God in prayer, that goes out of unfeigned lips,
that it may be thus with your H. both, thus still I say, and thus more, thus
more again, and thus still, and thus both still and more continually during
life. That those words of endless comfort may reach unto you in judging day:
Come ye blessed of my father, and possess eternal joy. If this poor travel
of mine may avail any thing to this effect, it is your Honors own, proceeded
from your own, most deeply bound for ever to be your own, and therefore bold
to present it in this sort, because he is your own. It was begun in your
Honors hearing, being that part of the Catechism that then fell to my course,
both the law and faith having been expounded before, the one by my self, the
other by my fellow that followed: and because it could not at that time be
gone forward withal, J have since, as J could, laid it down in this sort, if
it please the Lord for the good of mo. Who all shall welcome it by thus much
more (as they did the other) by how much it brings countenance from your
Honors both unto them, and is a gift derived even from your selves unto them.
The Christian Reader else whosoever, I should wrong too much, if I should not
comfortably hope, he will accept it well, since already he has showed his
love in the like respect. Therefore most humbly beseeching you both (Right
Honorable) to accept my duty, to weigh my heart, and to pardon my boldness, J
beseech the Lord again and again to multiply his mercies toward you both,
giving honor here, and honor ever in his happy kingdom of eternal comfort.

Wilton. the 11. of May. 1588. Your Honors most humble bounden to death,
Geruase Babington.

A PROFITABLE EXPOSITION of the Lords Prayer: by way of Questions and Answers.
Of Prayer in generality.
MAny things are spoken by many men of Prayer in generality, and gladly would
I hear what you think convenient of the same. Yet would I not prescribe by any
questions, for fear my want of judgment in asking, might procure in you any
needless answering?

Your care is very good, yet spare not to speak, if I omit any thing whereof
you would willingly hear. Truth it is, that much is spoken, and much may be
spoken of this matter at large, but a few things may suffice us at this time,
having fuller discourses to go to when we will.

Prayer natural, but to pray rightly, of God, Romans 16.
First then let us consider, that Prayer has a foundation even in our nature as
we are men, and is so taught us by the very instinct and testimony of reason
and conscience, that look what or whomsoever we acknowledge and think to be
God, that and the same we also willingly confess ought to be prayed unto. For
a persuasion of Godhead stands not without a confession of Prayer done to the
same. So we see in the 14. Psalm, Verse. 1.
where with the denial of God, which the fool makes in his heart, is joined
an utter want of prayer and invocation. Contrariwise in the 139. Psalm. with the
confession of God, Verse. 9.
an earnest, hearty, and often calling upon his name. So that a necessary
consequence the Spirit of GOD makes it upon the confession of a God even by
the instinct of nature to use prayer to the same. Verse. 13.
And contrariwise if we should never pray, then necessarily must we be even in
the number of those fools, which say in their hearts there is no God. Which if
it were duly and effectually considered of us, it would rowze us assuredly out
of our dead and damnable negligence in this behalf, if there were any spirit
of life and feeling in us, and cause us to acquaint our souls more often and
earnestly with this heavenly exercise. Fearing even with a great fear,
Ingratitude to God.
the vengeance of ingratitude toward God for innumerable benefits, Atheism.
the plagues in hell due to Atheists and such as deny GOD, and the same
amongst men that of force must fall upon us, when being men yet we abhor
from the very nature of man. Declination from nature.
All which three grievous conditions the want of Prayer forcibly proves upon
us, as now we see. Again, the Apostle Saint Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, Rom 2.14.15.
teaching how the Gentiles doing by nature the things contained in the law,
show the effect of the law written in their hearts, is a witness in stead of
many more, sufficient and strong, that to pray to God, being a thing comprised
in the law, was then, is now, and ever shall be whilst man has man's nature,
a thing ingrafted and planted of God in the same nature. And many other reasons
might be brought, but these suffice.

Prayer is necessary.
Secondly, let us consider the necessity of this Christian exercise of Prayer:
which we shall evidently see, if either we respect the Lord, our selves, or
our brethren. For unto the Lord we know is due, ever, and eternally, In
respect of the Lord here.
here, and in the world to come, praise and thanksgiving, and that is Prayer.
Praise the Lord all ye people, Psalm. 147.148. etc. Psalm. 136.1.2.3. Psalm.
150.6. Psalm. 146.1.
for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God. O give thanks unto the
Lord, for he is gracious. O thank the Lord of all Lords, etc. Yea, let every
thing that has breath praise the Lord. And, as long as I have any being, I
will sing praises unto my God. In the world to come, see the Scriptures. Apoc.
4.8.
Holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which was, and which is, and which is to come.
ver. 11.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power: In the world
to come.
for thou have created al things, and for thy will sake they are, and have been
created. Beside many other places. Unto the Lord is due worship and service of
all them that look for a place in his kingdom: Luke. 1.74.75 Ose. 14.3.
of which worship and service, Prayer is a notable part, and therefore
necessary.

Unto the Lord is due obedience to his Commandments, if we be the Lords,
for they are holy and just. But this is one, that we should pray unto him: and
therefore in respect of God Prayer is necessary. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me, says the Lord. And in an
other place, I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that every knee shall bow unto me, etc.

In respect of our selves Prayer is necessary, Prayer necessary in respect of
our selves.
if either we consider the manifold woes and sorrows, which at times shall
nippe our hearts, lying there and even grating and grinding our inwards to
powder by day and by night, till we have eased our selves by Prayer, and powered
them into the lap of the Lord, with suite for comfort and redress, or the
infinite necessities of this wretched life: which albeit the Lord is merciful
and ready to give, even before we do ask, yet good reason we should ask
them, and ever bound to that gracious God, that upon asking will vouchsafe to
give them. Psalm. 42.
What hellish gripes of wringing woe do we think the servant of God David
felt, when over and over he mentions the sadness of his soul? Chap. 6.
What Job, when the arrows of the Almighty did stick in him, the venom
whereof did drink up his spirit, and when the terrors of God did fight against
him? when he shriked out with mournful voice, what my shrinking hand does
shake to pen: O that I might have my desire, and that GOD would grant me the
thing that I long for. And what was that? O fearful! It follows, that GOD
would destroy me, that he would let his hand go, and cut me off. What the
persecuted Prophet, 1. Kings 19.
when he would so gladly dye? Jonas. 2.
What Jonas in the belly of hell, as he calls it? and what thousands, and
ten thousands of Gods children, ever, and daily, and whilst the world
indureth? And how have they been eased? do we not see? Even by throwing
themselves at the feet of the Lord, and pouring out by Prayer their grievous
complaints into the bosom of their gracious GOD, whose ear harkened, whose
heart pitied, and whose hand ever in his good time eased their shoulders from
the burden, to their comfort. Therefore Prayer in this respect we see most
necessary. For the other, we know the Scriptures also: Mat. 7.7.
Ask (says God) and you shall have. If having then be necessary in respects
of wants, necessary is also asking: that is, praying in respect of having. So
look we at woes, or look we at wants, necessary in respect of our selves is
Prayer.

Go we lastly to our Brethren, Prayer necessary in respect of our brethren.
and we are commanded to let our light shine before them, to their example
and confirmation. Of which light this is a notable part and branch, our
often, zealous, and religious Prayer, and therefore even in respect of them
also necessary.

Thirdly, the utility and profit of it would very duly, and earnestly,
Prayer is profitable.
of Gods children be considered: wherein the saying may have fit and proper
place.

Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque
Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit.
That is: It gayneth good to poor and rich,
if use thereof be free:
And hurts youth as well as age
neglected if it be.


The Scripture woonderfully lays down the benefit of this holy exercise,
not in one, or two respects, but even in every thing, that may befall the
child of God in this life. In afflictions, as partly has been showed, it
eases the heart; it staieth our steps still ready to slide into impatience; it
persuades the Lord; it wins his mercy, and brings his gotten comfort at
time appointed, to the panting soul, all breathless almost in the scortching
heat of such trial, as pleases God to send. And therefore pray (says our
Savior Christ) continually, Luc. 21.36.
that ye may be counted worthy to escape al these things, that shall come to
pass, and that ye may stand before the son of man. But what things are they?
O read and consider that singular Chapter, and see the fruit of Prayer. False
Christ's shall come, and deceive, to their endless woe, verse. 8.
thousands and thousands, but pray we to God against this fearful fall, and
we shall escape* Wars and seditions shall be heard of, and seen, dreadful
and terrible, 9.
but pray to God and they shall not hurt us, no not once make us justly afraid.
Though it be nation against nation, 10.
kingdom against kingdom: 11.
though the earth shake, and tremble in diverse places, and we see hunger, and
pestilence, and fearful things, and great signs in heaven above us, yet pray
we to GOD our guide and strength, and we shall escape. If hands be laid upon
us, persecuted and taken, 12.
and delivered up to the Sinagogues, and Prisons, and brought before Kings and
Rulers for the Lord Jesus sake, pray we to the same our gracious God, and his
word is past, 13.
these shall all turn unto us for a testimonial, and not hurt us. If we want
learning, knowledge, or utterance: 14.
so that we fear of a truth any weak defense, pray we to him, that in
weakness is strong, and the power he has promised, both of speech and
knowledge, shall bind the very devil, that he cannot stir, 15.
and with the head the members, with the Captain the Soldiers, with their
life all the limbs, so that not all the kingdom of perdition, if their force
could be joined against the poorest man or woman of us, that ever shall
profess Jesus, shall be able to resist or speak against us. Let our dear
Parents that brought us into this world, 16.
seek by cruel vyolence in hatred against a truth to throw us out of the same
again, and our own brethren, kinsmen and friends betray us, and kill us, if
it please God, we being hated even of all men for the Lord Jesus sake, 17.
pray we still steadfastly unto our God, and if he be the Lord that has made
the heaven and earth, whose word is truth, and abides for ever, there shall not
one hear of our heads perish, 18.
19.
but in patience comfortablie we may possess our souls. 20.
Let Jerusalem be besieged, that is, our native land and country, our towns
and houses in which we dwell, a token that desolation is near: 23.
let the heavy woman so great with child begin to sigh for her self, and
weep with woe for her dear birth within her, with shiuering shrinkes, to
think of bloody Spear to spit her sprauling babe upon, let our nation and
people disobeying the Lord in the time of peace, fall upon the edge of the
sword, and be carried captive into all Countries, 24.
and our stately Cities, Castles and Towers be trodden unto dust, yea let the
Sun, 25.
and the Moon, and all the Stars of Heaven threaten by their fearful
signs, the approaching dreadful wrath of God to men, trouble and perplexity
be upon earth, the Sea and the waters rore, and men's hearts fail them for
fear, 26.
looking after those things that shall come upon the world, the very powers of
heaven being shaken, and the Son of man appearing in the Clouds with mighty
power and glory, 27^
yet let us pray with a cheerful voice, and send out our faith to the Lord of
life, as we are ever bidden, and amidst all these fears and terrors, otherwise
to be trembled at day and night, we shall have no cause at all to fear, but
even contrariwise, 28.
to lift up our heads toward heaven, as men and women behoulding with eyes
their eternal deliverance, everlasting comfort, and unspeakable joy drawing
near unto them, to remain with them, and they in it for ever. O prayer then
available with GOD, and profitable to men. There needs no more to declare
the fruit of it; and yet much more remains to be spoken. For when in these
dreadful times many shall have their hearts oppressed with surfeting and
drunkenness, 34.
and the cares of this life, and so that day of death and dome come upon them
unawares, Prayer in watching shall preserve Gods chosen, that they shall be
counted worthy to escape all these things, and not only so, but as follows,
with comfort, even to stand before the Son of man, that is, in cheer, in
joy, in spiritual motions of heart, not to be expressed by man, to enter into
the heavenly and everlasting tabernacles. Lord then for thy mercy, teach us to
pray, that these blessings promised to the same may light upon us. I stay the
course that I might go on in, for the profits of Prayer are innumerable. It
sanctifies our mirth, it sanctifies our meats, and they are neither of them
holy, Iam. 5.13. 1. Tim. 4.5.
but in this. We wake and we work, Psalm. 4.8.
we sleep and we rest in peace, if we faithfully pray. If we pray with Jacob,
Genesis 28.20.
we prosper with Jacob in our journey: If we pray with David, we have our heads
covered with David in the day of battle. Psalm. 140.7.
If we pray with the father, we have our son healed: Mar 9.25.
If we pray with the mother, Math. 15.28.
we have our daughter healed: If we pray with the master, we have our
servant healed. Math. 8.13.
And what should I say? Cornelius praying, has Peter sent unto him, Act. 10.
and the holy Ghost powered upon him: Anna praying, has a child given her: 1.
Sam. 1.10.
and to conclude, there is no end of the tale, nor measure of Gods mercies, if
we speak of the fruits of Prayer. This knew well the godly Father S.
Chrysostom, Homil. 1. of praying to God.
and therefore he says: if thou desire to live single, or in holy Matrimony
to Gods content, pray: if thou desire to bridle anger, and with meekness to
be familiar, pray: if thou desire to be free from the fret of envy, or to
do any thing that belongs to a godly life, pray, and pray heartily, pray, It
is no small commendation of prayer that the Spirit teaches it. Romans 8.26.
and pray often, pray, and pray faithfully, and the Lord shall grant thy
prayer. For it is armatura inexpugnabilis, an armor of proof against all and
every assaulting darte of the devil or his members and means whatsoever. So
profitable is Prayer we see. The Lord in mercy give us spirits.

Amen I beseech him. Yet see the poison of Satan in his members against this
fruitful exercise: for there want not wits in this wicked world, that dare
dispute against it, and ask how it may be that we should fitly ask of the
Lord by prayer any thing, since without asking, and before asking, he knows
what we want and would have, yea so fully knows he all things, that he
needs no remembrauncer to put him in mind of any thing: and therefore why
should we ask or ever pray, but leave the Lord to himself to give what
pleases him.

Truth it is that thus they reason, but I trust you see the impiety of their
speech, and the blindness of their hearts: for it is an old rule and a true,
that Subordinata non pugnant inter se. Things that are comprised one in an
other are not contrary one to the other: and such are Gods foreknowledge of
all things, and our asking notwithstanding by prayer what we want. For in his
own person expressly in his word he has commanded, notwithstanding all
this his divine knowledge of every man's estate, which he knew himself to
know as well as we, yet nevertheless that we should pray to him in our
needs, and ask if we would receive at his hands. And therefore you see this
is a marvel by the witness evident of the Lord himself, Math. 7.7. John.
4.2.
and our Prayer is not taken away in any respect by the Lords knowledge, but
they employed one under the other, stand and agree well both together. Then if
you look Psalm. 139.
For David confessing of the Lord, that he did not only know his wants, but his
very thoughts, and that long before. Yet nevertheless for all this knowledge
in God, uses his own duty commanded, and prays for his wants. Yea our
savior Christ (which may stand for many proofs) in the same chapter, Math.
6.11.
bids us call upon our heavenly father by Prayer for our daily bread, that
is, for all necessities, and yet tells us, that he knows already and
before that we have need of these things. Verse. 32.
Elias the Prophet promised Achab rain, not rashly upon his own head, but as
privy to the Lords purpose, 1. Kings. 18.42.
and certified of his will, and yet for all that, most earnestly prayed he,
crouching to the earth, and his face betwixt his knees, and seven times sent
his servant toward the Sea for it. Therefore let us know, and so conclude,
although the Lord understand most fully and perfectly, what we would have,
before we pray, yet has himself appointed this means to obtain at his
hands, notwithstanding that his knowledge, and therefore we must use it ever
notwithstanding the same, knowing that what his wisdom has joined as
standing and agreeing together, those, man's wisdom, nay man's folly, or Satan's
malice may not separate, as disagreeing, and one frustrating the use or profit
of the other. And again, that is no end of our Prayer at any time, to
admonish God of

Truth it is, I thank GOD, and so let it fall. Yet give me leave to propound
an other to the same purpose, but I trust of no greater force. They say those
things are not to be asked even of a man, much less of the Lord, which he
willingly and of his own accord is purposed to give: for that were not to
honor, but rather to dishonor, by granting where no need is. Esa 65.24. Psalm.
21.4.
But whatsoever we want the Lord is ready to give, and therefore we should
ask nothing.

In deed of no greater force at all. For it offends even as the other did,
in reasoning of things subordinate one under the other, and agreeing well
together as of things contrary to themselves, and therefore taking away one an
other. The willingness of God to grant our desires takes not away our
Prayer, but strengthens our faith to ask cheerfully, and therefore even then
when he says you shall have, Math. 7.
he says also ask by Prayer: then when he says I will hear, Psalm. 50.
he says also call upon me: and even then when he promises to be near, yet
he mentions to whom, Psalm. 145. Joel. 2.32. Psalm. 34.16.
namely to such as pray unto him. And the eyes of the Lord are upon the just,
and his ears are open to their Prayers. Therefore even the Lord himself being
judge, his purpose to grant takes not away our obedience to ask: his ready
willingness to give, even before we ask, crosses not at all his commandment
nevertheless to ask, and so neither our bounden duty to perform the same
continually. But by all those places of his fatherly readiness, and most
merciful willingness to do us good, as I have already said, our faith is
strengthened, our hearts encouraged, his goodness showed, and our obedience in
(...) Prayer confirmed greatly, not any way subverted or taken away.

Well then, see now an other devise of Satan against this holy exercise. If we
cannot take it away out of the use of me^ by these conclusions, let us try
another way to make it vain, and not only so to our selves, but even hateful
and abominable to the Lord. Let us ascribe unto it merit of remission of
sins, justification with God, many marvelous virtues above the dignity
allowed in the word, and finally to salvation. And to this end let us allege
all the places of Scripture wherein Prayer is commended highly, Mark. 9.29.
Psalm. 55.17. etc.
as if they meant thus highly.

Indeed you say very true, such there are, and thus Satan persuades. But alas
what should we stand upon it. It is one thing to be a means and an other
thing to be a cause of salvation and mercy. Gods children acknowledge no cause
of their life with God, 1. Cor. 1.31.
but Christ Jesus only in whom freely the Lord has loved us: but means many,
as hearing, reading, fasting, 2. Cor. 5.18.
and what we speak of praying. Our prayers are acceptable to our GOD, but
never for them selves, but for Christ. They are available also with God, but
by and for faith in Christ, whereof earnest Prayer joined with fasting is a
token. And therefore if we obtain of God never so great matters by Prayer, our
Prayer yet is no cause of that, but only a means. So then a foolish and false
argument it is to cut it off, that thus reasons of a cause that is not a
cause indeed.

I see well then the foundation of Prayer, even in nature. I see the necessity
of it in respect of God, our selves, and our brethren: I see the marvelous and
exceeding profit of it, and lastly the malice of Satan against it in both
extremities, either seeking to deface it as not required: or if he cannot that
do, in ascribing unto it above that which is lawful, thereby to make it
fruitless with God. Will you now adioyne any more?

It shall not be amiss also for us to consider those other points which be
usually considered in these treatises, and comprised for memory in an old
verse, to wit: Affectus, causae, quis, per quem, quidque petendum. That is:
With what affection we must pray. For what causes. To whom. Through whom. For
what.


And concerning the first, the Scripture teaches us that we must pray with a
zealous spirit, Affection required in prayer.
with heart, with soul, and with all the power within us, not with cold
affection and lip labor. The Apostles speech of the Spirit may give this
rule of Prayer in it ever to be observed, Romans 12.
be fervent in Prayer. The Lord himself by his Prophet complayneth that the
people cried not in their hearts unto him, Hose. 7.14.
that is, with this affection that we speak of. And the ancient Ceremonies of
lifting up of hands remembers us thereof. The spirit of God witnesses it of
his children, as of Anna, she prayed and wept sore, 1. Sam. 1.10.13.
troubled in her mind that her lips shook withal, albeit she spoke in her
heart. Of Moses that he cried unto the Lord, and yet he spoke never a word,
Exo. 14.15.
but so vehement was his spirit and so fervent his inward powers of Soul and
heart, that it was like a shrill shrike in the ears of the Lord. This heat of
heart, it is glorious before the Lord and profitable to us: but it is not at
our commandment, we cannot have it when we will, the Lord has reserved it
to himself to give, when, and where, and to whom, and in what measure it
pleases him. As it is witnessed unto us by the Apostle saying: The Spirit
helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought: Romans 8 26.
but the Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs, which cannot be
expressed. That is, we are not able of our selves to pray with that
feruentnesse of spirit, that heat of heart, such motion of mind, such trust,
such faith, such sighs, such power, such affection, in a word, every way as is
convenient to the Majesty of God, unless we be enabled by his Spirit: and
therefore in mercy he supplieth with the same as pleases him. Nevertheless,
means there are in the word noted unto us, which work under the blessing of
this Spirit to this effect in measure in us: and therefore if this affection
be required in us they be also necessary as helpers to ye same.

Helps of affection.
The first is a true consideration of our own unworthiness and indignity,
such and so great as that there is no mercy due unto us: Such as makes us
with the Publican not to will to lift up our eyes to heaven, Luc. 18.13.
but to knock our breast and cry in humble sort, Good Lord be merciful to
me a sinner. Such as makes us with the Centurion to say, Lord I am not worthy
that thou should come under my roof, Math. 8.8.
and therefore say but the word and my servant shall be well. Such again as
makes us with Daniell to say in smarting woe, Dan. 9.18.
O Lord we do not present our supplications before thee for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. Psalm. 133.2.
With David, O Lord enter not into judgment with thy servants, for no flesh
living shall be justified in thy sight. With Esaias: Esaias. 64.6.
We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as
filthy cloutes, and we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like the
wind have taken us away. With Jeremy: Iere. 14.7.
O Lord though our iniquities testify against us, deal with us according to
thy name, for our rebellions are many, and we have sinned against thee. And
finally, such as may justly make our souls vexed within us when we think of
it, our bodies to bow down and go crookedly, and our eyes to fail, Baruch.
2.18.
as he speaks. This low conceit, but true conceit of our selves,
marueilously quickneth up our spirits, and therefore is ever to be used, and
our souls prepared thereunto by some fit meditation of it before Prayer. This
wanted the proud Pharisie, and therefore his prayer shows no zeal nor heat,
as the humble heart that comes creeping to the Lord in humility, confessing
grief for sin, and speaks as one does to him that has no cause to give,
but great and many to withholde. Ever therefore be careful of this, to keep
upon your soul, as upon a tree that you would have grow broad and large,
but not high, a weight of her own true unworthiness, and certainly you shall
find the power of it, in quickening affection when you pray, great.



view of the want of any under means in this world to compass our desire
by, or if we have any, as friends, riches, and such like, yet the great
inabilitie that is in them all, unless the Lord say Amen, give his blessing
to their labors, and prosper their endeavors for us. For thus again will
grow a feruentnesse in our affections, and a right godly zeal in our prayers.
Yea the more empty that we come before the Lord in this respect, the more life
has our Prayers always. For he that in truth doubts his help at home to
be sufficient, his suite for relief abroad will be more earnest. He that
secretly shrinketh to the conceit of the power of any second cause whatsoever
to give him any good by, and cleaves not only to the Lord, in a Christian
renounciation of all the means in the world, further then he will vouchsafe
to bless them, his Prayer shall be cold, and more frosen, as resting upon
other matters as well as upon his prayer, and if he speed, never so thankful
to the Lord neither. Therefore you see a third care of the child of God, if he
will have his prayer pithie, even to empty his heart of al such earthly bondage
as we have spoken of, to go to his knees, either without them in deed, or
without any trust and confidence in them, further then the Lord shall
strengthen them to him and for him.

A fourth, is an eye to the sweet promises Math. 7.
Ask and you shall have: seek, and you shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. Yea, Io. 16.23.
whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you. Call upon
me and I will hear you: Psalm. 5^. Math. 11.28. Joel. 2.32.
Come unto me and I will refresh you: Whosoever shall call upon the Lord shall
be saved. And a thousand such like. Muse upon them till the fire kindle within
you, and then speak with a spirit to so sweet a God as so cheareth his
children to pray heartily. And remember it often what once was said: Psalm. 5.7.
I will come into thy house even upon the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy
fear will I worship toward thy holy temple. The multitude of Gods mercies
make a sweet entrance into the house of Prayer: yea, say you with David
joyfully and comfortably, In Gods word will I rejoice, Psalm. 156.10.
in the Lords word will I comfort my self, in God have I put my trust, I will
not fear what man can do unto me.

Other meaner helps also there be of affection not to be contemned of the
godly, as to speak and pronounce our Prayers with words: for sometimes our
weakness is great and our minds begin to stray from our Prayer conceived in
silence, and then it shall be good to speak out, yea even to cry out that
which we but thought before, to the end that so we may stay a starting mind
and bring it to the sound of the tongue. This has been a wisdom of the
godly ever, and a means as we read to help them. The Profit David says. I
cried to the Lord with my voice, Psalm. 142.1.
and I said, verse. 6.
thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living. So that he uses
the pronountiation of word, and happily even for this cause that we speak
of. Saint Augustine says Deuotio nostra voce excitatur, our devotion and
affection is stirred up and and quickened by the voice. And experience
serves for longer proof in this matter. The gestures of body, as kneeling,
lying prostrate upon the earth, knocking of the breast, and covering the face,
or turning to the wall, lifting up the eyes, and such like, they are helps
also of affection. Yea then are they lawful, and right in deed, when they
serve to this purpose in sincerity, and not to any outward show in
hypocrisy. And thus much of them.

Now on the other side, as these be helps under God to quicken up our Spirits
in prayer, if we be dull, and to make us pray zealously and earnestly: so are
there impediments also that hinder us and make us that we cannot pray with
such affection as we ought. As the contraries of these that I have spoken of, A
proud heart puffed with conceit of merit, an ignorance, or at lest not a through
consideration of the thing, or things we beg, a leaning to second causes
overmuch, a dulnes in the seeking of Gods promises, and such like, which I may
not now over again follow at large. One great let only will I touch, and so
conclude this point, and that is ignorance of the speech or tongue wherein we
pray: Which I call even a great let, because it not only hinders our
affection and zeal, but otherwise dangerously hurts us by keeping from us a
singular fruit of our prayer as will appear.

This great folly then of many in ye world that delight to pray in a strange
tongue, and not only so, but boldly (to say no worse of them) defend that
they can pray with as right an affection thus, as otherwise, has first God
against it in his word most plainly by the voice of Saint Paul the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 14.
who says flatly, no man hears their prayers that are so made, Verse. 2.
no man hears them I say and mark the words well. The Apostle meant not but
that the sound of that unknown voice entered into their ears, but because it
entered without understanding, therefore it was in truth then, is now, and ever
shall be no hearing in deed, that is no good hearing, no profitable hearing, no
commanded or allowed hearing. And therefore if it be a duty enjoined of God
that his people should be made partakers of common prayers by hearing what is
said, then is it also evident that they ought not to be in a strange tongue,
forasmuch as in this place the Spirit of truth tells us, such prayers are
not heard at all in deed, as are not understood when they are heard.

Secondly if the pipe or harp be not verse. 9.
do well.

ought not to be spoken into the wind that is in vayn. But so they are (says
the Lord) if they be made in a tongue that is not understood, and therefore
they ought not to be so.

Fourthly, neither should the minister be verse. 11.
But except we know the power of the voice, says the Scripture, that is,
except we understand what is prayed, that is so, namely both he a Barbarian to
us and we to our selves: therefore the tongue should not be unknown to us.

Fifthly, if we pray in a strange tongue verse. 14.
and that ought not to be so. verse. 15.
But when we pray we ought to pray with our Spirit and with our understanding
also we ought to sing with our Spirit and with our understanding also.
Therefore we may not pray in a strange tongue.

Sixthly our prayers ought to be so made that all the company may answer Amen,
but if they be in a strange tongue says the same Scripture again, he that
occupies the place of the unlearned can not so answer, Verse. 16.
because he knows not what thou say, Therefore they ought not to be so.

Verse. 10.
yet had he rather in the Church speak five words with his understanding that
he might also instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue.
And what care think we shall be in us to follow his practice? Shall he be the
dear one of the Lord in so doing, and we so also in having no such care nor
conscience, but even flat contrary, to speak rather ten thousand words that
we do not know, neither profit others by, than five that do both? Let us
consider it, and setting aside all froward wilfulnes and damnable prejudice of
a truth, take heed betimes. Prayer is a sweet obedience to the Lord if it be
aright, make it not a disobedience to his will your self by doing it wrong.
Many are the blessings promised to it, turn not those blessings into a curse
by a stubborn heart that will not be instructed. verse. 8.
Lastly we edyfie not our selves by such unknown prayers, which yet we ought
to do, as well in our private exercises, as the public minister his whole
people in a public place, all things being commanded of God privately and
openly to be done to edifying, verse. 26.
and the reason being all one, namely our benefit and theirs before the Lord,
therefore we should not use them.

Thus is the Lord against it, and his word. Let us now consider men, and in
them either their practice or their judgment, and see if this kind of praying
may be warranted that way. Concerning the first then, The practice of the godly
against this error.
may we find any Patriarch or Prophet, any servant of God whatsoever, either in
the old Testament, or new, that used thus to pray in a strange tongue? No,
no, it is well known that from the very creation of man, till the corruption
of Rome infected the Church, there is not one to be produced, that either
being a minister of common prayer, made it in a tongue that the people knew
not, or being a private man, prayed privately he wist not what? Not one Prophet,
not one Apostle not one man or woman of holy memory in the book of God, that
ever used it. And yet they prayed as often, as much, as Zealously, as
fruitefully, and as commendably, as we I trow, yea happy we, if we were like
them. And is it nothing to leave the example of all these Saints, and to go a
course that not one of them ever practiced? Is there like comfort in a thing
never used, and ever used of gods chosen? How then are sum bewitched in
small matters to rely upon examples, and ever to be spying and prying into
the ways and works of weaker men ten thousand parts, and yet in this matter
so weighty and great, to cast behind them the practice of such great ones, and
never to regard it? Their judgments against it.
for the public prayers of the Church it has ever moved me since I knew
it, what I see recorded, by indifferent men in this behalf: Cap. 13. ad finem.
Saint Hierom speaking of the Pomp of Paulaes funeral in his Epitaphe he made
of her, and showing what co^curse was to it of people of diverse languages,
plainly lays it down, that every one had the tongue they understood in
their common prayers, and not a strange one. And yet none of the^ was neither
Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, which some count only holy, but the Syriacke. De
catechiz^dis rudibus. Cap. 9. ad finem.
Saint Augustine willing the Priests to apply their studies to correct the
errors of their Latin speech in those days, adds this reason: vt populos ad
id quod plane intelligit dicat, Amen: That the people to that which they fully
understand may answer Amen. Note the custom of the Church then, and the
faithful care of this godly father for the people, that no let might be to
their understanding of the common prayers. The same Father again in an other
place saying that we need not any utterance of words always to pray unto
God, De Magistro, in principio.
because the Sacrifice of Justice is sanctified in the Temple of the mind and
in the secret chambers of the heart, by and by obiecteth to him self, wherefore
then does the Priest lift up his voice, and pray aloude in the open assembly
in the Church, and then answers to the same thus: Not that God, but that men
may hear him, and that the people by the sound of his voice and understanding
of his meaning, may be put in mind, and by consent joined together, and lift
up to God. Aug. de doctrina Christiana lib. 4. cap. 16.
Again he says, Quid prodest loquutionis integritas, quam non sequitur
intellectus audientis? Cum loquendi omnino nulla sit causa, si quod loquimur
non intelligunt, propter quos, vt intelligant, loquimur. What profit is there
in speech be it never so perfect, if the understanding of the hearer cannot
attain it. For there is no cause why we should speak at all, if they
understand not what we speak, for whose sake we speak that they may
understand us. Again, Men's mea sine fructu est, Aug. in Genes. ad literam.
lib. 11. cap. 8.
hoc ait, quando id quod dicitur non intelligitur. My mind is without fruit,
This the Apostle S. Paul says, when the thing that is spoken is not perceived.
And again, Si intellectum mentis remoueas, nemo aedificatur audiendo quod non
intelligit. Set apart the understanding of the mind, and no man has fruit or
profit of the thing that he peeceiueth not. Quid opus est iubilare and non
intelligere iubilationem, In Psalm. 99.
vt vox nostra sola iubilet and cor non iubilet. Sonus enim cordis intellectus
est. What needs us to sing if we understand not what we sing, to sing with
our voice and not with our heart. For understanding is the sound or voice of
the heart. These are most plain testimonies, and worthy consideration, if we
desire a truth.

Origin again very plainly says of such things as are read in the Church.
Non fuisset necessarium legi haec in ecclesia, nisi ex his aedificatio aliqua
audientibus praeberetur? It should never need to read them unless some
edification should come by them to the hearers. But without understanding we
know not what edification is, and therefore Origens judgment is openly this,
that if Scriptures and prayers should be in a strange tongue then it were as
good that there were never any at all of either of the^. O mark it. Cyprian
next as flatly again, Not the sound of the voice, but the mind and
understanding must pray unto the Lord with pure intention. In Leuit. cap. 7
But my understanding to pray and the language to be strange to me that I pray
in, is impossible, therefore far was Cyprian from this folly. Saint
Chrysostom again the like, De orat Dom.
and many mo, that I spare to name in this brief treatise. The favorers of
Rome in latter days saw this truth, and yielded their testimonies plainly
for it. Lyra and Thomas of Aquin spare not to avouch it, that the common
service in the Primative Church was ever in the common vulgar tongue, that the
people did understand. That earnest and as some think, strong defender of the
contrary to this, by the power of a truth is drawn to these very words:
that in the Primative Church the prayers were made in a common tongue known to
the people, Diuisio. 28.
for cause of their further instruction, and it was so necessary to be: and
again in an other place: It were good the people having humble and reverent
hearts understood the service, Diuisio. 31.
I deny it not. And whereas they say they can as heartily, as earnestly, and
with as vehement an affection pray, although they know not what they say, may
they not see their own Doctor say the contrary flatly, and a man of no common
learning? Lyra in 1. Cor. 14.
Si populus intelligit orationem Sacerdotis, melius reducitur ad Deu^, and
deuotius respondet, Amen. that is, If the people understand the prayer of the
Priest, they are the better brought unto God, and with more devotion far,
answer, Amen. Now there is the same reason of their devotion openly, and of our
own privately. May they not see it plainly affirmed. Aug. prefat. in Psalm.
Quo modo potest debite Deo psallere qui non intelligit quid psallit? How can
he rightly sing unto God that understands not himself what he sings? as
if he should say it cannot be, it is impossible, and not to be hoped for.
Last of all is it not an old saying grounded upon true reason, Jgnoti nulla
est cupido: there is no desire of the thing that we know not? and no desire I
think is a very cold affection. Let us end then this point of the practice
and judgment of men with that decree of Pope Innocent the third in the Council
of Laterane, about the year of our Lord 1200. that in such Cities as should
be concurse of people of diverse nations, the Bishop should take order that
every people should have a Pastor of their own language, which might serve
them, and minister unto them in the same. A thing very worthy observing, that
even with the Pope himself the truth of this cause, that prayers ought to be
understood, should prevail.

We have seen then God, and we have seen men against this great corruption
and hinderance of our prayer, and men both in practice and judgment. What if
we join now for conclusion of all very open reason against it? It may do
good. For truly even this strikes so deep in in this behalf, as any
Christian heart may fear ever to come before the Lord with prayer in this
order. For it is not one, and a very singular use of our prayers, to
strengthen and frame our faith by the experience of mercies asked and received
at our God his hands. It working ever in us a trust, an hope, yea, an
unspeakable comfort, that he will be as he has been, being no changeling in
himself, and that whom he has heard so graciously, so readely, and so often,
with grant of their desires, those he will ever hear, and still hear in
their right and lawful prayers, to the praise of his mercy, and the joy of
them his servants in their distresses? Now this singular use and profit as I
say of prayer are they deprived of, that use to pray in a strange tongue, for
if any particular benefit be given them, they know not whether it has come
at their entreaty, or no, because they know not what they have prayed for, and
so receive they no sure and certain testimony of the Lords help and
goodness to them, to the comfort of their hearts at all times when they shall
need again to call upon him. And therefore if this be a blessing to have true
experience, nay thousands of experiences of the Lords sweet favor to us,
then must it needs be a dangerous thing to our faith, that robs us of all
and every trial of our God. Therefore let but even reason speak in this cause,
and it will conclude unto our consciences thus, that forasmuch as petitions
known of us to be made by us to the Lord, and of him granted to us, (which
is done when we understand our prayers) do strengthen our faith in comfort
ever to rest upon the Lord, and the contrary (which is when we pray in a
strange tongue) does weaken the same, and rob us of that comfort that grows
by experience, therefore it is profitable to pray in the one, and most
dangerous to pray in the other. Again, is not the remembrance of Caligulaes
fact in this respect most fit, and presses any honest mind in the world with
sight of fruitless labor in such kinds of prayers? Caligula the Emperor set
golden leaves before his guestes, and all other services in form of meats of
beaten gold, and bad them eat. But their dainties were too hard, and for all
yt glorious show they rose an hungered. And does not this Romish practice in
very like sort set before the people of God, whose souls are dear to ye Lord
that made them, a glistering service of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and bid
them feed? But alas what should they feed upon? A goodly show there is to stir
up wonder and astonishment in the people, but to receive or taste of, either to
move the^ to repentance, or to comfort and quiet their conscience they have
nothing. And how passing well speaks Austen in like case, Quid prodest clauis
aurea, si aperire quod volumus no^ potest? De doctrinae Christiana. lib. 4.
cap. 11.
aut quid obest lignea, si hoc potest: quando nihil quarimus nisi patere, quod
clausu^ erat? What avails a golden key, if it cannot open yt we would have
opened? Or what hurts a wooden key, if it be able to open? seeing we desire
nothing but that yt thing that is shut may be opened? The wrong is apparent to
the church of God, though I say no more, but it passes a frenzy for men and
women in their private prayers to deal thus with themselves. For I trust to
refresh their hungry bodies they would set no such hard meat as gold before
themselves: and skilleth it not how it feeds the soul that should feed it,
so it be glorious to the show? O consider it, and whosoever seek to starve us,
let us not be guilty of our own spiritual death our selves. Again, if ye brute
beasts or birds discover this folly let us not refuse them. If they could
speak, as Democritus ye philosopher sometime thought, and as Lactantius a
Christian writer seems partly to say, they do: yet being birds and beasts
and void of reason, they would not speak they know not what. The very sense of
nature therefore is against this folly. But let their sound be a sound without
sense and understanding, as Plinies raue^ that could say Aue Caesar Imperator,
All hail Emperor Caesar, or the Cardinals Popiniay that could pronounce
distinctlie all the Articles of the Creed, and yet knew not what they said:
shame we not to be like them? Having the gift of reason given us of God above
all the creatures that he made, to distinguish us from them in the rule of all
our actions? Let the old Father Saint Augustine speak both for the cause and
for this reason. In Psalm. 18. Exposu. 2.
Quid hoc sit quod precati sumus, intelligere debemus, vt humana ratione, non
quasiauium voce cantemus. Nam et meruli, et psitaci, et corui, et picae, et
huiusmodi volucres, saepe ab hominibus docentur sonare, quod nesciunt. Scienter
autem cantare naturae hominis diuina voluntate concessum est. What this is that
we have prayed, we must understand, that we may sing with reason agreeable
to a man, and not chatter with voice as birds do. For Owsels, and Popiniayes,
and Ravens, and Pies, and such like birds are often taught of men to pronounce
that which they do not understand. But to sing with knowledge is given by God
to man's nature. What testimony plainer, or reproof more weighty may there
be. But I forget my self, and purposing but to touch matters, make too long
abode in this thing. Conclude we the^ with an effectual thought in our hearts
as men and women that are not sworn against the Lord, and past all recovery,
whether ever any person in this world dared, or we our selves durst speak to
an earthly man for a suit of weight belonging unto this body in this world,
and know not what we say? O our care in the one, and carelesnes in the other,
our fear in the one even over tittles and sillables, and our want o^ feeling
in the other in large speech, what a witness will it bear against our souls
before the Lord in that dreadful day if we take not warning, and leaving
betimes the way that God condemns, man misliketh, reason reproves, and very
nature abhors, make choice of the other which in all these respects is
commended, and by no means can ever do harm. To day if we hear the truth
let us harden no hearts against it. Syrac. 5. verse. 6.
Say not God is merciful and I hope the best, for as he has mercy so
comes wrath from him when we are wilful. Woe to the ear that will not hear,
says the Lord often. Larger discourses may be liked of, if need be, this
serves for a taste of truth in a short treatise.

Yea Sir, but God understands what soever we say, in what tongue so ever we
speak, and that is sufficient.

No indeed. For can you affirm that prayer was ordained for God alone, or for
us, to make our moan to God by also? If it were so, and is so, then ought we as
well to understand our selves, as the Lord to understand us. And is there no
matter what we speak or how we speak, so that God understand us? Could we so
content our selves toward a man? Let the one teach us in the other, and let
desperate conclusions have deserved confusions before our eyes ever. We may as
well reason against speech of tongue, because God knows our hearts, as
against understanding of our prayers, because God understands them. But
enough is said.

Go you then to the causes of our prayers, which is next in order of our
verse.

These have in effect also sufficiently been touched already in this that
has been spoken. For we have heard causes in respect of God, in respect of
our selves, and in respect of our brethren. Which you may turn back unto
again, if you will, and peruse all causes urgent and weighty of our prayers,
Psalm. 50. John. 14.14. Psalm. 14. Luke 17.5. Math 6.13. verse. 11. Psalm. 18.1.
that are. God has commanded us to pray, God has promised to hear us if we
pray, threatens to punish us if we do not: our faith is then confirmed by it,
our dangers prevented, our wantes relieved, our love to the Lord increased,
and our lives ordered to the example of Gods chosen, ever with such like, and
these are great causes to use it.

What say you then of the third point concerning the persons to be prayed
unto?

I answer that only God and none but God is to be prayed unto, or as the
words of our faith and Creed has, one GOD in Trinity, and Trinity in
unity is to be worshipped. Which answer implying to things as you see, to
wit, that God is to be prayed unto, and only to be prayed unto. Let us see
the truth of them both out of the word. First then for the former it is
mentioned us in the law. Deutro. 6.13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and swear by his name. And in
another place, Chap. 10.20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and thou shall cleave unto
him and swear by his name. With a number other proofs in every place where
the word of serving the Lord, by a figure notes al duties due unto him in
general, and so implies this duty of prayer to him in special. Even as David
expounds it in his Psalm, saying, I will worship toward thy holy Temple,
and then expresses what one thing he means by that worship. I will praise
thy name because of thy loving kindness and truth, that is, by prayer of
thanksgiving and praise I will do my duty. So than this is plain, and more
plain I trust, than that it should need proof, that God is to be prayed unto.
If any would have reason as well as testimonies, the Apostle gives us a
strong one of contraries, when he touches the Galathians with it as a fault no
less than Idolatry, that they did service unto them which by nature were no
Gods. For it infers plainly our not offending, but most right doing, when we
do service unto him that is by nature God. But prayer is a service and a great
service, therefore due and most due to the Lord for ever. But it is not this
that any man doubts of, and therefore as I said, not to be stood upon. It
is the other that is a question, to wit, whether God only is to be prayed unto
or no, and therefore let us look to that rather and see the truth.

Concerning this then, is not the Scripture as plain, if we will not wilfully
be blind, as in the other? And does not our Savior Christ put it quite out
of doubt when he says: him only shall thou serve? Math. 4.10
Only to God, avouched by Christ, should stand against, not only to God,
affirmed by ten thousand worlds, if there were so many to do it. Esaias. 42.8.
But the Lord affirms further, that he will not give his glory to any
other: and it is a part of Gods glory in any Christian judgment I hope to
pray unto him, and to make him the fountain and welspring of all our good.
For, Call upon me (says the Lord) in the day of thy trouble, and I will
hear thee, Psalm. 50.
and thou shall glorify me. The law of God says, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me: which is an exclusion of all creatures in heaven and earth, from
partaking with the Lord in any worship we owe unto him as our God. The 17.
Chapter of the second book of Kings is a notable testimony of the Lords
abhorring any partners in this behalf. For there we may see, and hear him
witness it unto our souls, who must one day come to judge them in glory,
dreadful if we have not harkned, that not to fear him only, is not to fear
him at all, and not only to do after his laws and commandments, is not at
all to do after them. For our additions to the will of him overthrows utterly
that which we do thereof, because it is not as we should do it, that is,
only. My covenant and charge with the Israelites, says the Lord there, was
ever this that they should fear no other Gods, nor bow themselves to them,
nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them, but only me, which brought them out of
the land of Egypt with great power and a stretched out arm. And mark the
emphasis, Him fear. That is, as we may see plainly, him only, him ever, and
none but him. And therefore over and over he says it there, no other, no
other, and again the third time, no other. Which is proof sufficient, if we
be the Lords: yet is the Scripture fuller, and teaches us plainly that they
ever were and ever shall. be blasphemous Idolaters, Exodus 20. Psalm. 97.7.
Psalm. 115.3. Iere. 2.28. Act. 7.42. Deuteronomy. 4. Philip. 2.10.
injurious to the Lord that call upon any in their prayer but the same Lord
alone, whether it be in heaven, or in earth, or in the waters under the earth,
whether it be of gold, silver, or whatsoever. The places are known and you
may read them. It teaches us also that God has made us in his great mercy
Lords of all his creatures here, Genesis 1.26. Psalm. 8. Hebru. 1.7.
and even the Angels in heaven ministering Spirits to our good as shall please
him to appoint. But whatsoever we pray unto, we make it superior to us, and
having rule and power over us: and therefore if it be a creature we offend
grievously, perverting the Lords appointed course, and seruilely submitting
our selves to that which he in mercy has put under us, not over us in his
manner and order. Again, Romans 10.14.
that we cannot pray to any thing without belief in the same, but belief must
only be in God: and therefore prayer to no other. Wherefore it stands true
by the Judge of truth, the eternal word of God we now well see, that both
God with his worship of prayer is to be served and honored, and only God
also, with exclusion for ever of all others whatsoever they may be: and so we
end this question.

Your next is, through whom or by whom we must present and offer our Prayers
to God.

It is so: And it may be that in the former question you expected some fuller
speech of Angels and Saints that be dead, which many are of opinion may be
called upon, that yet greatly mislike that other folly or rather madness of
praying to inferior creatures. And if you did, it shall now be supplied, God
willing: for I did refer it of purpose hither, because no man justifies it
amongst us, if he have any cunning, that they are simply to be prayed unto as
helpers themselves of themselves, but as mediators to him that is able to
help, that is, God the Lord. Let us see then this, if even but thus much may
be given unto them.

And to begin at the beginning, we know it true that betwixt God and us a
mediator must needs be. For so says the Scripture. Ihon. 14.6. 1. Tim. 2.5.
Heb. 9.6.9.14.19.
No man comes to the father but by me: And as there is a God, so there is a
mediator betwixt God and man. The high Priest in the law by God assigned, a
figure and shadow of Christ, even in his office taught the same. And
conscience in us of our own unworthiness to appear before God, in our selves
and for our selves, driving us away from his presence, infers it necessarily
with it, that there must be a Mediator for us. But who this, is and ever was
through the malice of Satan working in his members, is become a question. We
say with the truth and his due glory, Christ Jesus our Lord, and he only. The
Papists say Christ, but not Christ only. Our warrants be many, and strong
against them. First express words: There is one God, 1. Timoth. 2.3
and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Mark the place
well, and see how first he determines the number, and says there is but one:
Secondly the person, who that one is, even the man Christ Jesus: Thirdly, why
there is but one, and no more: namely, because there is but one God, and no more.
Which is a singular proof, every one blushing to deny the one, and yet daring
to avouch the other. So then by this place it is got, that one GOD and but one
Mediator, and that Christ also: but mo mediators, mo Gods of necessity:
which they will not teach I hope plainly. Secondly, Ihon. 19.13. Ihon 16.4. etc.
all those places that appoint us to pray in Christ his name, making ever
mention of him, and only of him, without any addition of any other, do they
not with a mighty strength uphold our souls in this faith? For wanted the
Lord either power or will to add further truth, if there had been any such?
Or is he that says he will honor them that honor him, 1. Sam. 2.
become envious toward his Saints, and will not speak of their lawful honor,
if this were it, to pray to them?

3.
Thirdly, can any man be our mediator with God, 1. Ihon. 2.1.
but he that is just himself fully and perfectly before God? And was there
ever any such or can be to the worlds end, but only Christ? Is not any thing
whatsoever it be that comes not of faith sin? And comes faith any way
but from the word? Then either some porofe out of the word against Christ only,
and for others as well as Christ, or to believe it is sin and a death for
ever, without repentance. Dare we of our own heads take the honor of Christ
ascribed to him so expressly in his word, and give it to others equally with
him, without a warrant? It is written Gloriam meam alteri non dabo, I will not
give my glory to an other, and he that writ it shall judge us for breaking it,
unless we can show his dispensation. Sanctos defunctos pro nobis orare, ex
nulla scriptura Canonica edocemur. That the Saints departed pray for us, it
appears not in any Canonical Scripture. Et quamuis id faterer, non tamen ex
eo sequeretur, nos oportere sanctos defunctos inuocare. And although that it
should be granted, yet follow thereupon it would not, that we should pray unto
them: for assured by the word of God we cannot be that they hear our prayers.
And without that assurance, what comfort can we pray withal unto them. Wherefore
most grievously do they offend both against Christ and religion, that make
mediators beside him. We are plainly told that he makes intercession for
us, but we are not told of any others. 1. Ihon. 2.1.
I write unto you little children says Saint John, that you sin not, and if any
man do sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propitiatio^ for our sins. In which place of Scripture Saint
Austen notes two things. First how the Apostle does not say ye have an
advocate, Contra parmenian. lib. 2. cap. 8.
but we have an advocate teaching us thereby that there was never any so holy
but that he had need of Christ to be his mediator as well as others, and
therefore he did not separate himself from others in that respect, secondly
that he did not say ye have me an advocate with the father, but ye have Jesus
Christ the righteous: neque ego exoro pro peccatis vestris: neither is it I
that entreat for the pardon of your sins, but Christ. For had the Apostle John
said otherwise quis ^um ferret bonorum atque sidelium Christianorum? what good
and faithful Christian could have abidden it? Quis sicut Apostolum Christi,
and non sicut Antichristum intueretur? Yea who would have looked upon him as
upon an Apostle of Christ, and not as upon a very Antichrist. What a notable
testimony is this against other mediators beside Christ? and how happens it
that our Papists see it not, or think better not of it, if they see it? But I
pray you hear the same Father again in an other place. Quem inuenirem qui me
reconciliaret tibi? Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 42.43.
An eundu^ mihi fuit ad angelos? At qua prece? quibus sacramentis? Whom should
I find to reconcile me to thee? Should I go to the Angels? with what prayer,
with what sacraments? Have not many done thus, and bin deluded with the ill
Angel, transforming himself into an Angel of light. Verax ergo mediator
Christus, the true mediator therefore is Christ Jesus. And much more in those
two good Chapters to this purpose. These proofs may suffice in this brief
treatise, yet are there many more. Themselves have had, even by the mighty
power of an able God to give his truth passage, a true feeling of the safety
of the one, and the danger of the other, and their witness of it should truly
work both with them and us. With them to draw them to a sweet truth, and
with us to strengthen us where we stand, since the Lord has made his enemies
confess the soundnes of our faith. Cassander said it of his own practice,
Ego in meis precibus non soleo Sanctos inuocare, sed inuocationem dirigo ad
Deum ipsum, idque in nomine Christi: Hoc enim tutius existimo. I, says he, do
not use to pray to any of the Saints my self, but I direct my prayers to God
himself, and that in the name of Christ: for that I judge more safe. An other
of them again: Tutius and iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum, quam ad aliquem
Sanctorum spirituum. Both with more safety and comfort do I speak unto my
Jesus, than to any of the holy spirits. Is not this strange that our enemies
should confess our manner of praying to God alone by the mediation of his
beloved son both more safe and more comfortable, and for the same causes use
it so themselves, and yet teach others otherwise. Should faithful teachers
seek to save themselves and make no conscience to kill others. And is this to
deal faithfully with the Lords inheritance, the price of his sons blood, to
teach them to do, what not only by knowledge in judgment, but by inward
feeling of conscience, they find neither so safe nor comfortable, as the way we
use, and themselves also, is? Woe and woe again must needs be to such, as even
agninst their own feeling, direct the people committed to them. And what
madness is this in us if we suffer our selves by any subtle persuasions to be
led unto that which our teachers themselves refuse for their own parts to
join with us as in a course that is neither comfortable nor safe. Let us
hearken rather to the Apostle, truly aduertising us to suffer none such as
these, Coloss. 2.18.
neither any man living at his pleasure to bear rule over us by For these
angel worshippers blamed such of pride as would go straight to, God, and use
no other vndermeanes beside Christ, and said the other was humblenes of mind.
But such humility the Apostle condemns.
humblenes of mind, and worshipping of Angels, aduauncing himself in these
things which he never saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind, and holds
not the head etc. For assuredly if the consciences of all the^ were examined ye
delight in other mediators beside Christ, to offer up their prayers to GOD and
to speak for them, and true confession made of what they find, it would
appear to us all that this sin springs of none other root than of a
persuasion that Christ is not so pitiful and merciful, and willing to be
spoken unto as other Saints and creatures be. Which how blasphemous it is
against him, to give his creatures preeminence above him in any goodness, let
every feeling heart discern and judge. Far was the godly father from such
opinion of our Savior, when he made him all in all and with truth said of him
what all true Christians firmly believe and hold: Ambrose. de Isaac and
anima, lib.
Ipse os nostrum est, per quod patri loquimur, oculus noster per quem patrem
videmus, dextra nostra, per quam nos patri offerimus. He is our mouth wherewith
we speak unto God, our eye wherewith we see GOD, and our right hand
wherewith we offer our selves unto GOD. Quo nisi intercedente nec nobis nec
Sanctis omnibus quicquam cu^ deo est. But by whose intercession neither we nor
all the Saints in heaven have any thing to do with the Lord. And yt there
remain no scruple of fear in us to go to this gracious mediator ever when we
pray, consider it in the Scriptures, and consider it earnestly, that that
glistering reason which they use of our indignity to go to him at the first
(for so I call it because it seems so fair at the first vewe) never
discoraged any of the godly mentioned in the word ever, but even then when
they have seen and thought of their unworthiness most, they have yet gone unto
God and to no others for help. David when he saw that multitude of offenses
in him and himself so horribly defiled as that there remained almost nothing
of old David in him, that is of a good servant of God, never yet cried to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, nor to any of all the godly departed, Psalm. 51. Math.
3.
or Angels in heaven, but Miserere mei deus, have mercy upon me O God, and
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine iniquity. John Baptist,
though he saw himself unworthy to loose the very latchet of Christ his
shoone, yet taught he no other Mediator to God, neither had any other himself,
but only him. The good Centurio^, that in so true feeling both of himself, and
Christ, confessed he was not worthy, under whose roof the Lord should come,
yet with all that unworthiness was not feared from him to ask his help, even
for his servant. The poor Publican unworthy in his own eyes to look upon
the heavens, yet fears not to look upon his God, and to say, God be merciful
unto me a sinner, when he might have called upon Saints and Angels for mercy,
if it had been as good or better, as these mad men affirm. And so far was
this his doing from presumption, displeasaunt to God, and unseeming an
unworthy sinner, as that sentence is given by the Lord himself of it, it was
pleasant and acceptable to God, and he justified more than the other. Finally,
the Prodigal Son with the same mouth that confesses his indignity ever to
be counted a Son any more, yet calls upon his Father for pity, and not
upon any of his Fathers servant. Wherefore let us open our eyes and see the
truth, let us not harden our hearts, to day when we hear his voice, the
mediator betwixt God and man is thr man Christ Jesus, 1. Timoth 2.5.
and none but he: To. 8.32.
it is he that sits on the right hand of God and makes intercession for us,
1. Ihon. 2.
and there is no other. And if any man sin we have him our advocate and we
must know no other.

Yea Sir, but you know their answer in this matter, if they be charged, they
do not deny they say, but Christ and only Christ is mediator of
redemption, but not of intercession, and that which they ascribe to holy
spirits, it is only to make intercession for them.

Indeed they so answer, but alas in vain. For it is but a shifte devised
of Satan to deceive our souls by, if we receive it, and that may appear both
to them and us, if we have care to see the truth. For has it first any
warrant in the word? If it have let them produce it, if not, let them know
that even for this cause it faulteth, and we reject it. For if this be
granted that men may frame distinctions at their pleasures, there is not the
truth to be named but it may be overthrown. Wherefore this is one reason
against it, it has no warrant in the word. Secondly, was not the high Priest
in the law mediator in figure, both of expiation by sacrifices, and of
intercession by prayers? That is, more plainly, did not he both offer the
sacrifice and make prayer? And what was this but in shadow to show that so in
the new Testament both these things should be conjoined in one man also, even
the man Christ Jesus, and he that was mediator of redemption, should also be
mediator of intercession. To divide these the^, is to make the body not
answer to the shadow, neither the truth to the figure, which may not be. For
look whatsoever was typically showed Christ should do, that has he truly
done and performed, and to affirm otherwise is great impiety. Thirdly, these
two are both duties of the mediator, and in truth none can be a mediator,
unless he perform both these things, namely both redemption and intercession.
Now of two duties or parts of the office of a mediator, shall we make two
sorts of mediators. Truly it is even all one, as if because man consists of
body and soul, as of two parts that make but one whole, we should say there
are two sorts of men, one consisting of body, another of soul, which were a
trim speech. Or again, because the Prince has power over body and goods,
and they both are incident to the prerogative of his kingly office, therefore
of two things belonging to one person, we should make a distinction of persons,
and say, there are two sorts of Princes, one having power over body, and an
other having authority over goods. For even so it is in this matter of a
mediator, whose office consists in both these duties, as parts of the same,
to redeem the people and to make intercession for them. Remember also in the
scripture before named, how utterly Saint Austen disliked that Parmenian yt
heriticke, who in a certain place made the Bishop a mediator betwixt God and
the people, and how he said that if Saint John should have done so, no man
would have abid him, neither have looked upon him as upon an Apostle of Christ,
but as upon a very Antichrist, Truly Parmenian never thought the Bishop was a
mediator of redemption or salvation, and therefore even there, by that learned
father Augustine, is most plainly overthrown this foolish distinction which
we speak of. Lastly consider the Scriptures of God, and tremble to resist a
truth maliciously when it is plain. Does not the Apostle say, we have
boldness, Ephesians. 3.12.
and entrance with confidence by faith in him. If in any place it can be
truly showed that we have such entrance by any other, find it out, if not,
think of it. Consider advisedly of the 7. and 9. Chapters to the Hebrews,
Hebre. 7. and 9.
and see how strongly it is proved that these two offices of redemption and
intercession are joined, and so that the dignity, power, and efficacy of
Christ's intercession depends upon the merits of his redemption. Chap. 7.25.
Mark how he says it of Christ, that he ever lives to make intercession
for his. Find you where Saints or Angels live to make intercession for us.
Again, Hebre. 9.24.
that Christ is entered into the very heavens, to appear now in the sight of
God for us: show you the like of other mediators. Hebre. 7.28.
That Christ by the very oath of God is appointed to this office for his
children. Show you where God by oath has joined others in commission with him
Consider with your self how comfortable a promise it is of Christ, Ihon. 16.
that whatsoever we ask the father in his name we shall have it. Surely if
other were fellows with him in mediation of intercession, we should have like
promise, that whatsoever we ask in their names we should receive it, but this
is not so, and therefore a great difference betwixt our comfort that ask in
Christ's name, and theirs that ask in other names. I am the door, Ihon. 10.
says our Savior Christ, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and
shall go in, and go out, and find place, I am the way, the truth and the life,
Ihon. 14.
No man comes to the Father, but by me. Which were merely false, if there
were many mediators of intercession. For then so many mediators, so many means
to come unto God. Finally consider it even with your heart, that in the very
place where he says, there is one mediator, 1. Tim. 2. verse. 1. and 5.
and that Christ, he speaks of prayer, supplication and intercession, and
therefore most fully satisfies any Christian conscience that even of that
there is but one contrary to this vain and foolish distinction. Wherefore let
the fruit of all this be a reformed judgment, forasmuch as prayer to God
alone by Christ has warrant and comfort, and the other has none, but when God
shall awake us, most fearful discomfort, being a plain and dreadful robbery
of God of his true and due honor. If you can find as plain proofs and
proppes to your conscience that others be joined in this authority and office
with Christ to make intercession for us, as now you have seen that Christ is,
then hearken to them, but if not, think upon your God that shed his precious
blood for you, and he that has so loved you, and done so much for you, grudge
him not his due glory, neither match his creatures with him cheek by cheek,
without good warrant, for he is a jealous God of his honor, and has plainly
told us that his glory he will not give to another. Think upon your own poor
soul the greatest jewel that ever God committed to you, spill it not, kill it
not by pulling it from the life of all souls Christ Jesus. And be you even
fully resolved, that if the Angels or Saints appearing or living in this world
would never suffer their fellow servants to pray unto them, Apoc. 19.10.
surely now in heaven they like it not, but would have you only cleave to
Christ.

For what things may we pray. 1. Timo. 2.1.
I exhort, says the Apostle, that supplications, Iam. 5.13.16.
prayer, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. Math. 5.44.
For kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, To. 12.14.
for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. And again,
whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God, even the father by him, with many other places.
Justinius. Tertul. Clemens. Augustine. etc.
Chrysostom in his Liturgy and others have prayers then usually of the Church
publicly made, for seasonable weather, fertility of the ground, peace and
quietness, for such as traueiled by land or by water, for them that were sick,
prisoners, or captives, for Bishops and people, for infidels and heretics,
and such like. In conclusion, we are warranted to call upon the Lord our most
merciful God for whatsoever is requisite either to body or soul, 1. Tim. 4.8.
this life, or the estate to come. Which being more particularly laid down by
Christ himself in this prayer following, need not now so much to be stood
upon.

Something also of the place of prayer, if you will. As prayer it self either
is private or public, so is the place, both allowed and commended in the word:
of the first our Savior speaks, when he says: be not as the hypocrites,
Math. 6.5
for they love to stand in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
because they would be seen of men. Verily I say unto you they have their
reward. But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut
thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in
secret shall reward thee openly. Here by chamber are meant al private places
whatsoever, which the godly draw themselves into: to make their private prayer,
It being now lawful to pray every where and in all places, lifting up pure
hands without wrath or doubting, and no need to seek out Temples, 1. Tim. 2.8.
Churches or Chapels hallowed by men, as though no prayer were good but there.
Whether we be at home or abroad, in the City or in the Country, in our shops
working, or in our beds lying, whither we be sitting, standing walking, by day
or by night, early or late God is present and hears, and accepts the
prayers of any faithfully made, and in mercy he has made and consecrated our
bodies temples for the holy ghost. A great mercy and little thought of, yt we
are not tied to any places. For then might our streits have been such that we
could not come at them, and so consequently not have been able to pray to God
his liking, whereas now it is not, but wheresoever we are, we maydoe it if we
need, in bed sick, in prison bound, in persecution feared, and driven into
holes, so that we cannot come at the public places, we may pray and
comfortably pray, assured that even in all these places and others, whatsoever
our prayers made in faith, come before the Lord as incense, and the lifting up
of our hands is as an evening sacrifice. Of public place and prayers, Psalm.
14.1.
all those appoyntments of God of assemblies both in the law and the Gospel,
and his childrens careful and diligent keeping of the same. Exodus 29.38. Joel.
2.
This public place the Lord calls his house, Esaias. 56.7. Ihon. 2.16.
and the house of prayer. And the old father is not afraid to say thus of
them. Non aeque exoras, Chrysostom. de in incomprehensibli Dei natura Homil. 3.
cum solus Dom. obsecras, atque cum fratribus tuis. Est enim in hoc plus
aliquid, videlicet, concordia, conspiratio, copula aemoris and charitatis, and
Sacerdotum clamores. Praesunt enim ob eam rem sacerdotes, vt populi orationes,
quae infirmiores per se sunt, validiores illas complexae simul in coelos
euehantur. Thou do not so soon obtain thy desire when thou prayest alone
unto the Lord, as when thou prayest with thy brethren. For herein there is
somewhat more, the concord, the consent, the joining of love and charity, and
the cry of the Priests. For to that end the Priests are made overseers, that
they being the stronger sort, may take with them the weak prayers of the
people, and carry them up into heaven. Again, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 4.
Quod quis apud se ipsum precatus accipere non poterit, hoc cum multitudine
precatus accipiet. quare? quia etiam si non propria virtus, tamen concordia
multum potest. The thing that ae man can not obtain praying by himself alone,
praying together with the multitud he shall obtain. And why so? for although
not his own worthiness, yet the concord and unity prevails much. This
concord and unity in prayer is a goodly thing, and make a shrill shrike in
the Lords ear. S. Hierom did liken it to a thunderclap, Basil to the roaring
of the Sea. And by plain experience we know, that if one string of an
instrument make a sound, many stringes make a greater sound, if one stick
make a fire, many sticks make a greater, and an hoater fire. This true and
good consideration made ever the godly have a special care to frequent the
public places of prayer: that if themselves were dull, yet even the company
of others might stir them up, and they in common place might receive the
blessing of common prayer. Peter and John went together into the Temple to
pray. Act. 3.1.
And David remembering how he had wont to lead the people to the house of God,
Psalm. 42.
and have a multitude follow by his good example, when he was banished from
that comfort, and wanted that help so good against wants, he said his heart
was ready to break within him, and the grief was very great. A most notable
place for all men to think of, to stir them up to frequent places of prayer,
and especially for great men, whose examples prevail so mightily either to
good or evil. The companies will assemble, if they come, and follow them
carefully. As they did David: and that obedience of many shall be their crown
and true comfort, even as it was David's: What think you, if in his exile so
grievous and bitter, David's conscience had cried also against him, and said,
Thou never when thou had peace and liberty caredst for public meetings at
prayer and Sacraments, thou never gave any good example this way to the
multitude that watched what thou did and depended upon thee, but if thou
did pray, it was secret by thy self when thou should have been with
the congregation, and therefore since God gat no honor by thee, nor obedience
of his people by thy zealous forwardnes to go before them and to lead them to
the house of prayer, therefore now the Lord has laid thy honor in the dust and
raised up evil against thee. Do you think it would not nippe? yes truly
more then all his woe beside, for there is no torment to a conscience justly
accusing. Wherefore now it should be thought of by all nobles and gentlemen
and women, the marks that ignorant people frame themselves unto, that if ever
the Lord should do with us, as with David, or cast us in the bed of sickness, or
any way let us that we could not go, yet with David we might testify with
great comfort what had been, although then grieved as he, that it was not so
still. Confess. 19.13.
Austen was ravished with the songs of the Church and congregation met
together, and even wept in spiritual comfort conceived by that sweet consent
and heavenly matter, so jointly, and with such order and power made and uttered
to God in public meetings. And who has not felt his heart moved in a
congregation? Wherefore once again let these things work to a great regard of
public Church assemblies at times appointed. For the sanctifying of the
Sabbath requires it, if there were no more. And take heed of exceptions, for
they are most dangerous against a thing so renowned in the word and so
carefully observed ever of the godly. It is easy to deceive our selves with a
show of truth, if there be not even a conscience to suspect a plea before that
is made against the truth. Many things might be here touched, but who is
wise will consider what is openly touched, and beware.

Yet one thing more I pray you answer me in this matter, and that is
concerning the dead: may they be prayed for of us after they are departed?

No in deed, unless we will presume in zeal and affection above any warrant
of the word of God, and so pull upon us (as we have heard before) both sin
and the reward thereof. For we have no commandment any where to do it, being
yet expressly commanded to pray for the living, and to do such duties also
for the dead as are fit and allowable, as to bury them, to mourn moderatly
for them, and so as may become men and women that have hope of their
resurrection and life eternal, to be faithful performers of their last
wills, and such like: We have no example of any in the Canonical Scripture
that ever did it: we have no promise to be heard if we do it: no punishment
threatened if we do it not. And is not this a great nakedness of an action to
have none of all these: yea such a nakedness as should touch and press any
man or woman living that desire to please God by true and right obedience?
Truly it is. And we are not able to name any one thing that God has in good
liking to have his children do, but it either has all or the most of these.
It has a commandment, it has a promise, it has example, it has punishment
threatened if not done, etc. Wherefore let us consider it, and not be carried
away with vain shifts. We use to say, we do it for good will, and if it do
them no good it does them no harm. But is there any true goodwill which is not
allowed by God? Should not his liking and allowance be the rule and guide of
us and all our doings? If then we can find where he bids us show our
goodwill in this sort, use it and fear not: if we cannot, never think that
is goodwill which wants the Lords stamp upon it, unless you will affirm
that GOD condemns good duties to our Brethren, which God forbid. Then
consider again, that albeit it neither hurt nor profit them, yet in truth it
hurts us that do it, both because it is an action without warrant, and
therefore not of faith, and so sin: and because also it confirms and
proppeth up that lewd opinion of Purgatory, so derogatorie to the truth of God
and the comfort of his children. Therefore if we will show goodwill to our
friends departed, let us speak of them as men and women in the hands of God,
and in such comfort as that they need not any prayers of us, departed in a
true faith, and therefore now possessors of the promise, even of such joys as
no eye has seen, no ear has heard, neither any heart been able to conceive
of. For thus to hope of them is like friends to hope of them, and thus to
speak hurts not our selves. Our phrases may be as easily, God has had
mercy on him I trust, as GOD have mercy on him, he is with GOD I hope, he is
at rest from his labors, he has finished his course: or any such like. If we
will a little at first labor to forget a bad custom when it seeks to come
upon our tongues so readily: Then for the place in the Machabees, 2. Machab.
12.44.
our answer first touches the books, and then the matter. The books we except
against, as not Canonical, that is, of authority to build our faith and
obedience upon: and the reasons of our so doing, are such, as never have,
neither can be truly answered by any adversary. I pray you let it not grieve
you both to hear the^, and very diligently to mark them. First the holy Ghost
never uses to epitomize, contract, and profane men's works and writings, but
is able of himself to write and lay down whatsoever may be profitable for his
Church, and so has ever done. But ye second book of Machabees, 2. Machab.
2.29.
whence this place for Prayer for the dead is taken, is an abridgement wholly
out of the five books of Jason the Cirenian, as the author himself
confesses: and therefore not a writing or book of the holy Ghost. 2. Machab.
15.39.
Secondly, the Author of this book craves pardon for his wants, and says it
is as well as he was able to do: but thus never the holy Ghost at any man's
hands. For how should God crave pardon of man, and say it is as well as he was
able to do? Therefore this most mightily and evidently, unless we shut our
eyes and stop our ears against the truth, tells us, this book is not as
the rest of the Scriptures, whereon we safely stay our selves. Thirdly, in the
writings of the holy Ghost there are no contrarieties ever, but in these books
there are: and therefore no Scripture by inspiration from the holy Ghost.
Machab. 9.18. An. 152.
Will you think of some of them. In the first book it is said of Judas that
he was slain of Bacchides his army, and that Ionathas and Simon his brethren
buried him in his fathers Sepulcher in the City of Modin, An. 188. 2. Maca.
1.10.
and all the Israelites wept for him, etc. In the second book he is alive
again, and writes letters 36. years after he was dead. Can both these be
true? If not, then mark the credit of this book. Not unlike to this is that
which is written of Antiochus his death. In the first book it is said, 1.
Maca. 6.8.
he laid him down upon his bed sick, and there dyed: with such
circumstances of the matter as there you may read and see your self. In the
second book and first Chapter it is said, that he entering the temple of Nanea,
verse. 16.
the Priests opened a privy door of the Vaute and cast down stones like
Thunder upon him and his company, and bruised them in pieces, cut off their
heads and threw them out to the rest of their company that were without. In
the 9. Chapter of the same book it is said, he dyed a miserable death among
the mountains. These be greater contrarieties tha^ I trust any man, that
fears GOD, will think may be in books whereof the holy Ghost is author. And
therefore you see we do not without great cause refuse to learn our faith
out of these Books. If men's judgments be regarded of us, we hear and see
what the Fathers thought. Hierom, Epiphan, Athanasius, and Cyprian reject these
books in this sort, as not to be rules of faith. Yea, the Bishop of Rome
himself Gregory 200. years after Austen rejects them as not Canonical:
Greg. in Job. lib. 19. cap 16.
and if other men be of small regard with them, yet would GOD the Papists
would respect their own Bishop. But Austen, they say, affirms them
Canonical. O why should not love of truth banish all cauilles? Austen does so:
and in the very same place that they allege, says the contrary. How then is
Austen contrary to himself? No, their own eyes see as well as we, if they
will, that when he calls them not Canonical, he takes the word strictly
and properly, and means they are no grounds and rules for our faith: when
he calls them Canonical, he takes the word largely, and means they are
such as may be read in the Churches for examples of the great and marvelous
passions and persecutions of the Martyrs. Believe not me, but hear himself.
First, that they are not Canonical. In Machabaeorum libris, etc. Although
there may some thing be found in the books of the Machabees meet for this
order of writing, and worthy to be joined with the number of miracles, yet
hereof we will have no care: for that we have intended only to touch a short
rehearsal of the miracles contained in the books of holy Canon. See how he
says, they are not Canonical, and therefore he will not accept of the
miracles in them. Again, Haec supputatio non in scripturis sanctis, quae
appellantur Canonicae, sed in alijs inuenitur, in quibus sunt and Machabaeorum
libri. This reckoning is not found in the holy Scriptures that are called
Canonical, but in certain other books, among which are the books of the
Machabees. Many such testimonies might be alleged out of this Father, but
these suffice in this treatise. Now that they are Canonical, hear himself
again. Libros Machabaeorum ecclesia habet pro canonicis, propter quorundam
Martyrum passiones vehementes atque mirabiles. The Church accompteth the books
of the Machabees as canonical, (not for the authority and weight of truth)
but for the great and marvelous passions, and persecutions of Martyrs therein
contained. And again, that scripture that bears the name of the Machabees,
is received not unprofitably of the Church, so that it be read and heard with
sobriety, specially because of those Machabees that suffered so cruel
torments for the law of God. Wherefore by his own words now on both sides
repeated, Augustines mind is plain, namely that these books alleged in
proof of faith, they are not Canonical, but to be read unto the people in the
Church for example of life, in this sense says he, they are Canonical, and
may be thus read, so that they be read soberlie. And what is this, but that
which other Fathers have also said, as Jerome. The Church reads the story
of Judith, the book of Tobie, and the books of the Machabees, but ye same
Church receives not these books as the Canonical Scriptures. Cyprian, Haec
omnia legi quidem in ecclesijs voluerunt, no^ tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex
his fidei confirmandam. All these writings our Fathers have allowed to be read
in the Church, yet not to be aleadged for authority, to confirm the doctrine
of our faith. Wherefore to go no further, in this you see our reasons, why we
allow not any proof of doctrine out of those books, and therefore not of
prayer for the dead. Other reasons more are aleadged by the godly learned, and
^ight by me now, but that these suffice here.

Next, our answer touches the matter it self, and we say that prayer for the
dead, sought to be proved out of this place of the Machabees, is contrary to
the rest of the Scriptures, and therefore we dare not allow it. For no truth
and lawful thing is contrary to any Scripture, but agreeable, as receiving
warrant, and lawfulnes thence. Secondly, that though Judas had so done (which
is not likely he did, howsoever this place has been corrupted to that end,
because it is contrary to the custom of the Jews, even to this day, to pray
for the dead) yet this particular example is not sufficient to establish a
doctrine, no more then Zipporalis was to prove, that women may administer the
Sacraments, or the example of Razis, that one might kill himself, whom this
author so much commends. And therefore concluding, since neither by this
place, nor by any Scripture, this preposterous love to the dead, to pray for
them, can find sure warrant, we desire that it may hartelie be thought of,
how ill it becomes any that profess a desire to please God, which commanded
obedience, and not with traditions of men, or devices any whatsoever, either of
their own heads, or of any others. And thus much of it.

Sufficient then being said of these circumstaunces of Prayer, will you now
proceed to the form it self prescribed of our Savior.

A great goodness of God to teach us a form of prayer.
Content. And first consider what a gracious goodness this was in the Lord our
God, to lay down a form for us. That we not able to see the bottom of our
wants our selves, neither in what we do see, to take such course as becomes
speakers to so great a GOD, by his own mouth we might be directed both in the
one and the other, to our great comfort and assurance, that keeping our selves
within the compass of this form, our prayer should be to the Lords good
liking, and therefore we obtain what we ask, according to his will. Without
a form we might have wandered to our great harm, asking many times things
hurtful, and if not so, yet things lawful, not in form lawful, which also had been evil. And if Heathens saw the nakedness of men for want of such
direction, let us Christians see Gods mercy and our own great good by this
direction. Plato we know espying the ignorance of men in making their prayers
to God, for that many times they sought, what granted would hurt them, said
this was a good form: What form some heathe^s used.
O Jupiter Rex, optima nobis et vouentibus, et non vouentibus, tribuae. Mala
autem poscentibus quoque abesse iube. That is* O Jupiter king, give unto us the
best things, whether we ask them or no. And all evil things command away
from us, though we ask them. Wherein we may see how daungerously they groped
in a great darkness for want of a form, and were feign for safety to pray
thus generally, whereas we now plainly are taught how to pray more
particularly, and yet still truly. Wherefore see, I say, ^^rst Gods great
mercy, and our great good, by having this form laid down unto us. Then
touching the form it self which our Savior has laid down, The Lords
prayer has three parts.
it consists of three principal parts. First of a preface, secondly of the
petitions themselves, and lastly of a conclusion. The preface in these words:
Our Father which art in heaven. The petitions in order after. The conclusion
thus, for thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever,
Amen. The first part which is the Preface, short in words, but plentiful in
matter, is so laid down by the wisdom of the Lord Jesus, as that every word
carries his weight, A father by Creation. Redemption. Sa^ctificatio^
The use of the word father to our Souls.
and brings to us in use thereof most singular profit. The first is, Father,
by which name we are taught to speak unto our God when we pray unto him: and
see the use. There is no prayer as we well know, and before has been declared,
that can pearce the ears of the almighty God, unless it be made both in
affection and faith. Affection has his want great and too great often in our
corruption, and therefore in mercy of a gracious GOD, helps and means
provided for it. This is one evermore to consider to whom I pray, and to whom
I speak, namely, not to a severe and sower Judge, not to a cruel and
merciless tyrant, not to a stranger that knows me not, or has no aliance
with me, but to a Father, yea in Jesus Christ now my Father, a kind, a
loving, a good, a tender Father, who looks upon me with bowels of mercy and
pity, sigheth for me before I come, runs out when I do come, meets me,
embraces me, falls about my neck with his arms, weepeth upon me in
melting motions of loving kindness, hears me speak, weighs my suit,
whether it may be my good, and can as sone in conclusion cease to be God as
deny me any thing yt may be my benefit. And O then ye affection yt we may
pray with, if we consider this name of Father. My soul may thirst, my heart
may long, yea burn and burst as it were within me, with desire ever to come to
my Father, for he is ever a Father, and has ever the nature of his name,
though I be vile. And therefore let us take the use intended by the Lord in
this given title, and pray cheerfully with sweet comfort in the conceit of
whom we speak unto evermore. When affection then is thus kindled and stirred
up, look at faith in the next place, which also must concur with it, or else
in vain we pray and obtain nothing. This knew our Savior well, The second
use of the word father.
and therefore even to this end also has taught us to say, and pray in the
name of Father. Whereby arises in us, and ought evermore an assurance of his
willingness and readiness to help us. For what will a Father deny unto his
begging child that may do him good, pater quid negabit filijs, qui iam dedit,
quod pater est. What will that Father deny to sons, which has already
granted this, to be their Father. Yea, such a father as being not our father,
has redeemed us to him, his utter enemies, with no less price than the
precious blood of his own and only dear beloved son? Romans 8.32.
O how shall he with him not give us al things also. Math. 7.11.
If we which are evil, yet in the nature of fathers, give good gifts to our
children, how much more shall our Father which is in heaven give good things to
them that ask him. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion of
the son of her womb? Though it could be, Esaias. 49.15.
yet will not I forget thee. verse. 16.
Behold I have gtauen thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are ever in
my sight. Judge then the willingness of the Lord evermore, to grant our
profitable prayers, and be strengthened in faith by this word Father. Ambros.
lib 50. de Sacram. cap. 4.
Primus sermo quantae sit gratiae vide, et suauitatis, O homo: faciem tuam no^
audebas ad coelum attollere, oculos tuos in terram dirigebas, et subito
accepisti gratiam Christi, ex malo seruo factus es bonus filius. Non ergo hic
arrogantia est, sed fides. Praedicare quod acceperis, non est superbia, sed
deuotio. The first word of Prayer, of what grace and sweetness it is, O man
see and consider. Thou durst not lift thy face to heaven, but threw thine eyes
down to the earth, and sodeinly thou receiuedst mercy in Christ of an evil
servant to be made a good son. Here is no arrogancy, but faith. And to
publish abroad what thou have received, is no pride, but devotion, said the
godly Father Ambrose.

A third use of the word father.
A third use of this word Father is, to put us in mind also of the duty of
children, for we may not think, that we calling him daily by this tender name
of mercy and favor, and expecting at his hands the fruits of such nature as
his name imports, we in the mean time loosely and lewdly may behave our
selves, and neither before God nor man, walking as children yet foolishlie
feed our selves with the hope of childrens benefits from their Father. There
is no such matter if we take that course, but even as often as we open our
mouths and pray this prayer, so often even of our own mouths the Lord shall
judge us that we calling him Father, yet live not, nor desire to live in the
duties of his children. O fearful change of a sweet name to a dreadful
witness of woe unto us. Say then O Father, but do or endeavor to do the
office of a child. For it is passed from him, and lies before us to stand
till heaven and earth perish, he expects it, and we are commanded it:
Malach. 1.
If I be your Father where is my honor: if I be your master where is my
fear. And therefore well said the godly Father, Cypria.
Quemadmodum nobii placemus de Deo patre, sic sibi placeat et Deus de nobis. As
we take pleasure of GOD to be our Father, so let us do, as he also may take
pleasure of us to be his children. Yea, well says the word which we must
never forget, 1. Peter. 1.13.
Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace
that is brought unto you by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as obedient
children, 14.
not fashioning your selves under the former lust of your ignorance, 15.
but as he which has called you is holy, 17.
so be you holy in all manner of conversation. And if he call him father, which
without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass the
time of your dwelling here in fear, and so forth to the end of the chapter.
And the Apostle Paul in like manner. Ephesians. 4.1.
I therefore being prisoner in the Lord pray you that ye walk worthy of the
vocation whereunto ye are called. With many other such places. And certainly it
is true, our sinful souls shall one day rue the proof of it, if it be not
warned: Ihon 9.31.
God hears not sinners, but if a man be a worshipper of God, and does his
will, him hears he. Yea, therefore mark it with a mind and a conscience
careful to perform the like evermore. How both David persuades ye Lord to
hear him, and strengthens himself in assurance to be heard by performance of
the duty of a child to him whom he calls in his prayer his Father, Psalm.
119.
either before or after. Before in these places: Save me for I have sought thy
precepts. 94.
And again, 173.
Let thy hand save me, for I have chosen thy precepts. And in the last verse
of that Psalm, Seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.
With such like speeches many. Afterward as appears in the 145. verse. Hear
me O Lord, and I will keep thy statutes. By which practice of the Saint of GOD
we may make this assured, but dreadful conclusion, that Father in mouth, and
Son without sense in life, Note.
makes him of a Father a Judge, and tourneth his favor into fury, his pity
into plagues, and our hoped health in heaven, into assured woe in hell for
evermore. Therefore again and again, let us take this profit of this word
Father, even to reform us daily as the Lord shall strengthen into the obedience
of children. So shall we say in comfort with Saint John: 1. John. 3.22.
Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
and do those things which are pleasing in his sight. Yet do we no way
strengthen the error of merit hereby, but testifying hereby our selves in
truth, not in a lying name and show only, the children of God, both please the
Lord with the obedience of faith, and comfort our selves in truth of promises
altogether free, made by a good Father unto the same.

A fourth fruit again may be of this word Father in this beginning, The
fourth use of the word father.
even to prove unto the consciences of the whole world the sufficiency and
perfection of the work of Christ for us. For by which God is so fully pacified
and pleased; so contented and satisfied, as that of a Judge to punish, he
becomes a Father to favor, and we of enemies, sons and fellow heirs with
Christ, that is absolute, perfect and every way full. But by the work of
Christ for us this is done, and we in the knowledge thereof be so even by the
same Christ commanded, not in the spirit of fear, but of faith and comfort
boldly to call him Father. Therefore the work of Christ for us most perfect,
The perfection of the work of Christ for us proved.
glorious, and absolute. This gives faith for fear, this gives hope of
safety from the power of all foes. From the strength of the law, from the
sting of death, from the victory of the grave, and from the mainest might of
all the kingdom of hell that can be raised against us. For we are justified,
yea, fully justified, and who or what can now condemn us, we are sons, and
who can make us again servants, we are friends, and who can again make us
foes, it is now my Father and your Father, my God and your God, and what
strength of hels ten thousand can change this course. O word of comfort
then commanded me by Christ to pray in the name of Father. Dear God and sweet
God, let our souls feel it. It is finished, and why are we feared. Were our
sins as Crimsin, as Skarlet, as blood, they are washed, they are wiped, they
are gone. Were my wants the wantes of the whole world, they are pardoned, they
are forgiven, God is pleased and is now my Father. O Savior sweet, make my
thanks many. Let my tongue, my voice, my heart, my soul, my whole man inward
and outward resound thy lasting praise. The wickedness of the Mass.
See see their sin that devise a daily sacrifice for sin, either adding
unto this most perfect redemption as if it wanted, or else vainly doing by a
work of will what already is fully done by prescript of God. Be it that we
paid a debt, and yet are troubled for it diverse times and ways again, must
we so often pay the debt again as we are troubled? No, we know it suffices
well to recurre ever to the payment once made, and making proof thereof, we
still escape such vexing wrongful action. So it is in this. The virtue, power,
and efficacy of this sacrifice is perpetual, being once made, and needs but
by faith to be taken hold of and applied, whenever we are troubled. The debt
is paid, make but the proof and end this action. For, once has he entered by
his own blood unto the holy place, Hebre. 9.12.
and obtained eternal redemption for us. And with one offering has he
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. 10.14.


Why do we say our Father, and not my Father.

This word again, has his great reason, and profit to us in this preface.
For first it teaches us Charity toward our brethren in general, 1.
Charity.
wheresoever, and whosoever they be, and a care as well of their good, as of our
own. Which in this great corruption of our nature is hard to be had, unless we
should by such admonitions as this, be drawn unto it. We rather as borne for
our selves, live and care for our selves, in such a self love, as God and man
abhors. We must never pray for our selves with such a private heart, but that
we wish the like mercy to all that have the like need. Ephesians. 1 23 Ephesians. 4,
4.
Wherefore the Lord Jesus here commands in this word of community, that we
should never think of our selves, never pray for our selves, but also together
with our selves, for all others, even the whole Church of God in Earth. For it
is the fullness of the body of Christ, and therefore by that means dear unto
us, if he be dear. It is that one body whereof we are all members. And the
bond of members so strict, that we should feel one an others griefs, Gal.
6.1.
bear one an others burdens, remember one an others bonds, even as though we
were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, Hebr. 13.3.
as if we were also afflicted in the body: yea we are taught in this love, 1.
Peter. 4.10.
every man as he has received ye gift, to minister the same one to another, as
good disposers of the manifold graces of God, and by name, to pray one for
another. Iam. 5.16. 1. Cor. 13.5.
For love never seeks her own things only. This we forget too often, and
therefore we fearfully pray without profit. Our hearts are narrow and
straight, only looking at our selves and our own, our children and friends:
and the dear Saints of GOD, members also with us, are not thought upon. Alas
we judge it folly to be told us that we should think upon them. And sink or
swim, as we say, the Church of God, we care not so we be well. This is far
from Our Father, that is, this is far from that affection that in this word we
are taught to all men, and therefore certainly these prayers thus made of us
most usually without remembrance, care, and desire of good to all Gods Church
as to our selves, is no sweet meat before the Lord, but even a filthy smoke
rather that he flies from. August. Confess.
Therefore let us remember this use of this word, if we wish to pray aright,
and thinking of others in Christian love as of our selves, entreat the Lord
for them as for our selves. Beatus qui amat te, et amicum in te, et inimicum
propter te. Blessed is he that loves thee, and his friend in thee, and his
enemy for thee, says the Father. That is, blessed ever he or she yt reach out
affection as they ought past themselves to others. For, Chrysostom. in Cor.
Dilectionis flammas Satan far non potest. The flames of Christian love and
charity Satan the enemy of our blessedness cannot abide. But, Dilectio donum
Dei. This love is the gift of God, and that Lord then grant it to us for ever.

2. Unity.
Secondly, this word teaches us unity with our brethren, consent and
agreement of mind in faith and doctrine, and every good thing. For how else
can we call him Our Father, The great danger of schism.
we being divided from the Church and members thereof, by heresy or schism.
The word shall importe a communion with them in one father, common to all, and
our wicked wayward separation of our selves from them shall deny ye same.
Math. 5.24. Math. 6.15.
Therefore be reconciled ever first to thy brother, says the scripture, before
thou pray, or else thy prayer does witness against thy self. Ephesians. 4.
62.
And let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, if thou mean to please god.

Thirdly humility is learned by it, not to exalt our selves above our
brethren, 3. Humility.
past that which is meet, forasmuch as we have all one father and such an one
as is no respecter of persons. But tenderly minded to all his children. He
cares not for the puffes of this world, birth, beauty, wealth or wit, nor for
all the glory wherewith commonly proud flesh swells, but he cares for those
that fear him and work righteousness, how mean soever they be. And when the
fading fashion of a transitory condition is cut off by death, the determiner
of such pride, Act. 10.
then they as we with God accepted, as honorable, as wealthy, as beautiful in
heaven, where this trash is trodden under foot, Note.
yea even more peradventure honored, as they that have more honored him in
this life, where we with our pleasures played the wantons and vaynely boasted
of a painted sheath. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond
nor free, Galat. 3.28.
there is neither male nor female but we are al one in Christ Jesus. It is Our
Father to the comfort of all hearts that fear his majesty. Omnes Christiani
fideles diuersas in terris habent patres, Aug. Ser. 135.
alij nobiles, alij ignobiles: vnum vero patrem inuocant, qui est in caelis.
Sub isto Patre sunt dominus and seruus, imperator and miles, dives and pauper.
All faithful Christians here in earth says S. Austen have diverse fathers,
some noble, some unnoble, but they make their prayers but to one father in
heaven, and under this father is Master and servant, Emperor and Soldier,
rich and poor. Truth it is, and sweet it is to us poor wretches in this
world, upon whom the magnificous of this earth look so big, as if we never
should be worthy to wipe their shoes, much less accepted as their fellows,
yea peradventure before them, in a place of greater honor than this sea of
glass here can ever be. Wherefore let us joy in it and remember it to school
our selves in our places, every one to show favor fit, and due regard to
every man in this present world: the prince to the subject, the Master to
servant, and every man and woman, one to another. If I did contemn the
judgment of my servant, Job. 31.
13.
says holy Job, or of my maid when they did contend with me, 14.
what then shall I do when God stands up, and when he shall visit me, 15.
what shall I answer? He that made me in the womb, has he not made him? has
not he alone fashioned us in the womb? And receive him now, says the Apostle
Paul, not as a servant, but above a servant, even as a brother beloved, and so
forth. Thus we see the christian humility toward al our brethren in this
world, yt is noted unto us as a thing fit for us ever, in this word, Our father.

But it seems by this form that we may not at any time say in our prayers.
My God or my father, neither yet pray particularly either for our selves or any
other. But in common ever.

No? you mistake it. For as this community of affection is taught us, and this
prayer that extends the desire to the good of others, so is the Scripture
full of warrants, also for both the particular application of God unto a man's
self by the term of my God, and Lord, and Father, and also for particular
prayer for our selves and others, Our savior says, my father, the Apostle, my
God, Math. 26.
the Prophet David in every Psalm almost, Philem.
and the prayers of Gods children for themselves privately are extant, David's,
Paul's, Annaes, with many more. But the matter is this, we should not, neither
ever did any of these so particularly pray for themselves, or any, but that
there was ever in them, although not expressed, an eye, to commit by the fruit
of their action that thing, either tending to the inabling of the^ better to
serve in gods church, which is a common good, or else as willingly wished,
though not in words, yet in truth of meaning to all, to whom it may stand in
like steed, and for as much use and good. So are we but spoiled of all filthy
self-love without care for others, not forbidden to regard our selves with
like wish to others.

Why say we next, which art in heaven.

Two things in God, our faith ought ever to be assured of, or else we pray not
well, to wit, will to help us, and power. The one has been sufficiently
declared in the word Father, the other now in these is confirmed unto us. His
being in Heaven what Spiritual use it has to our souls.
For by his being in heaven appears his majesty, might and power, his rule
and dominion over all things whereby he is able to go through with the purpose
of his good will toward us, that in nothing our hope of being heard may be
hindered. I have sworn by my self: Esaias. 45.23.
the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return, that
every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. This Lord
of ours reigns, let the people tremble, he sits betwixt the Cherubins,
let the earth be moved. This Lord is great in Sion, Psalm. 99.1.
and he is high above al people. Let the kings of the earth band themselves
and the Princes assemble together against this Lord, and against his anointed,
Let them purpose to break his bands asunder, and to cast away his coards from
them. He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn and this
powrefull Lord of ours shall have them in derision. 2.
When he purposed to do his Church and children good, who or what could ever
resist yt will. Bless he or curse, prosper or punish, give he or take,
whatsoever he will, that does he in heaven and earth and none can let him. His
power is almighty, and therefore able ever to perform his will. This is one,
the doctrine delivered us in these words and the use of it is great. For many
are the assultes of this life, the troubles of the flesh, and the griefs of
our minds, dangerous are the darts of Satan against us often, and we have no
way to win relief, but from the Lord by prayer: then steppeth in the greatness
of the matter, the multitude of enemies against it, Note.
the weakness of our selves in faith, in friends, in Counsel and means, and
in conclusion a very impossibility as it were in reason of the thing
appears. But oh fear auant, and faith be strong, for what will wantes in a
tender father, or what power to him that dwells in the heavens. And we are
purposely by Christ remembered of both those in this prayer that we might never
doubt of either, he is our father and he is in heaven, that is, he is most
willing and ever able, the^ fear away. This comforted Christ in the pride of
power against him, that even then his father was able, Math. 26.
if it pleased him, to give him more then twelve legions of Angels to fight for
him against them. 53.
And this is written for us whilst the world indureth to be our comfort. What
God ever would do, he ever could do.
God would deliver Joseph his innocent servant, and he could do it, though
the credit of false report in respect of the accuser were never so great. God
would defend his Daniel and he could do it against all the spite of man, and
power of roaring beasts, so great and terrible. God would give passage through
the main sea on foot, and he could in the moment of time perform his will.
What should we say? Many have been the troubles of the righteous and ever the
Lord able to deliver them out of all. He is the same yeasterday and to day,
and for ever. And therefore whatsoever befalls us in this world pray in the
comfort of this sweet conceit, that he is in heaven, that is, God and Lord of
all, able as willing, and willing as able, and ever both to do us any good, if
we pray: for, fear not the devil nor death, nor hell, nor man, nor matter
ever in this earth, but look to the power of thy God to defend thee, to help
and succor thee in all distresses, and that power joined with the will of a
Father, whose bowelles melt upon his child. O God and father sweet and
strong, increase our faith, increase our feeling, and enlarge our hearts and
souls to receive the use of these things, that assured of will and assured of
power our prayers in faith may pearce thy dwelling place, and win our good on
Christ for evermore. Amen.

The second use of our fathers being in Heaven.
Secondly these words serve to lift up our hearts and minds from all earthly
base and low conceits of the Lord. Yea even to set us as it were out of our
selves and beyond all remembrance either of body or soul, in our heavenly
elevation of inward powers to that throne so high and glorious, the seat of
that mighty God we pray unto. And consequently to make us ask nothing of him
that might be unseeming so imperial a majesty to deal in and care for. But
ever to remember that he being in heaven, and we in earth, he holy and we
unholy, he glory and we shame, he God, and we men, it is true that the
Prophet says, his thoughts are not our thoughts, his ways our ways. Esaias.
55.
But as the heavens are mightier then the earth, 8.
so are his ways higher then our ways, 6.
and his thoughts above our thoughts. To which end it served also in the
Church of old as Cyprian witnesses, that the Pastor being about to make
public prayers should cry to thee people Sursum corda. Lift up your hearts.
And the people did answer Habemus ad Dominum. We lift them up unto the Lord,
thereby declaring that they thought of no base and earthly and low matters,
but of the Lord and the Lord in heaven, even as we do and are ever taught to
do by these words, Which is in heaven.

Thirdly they serve to strike us not a little, The third use.
but ever through and through with a reverence of his majesty whom we pray
unto. For heaven and the height of heaven is his dwelling place, and we ought
most earnestly ever to think of it, that we may come humbly to him. This
caused the servants of God not only to crouche their bodies, but to bow their
hearts when they came before him, even the knees of their hearts, as thinking
never their reverence great enough toward so mighty a God. Heaven is his,
earth is his, hell is his, Psalm. 50. Psalm. 60.
al is his. Devouring fire goes before his face and mighty tempests are
stirred up about him. 4.
8.
He rides upon the heavens as it were upon an horse, 17.
yea the earth shakes and the heavens drop at the presence of him. His charets
are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels. It is he that commands the
waters, Psalm. 29.3. etc.
it is this glorious God that makes the thunder. It is he that rules the
sea, it is his voice that is mighty in operation, yea and a glorious voice:
Such a voice as breaks the Cedar trees, yea the Cedars of Libanus: such a
voice as deuideth the flames of fire, and shakes the wilderness, even the
wilderness of Cades. Let us make have therefore with the great servant of God
Moses, Exodus 34.8.
and bow our selves to the earth and worship, yea let us in the true conceit
and reverence of this mighty majesty, cover as it were our faces with our
mantels when we pray unto him. So shall we come before him rightly, and show
the use of his glorious dwelling in the heavens, A foul fault of many in the
Church and elsewhere.
noted unto us. But alas where is it with thousands thousands, that yet take
themselves to be great Christians. We clap our selves down to pray, and we
think of any thing rather then of the mighty majesty of him before whom we
are come, and and therefore we gaze here, and gaze there, we note this man and
that woman, their gesture, their apparel, yea the least toy (especially
strange about them. Note.
And yet we pray well, we huddle and tumble up in have the labor of lips
without touch of heart, and the faster the better, we long to have done, for
fear dinner be marred, and yet we pray well. We gape and we yawne, we hem
and we hawke, not for necessity of nature which is allowed, but in the
drowsines of our Spirits, and to show our authority, we are chief men in the
Church etc. and yet we pray well. A right coming before God to pray.
But O we senseless wretches in this behalf, for then come we rightly before
the Lord, as we learn here when remembering that he is in heaven, that is of
such glory, majesty, and power as has been declared, we throw down our
souls and bodies in all reverence and comely fear before him, speaking to him
as dust and ashes to the immortal king of heaven and earth, humbly, even with
a reverent trembling as it were and affection of al our parts, leasurely,
carefully, heartily, Mark it.
and with all true properties and testimonies of a mind considering the
puissance, the might the glory and imperial majesty of him to whom we
speak. Which whether these things that I named declare in us or no let all
christian hearts be judges. It is too true they convince us of the contrary,
and therefore even in dread of their witness to our woe at the day of doom,
let us leave them and use the place of prayer as we should, in all humble,
lowly, and possible reverence. We are so willed, and by Christ himself, that
shall judge us if we do not. To this end we say it, ever think of it, which
art in heaven.

Ihon. 4.
Lastly, this notation of the place where our God dwells, teaches us that our
Prayers are not tied to any certain place as in old times, neither bettered
by any place, be it this mountain, or Jerusalem, or whatsoever: But the hour
comes, yea now is, The use of Churches not ouerthrown by liberty of place to
pray in, under the Gospel
that the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, and in
every place have liberty and leave to lift up pure hands to his majesty, in
every place, he says, and mark it. And why so? For our God is in heaven, and
hears every where without respect of place now. I mean without respect of
place as then, touching any commandment from him of particular place, but not
hereby to overthrow any civil order, for better meeting together in appointed
Churches of Gods people. Yet even herein beware Superstition again a fresh in
respect of place more than elsewhere, when true warrant bears me out as well
there then, as in the Church at other times to make my prayer. But of Churches,
and public meetings there, enough has been said before. Where it may be read
again if you will.

Great is the use I see well of this short preface, so often said and so little
thought of: but now I pray you let me ask a question: does not this
invocation of God by the name of Father, exclude both the other persons, Son,
and holy Ghost, from both our speech and meaning. The name father agrees to
Son and holy ghost.


No indeed: for the name of Father being opposed to creatures is taken
essentially, not personally, and agrees rightly to all the three persons in
Trinity, being in essence, nature and substance one, and so is it here. But if
it be put and joined with any other person of the Trinity, then is it not
taken essentially but personally, and agrees to that person only, and so is
it not here: for you see here in this prayer there is no mention either of
Son or holy Ghost together with this word of Father: which if there were,
then should it be a name of person and not of essence: but here is only
mention of Father granting, and creatures asking: and therefore Father a name
of essence comprehending Father, Son, and holy Ghost. As it does diverse times
in Scripture. verse. 6.
Esaias the 9. Chapter calls Christ the everlasting Father. The Apostle says,
1. Cor. 8.6.
Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there
be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto us there is but one God which is that
father of whom are all things and we in him. The name father set down
because it is principium deitatis, the beginning of the Deity.
In which place the name Father includes Son and holy Ghost. But the name
Father is put down, because it is the beginning of the Deity. So in the 14.
of John, and elsewhere. Wherefore though we are taught in this form of Prayer
to say Our Father, yet do we pray to all the three persons without exception
of any, because so the name Father includes.

But the Scripture calls Christ our brother, how is he then our Father?

Very well by distinction of two natures: for he his our Father in respect of
his Godhead, and he is our brother by reason of manhood.

Yet am I not satisfied. For thus me think is reason against you. He that
receives us into favor for Christ, and grants our petitions for Christ,
that is not Christ himself. For there is a manifest distinction of persons
employed in it: but this father here whom we call father in this Lords Prayer,
receives us and hears us, and helps us for Christ: and therefore this
father in this place cannot be Christ.

You trouble your self in an easy matter, and you do not distinguish as we
needs must do to keep a truth in these causes. I told you before there are
two natures in Christ, and diverse several things in that one person in respect
of those several natures. Now you must consider again, that in Christ there
is a nature of Godhead, and an office of a mediator betwixt God and man, he
and his office are several things, yet he one Christ. Then concerning your
mayor proposition, true it is that he that receives us into favor and hears
and helps us for Christ is not Christ himself in that one respect, but in an
other he is. For Christ as mediator is he for whom we are received, heard
and helped: but as GOD it is he also that receives, hears, and helps. So
does distinction of things severally to be considered answer your doubt, and
leave Christ included in this word and name of Father in this Prayer, as well as
any other person.

Then this nomination of him to be in heaven, how agrees it to him that is in
every place? Does it not restrain that vbiquitie of his? Vbiquitie.


No indeed, no more than other speeches in Scripture does, which yet at the
first blushe seem to do it, as this does. Wherefore that we may understand
both this and them, let us remember, that not only in this Prayer God is
said to be in heaven, Psalm. 103.19 Esaias. 66.1. Number. 14.
but the Prophet also says he has prepared his seat in heaven, and many
other places the like. Then again it is said: 42.
Do not go up for the Lord is not with you. Thirdly, If any man love me, I
and my Father will come to him, etc. which coming and going should seem to
infringe his vbiquitie. But concerning the first, we are to know that in these
or any other places, God is not meant to be in heaven either circumscriptiuely
as men limited by place here and not else where for that time, either
definitiuely as Angels by propriety of their substance, but (that we may so
speak) repletiuely, because with his absence he replenisheth and fills heaven
and earth, and all places, as the Prophet says. Again, because there, as in
his throne and place of greatest dignity, Iere^ 23.24.
he shows his power, his wisdom, his goodness and majesty more than in
other places of the world, and therehence more reuealeth and declares the
same than from any other place. The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm.
19.2.
and the firmament shows his handie work. Hose. 2.24.
The Lord hears the heavens, and the heavens the earth, the earth the corn,
and the corn the people. From heaven the wrath of GOD is revealed against all
ungodliness. Romans 118.
From heaven he sends his Angels, from heaven the son of man descends,
from heaven the holy spirit comes, and from heaven shall he come to judge the
quick and the dead. Esaias. 66.1.
Wherefore in these respects and a number like, heaven is called his throne,
and he is said there to be more than in all other places, and we when we pray,
lifting our eyes and minds up to this chief throne of his majesty when it
pleases him to communicate, life, motion, light, and all goodness to his
servant, say, Our Father which art in heaven.

And remember with your self that even in the same place where heaven is
called his Throne, the earth also is called his Footestoole, as noting his
presence, notwithstanding every where, though his seat be prepared in heaven,
and what place will you build unto me, says the Lord, that is, how may I be
apprehended of any one place, that am infinite, and fill all places. Nothing
therefore this clause in our Prayer infringeth his vbiquitie. Touching the
second thing, that God is said in the Scripture not to be with some men
sometimes, we must understand it is not meant of his essence, as though that
were not in some places, but of his efficacy and working by his holy spirit,
and by his strength to save and deliver sometimes. Thus is not the Lord in the
reprobate and wicked. For what is it to be in a place rightly and fully, but as
in his own proper place there to rule and reign, and to exercise his power to
the good of the place: which the Lord does not in the wicked. Thus was it told
the people, Number. 14.
that God was not with the^, and therefore they should not go up: namely, not to
fight on their part, not to save them and deliver them by his power and
strength, otherwise by his essence he was with them and he is every where.
This well considered gives a light to diverse places of Scripturs, where it is
said, the Lord is near or far of, telling us they are meant not of his
essence, but of his grace, which grace when it is mercifully offered to men
and women by the word preached unto them, by blessings and comforts bestowed
upon them able to move a heart of steel to think of a gracious God that
gives such gifts, How God is said to be nere or far of.
then is the Lord said to be near, and when unkindly (notwithstanding al his
goodness) he has been rejected, despised, and refused, and therevppon cease
to offer us any more favor, Esaias. 55.
but shuts up his compassion toward us, then is he said to be far of.
Thus is it meant in the Prophet, Esaias. 55.
Call upon him while he is near, that is, I have now showed whilst his
arm is stretched out to you, and his mercy offered in such sort as it is.
How God is said to be more in one man or place than in an other.
This also considered, teaches us how God may be said to be more in one man
than another, and more in one place than in another, namely, still not in
respect of essence which is equally in all places, and wholly in all places, but
in respect of more or less after the gift of his grace to one person than
another, or to one place than another. Of which it may be true that Gregory
said: Deus qui omnia tangit, non aequaliter omnia tangit. Tom. 2. In Ezekiel hom.
8. page 130.
God that touches all things, yet touches not all things alike. By this may
the third thing partly be understood, to wit, how GOD is said in Scripture to
come and go away, and yet no breach made of his vbiquitie, How God is said to
go and come.
namely, because such speeches are never to be meant of his essence, or
mutation of place, (for so departs he from none) but of inward or outward
effects of his holy spirit, according to which given or taken away, the Lord
is said to come or to go from men and places, as he departed from David when
he left him justly for his grievous sins, destitute of the peace of his
conscience, of the cheerfulness of his mind, the cleanness of his heart,
the quietness of his affections, and other gifts of his holy spirit which
before David had in great measure. Whereupon he was forced to cry, O Lord
create a clean heart within me, Psalm 51.
and renew a right spirit, O Lord give me the comfort of thy spirit again,
and let the bones which thou have broken rejoice. On the other side he is
said to come, when again he begins to work by his holy spirit, and to
stir up faith, repentance, love, hatred of sin, and such like. Thus meant
our Savior when he said, I and my Father will come unto him and dwell with
him. And this of inward graces. Outwardly also the Lord is said to come, ergo
when either by outward crosses he so humbles us as though he had forsaken us,
and departed in anger from us, so that we are constrained with David to say, My
God why have thou forsaken me, Psalm. 22.2.
or when he so defends us, comfort us, and blesses us, that the world
that sees it is driven to say and see as Saul did of David, 1. Sam. 18.28^
that the Lord is with us. So his absence is the absence of his effects in us,
and for us, and his presence or coming is the presence and gift of them either
inward or outward. Wherefore to go no further, I hope it is plain enough now,
that though we say our Father is in heaven, yet we are far from denying
therein or thereby his divine vbiquitie and presence every where. But even as
the soul of man which is wholly in the whole and in every part, yet is said
to be in the head or heart more than else where, because there more than
elsewhere it exercises his power and effects: So God though by essence every
where and in all places wholly, yet by action, operation, and communication of
grace and gifts not equally in all parts, but in heaven more than in earth, in
the godly more than the wicked, and in one of his children, more than an other:
in the Saints in heaven, more than in the Saints in earth, and in the humane
nature of Christ, more than in any creature either in heaven or earth, as in
whom the fullness of grace and spirit without measure was. Howbeit yet in a
more excellent manner God dwelt in Christ than by fullness of grace and gifts,
or by manifestation of his virtue and power, as might be showed if the place
required it. But thus much of this matter.

Now if you think good, to the petitions themselves.
WIth a good will. And herein for more plainnes of speech, Three things
considered.
let us generally observe the division or number of these petitio^s, the order
of them, and the matter and meaning of them. Touching the division of the^ I
will not curiously stand upon it. S. Austen, and many after him by his example
make 7. dividing the last into two: but their reasons are very insufficient,
Enchiridion. Chap. 116.
as may be seen. And Austen himself contrary to him self confesses that
those words But deliver us from evil, are an explication of the former, Lead
us not into temptation. And therefore by consequence unfitly made a petition of
it self: for in so short a sum of so few petitions, one to be confounded
with an other, and to be all one, is not probable. Others make six, and they
rather are to be followed.

For the order of them this is to be observed, The petitions concerning Gods
glory first.
that 3. of them respecting immediately and chiefly Gods glory: other 3. our
necessities and wants: those that concern the Lord are placed before the
other, even as in the law of God those 4. commandments that contain man's
duty to God are set before the other 6. that contain his duty to his
neighbor. Which being done of purpose in the depth of his unsearchable
wisdom, that laid this form down for us, Christ Jesus, contains in it a
lesson of great regard to a mind possessed with the fear of God and care of
bounden duty. Namely, that the honor of God ought to be more dear unto us
than either body or goods, or any benefit of ours whatsoever in this world,
yea which is far more then the very souls within us, and the salvation of
them in the world to come. For so both the Lord God himself, the composer of
this Prayer, and the giver of body, goods and soul and all, teaches in the
sixth of Matthew. And the power of his holy spirit in the practice of his
servants confirms and shows evidently. For principally and above all, says
the Lord Jesus, Math. 6.33.
seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these other
things shall be cast upon you. Which words, if a man would demand a reason of
the order of these 3. petitions before the other of our Savior, contained, as
you see, even a full answer, to wit, Gods glory is more chief, and therefore
ought to be first: but these 3. petitions immediately respect that, Exodus 32.32.
and therefore ought to be first. The power then of Gods spirit in the practice
of the godly we see also in Moses the great servant of almighty God, and in
Paul his elect vessel, to bear his name unto the Gentiles, Romans 9.3.
who both of them in the flaming heat of a burning zeal to the glory of the
name of God wished the same, with the rasing of them selves out of the book of
life, and curse of his wrath to ye woe eternal of their own souls for ever in
ye place of perdition and death, Gods glory more to be cared for, than our own
salvation, if they should come in comparison together.
as is laid down unto us. A fruit in the^ of a mighty working spirit, and
commended to us in the world for ever, to tell us what ought to be.

See then even at our beginning, when we pray like Saints and sons of God,
like duetifull children affected rightly to their father, even then when we
fall before him with hearts and minds, nothing so careful to gain our own
good, as to win the glory and honor of his name, and the content of his holy
blessed and most good will. And therefore look into our petitions earnestly how
and which way they serve to that before we make them, and then beg them
specially for that end. And even then I say when we do feel in the secret
testimony of an inward conscience such a flame of love wrought by a gracious
spirit beyond power of sinful nature to our God in us, Note.
as that if any preferment of ours, benefit and good in the course of this
world should be found of us to fight against his glory, by and by we find
content, nay not a content only, but even a restles posting have, and burning
heat to renounce it, to defy it, and to spit at it: yea were it such glory of
us in this world as ever Prince inioyed, and not only so again, but even a
most willing mind together with the want of that worldly glory or good
whatsoever, to wit also as has been showed eternal glory, and good in
heaven, so that our God and Father might thereby be honored. But O where are
we? where are we in this affection? Woe to our weakness, and alas our want. Yet
let us see what should be, let us confess what is not, and God for his
Christ's sake grant us mercy. Something is something and ever comfortable,
nothing is sinful and ever damnable. This love to the Lord and zeal to his
glory, it is his gift and where he will, he gives it. Though we be weak,
he is strong, and there is no flesh but he can aid it, neither any heart but
he can change it, only let us see our want, and seek our good, and certainly
we shall find ye same with him. This world ends and God knows how soon,
Luke*
and eue^ this night before the next may my soul be taken from me, and then
all my care for the causes of this world where is it, or whose is it? it cannot
go with me, it shall not follow after me, but strangers perhaps shall
enter upon my labors, and my cares shall make them mighty that will joy in
the lack and loss of me. If I have followed then this and neglected the
other, woe is begun and it shall never end with me. But if I have cared but
competently for this with the other, and ever in the power of given grace more
for the other tha^ for this, be it unto me an end when it pleases God his
mercy shall drive my labors to the good of those that I here loved, and that
my love of him and zeal to his glory shall follow me, remain with me and wear
the crown of Gods mercy for ever more in heaven. Thus is it a blessed thing,
to love Gods glory, and to seek his kingdom with conscience of duty and
feeling of a future state: and it is as cursed a thing, only to seek our
selves, and care for ever a kingdom in this world if it were we could get it,
much less for far inferior preferments, and so whereby with the love of the^
to be devoured and eaten up, as that all speech and talk, and thoughts of the
other is very odious to us, and a mockery with us. You see the world, the days
and times, and you know my meaning. Remember the place of these three
petitions before the other, and remember God in Samuel, They that honor me, 1.
Sam. 2.
them will I honor, and they that despise me, they shall be despised: and I end
with them. Jesus Christ in the benefit of his blood give us care and feeling.

The division then of them and number, as also the order of these three before
the other, you thus observe: now for the matter and meaning of this first, if
you will, Hallowed be thy name.

This shall we then understand when we know what is comprised and meant by
the two words in it, Name and Hallowed. And therefore concerning the first we
are to be advertised, that although no one name wherewith the Lord is called
in the Scripture as Jehovah, Eloim, Shaddai or such like, should either in mind
be conceived and thought, or in voice with words expressed and spoken
without most high reverence as duty is, yet are none of those names in this
place meant, and much less any Judicial or Popish superstition in any of them
confirmed. The Jews for their Jehovah, this is no warraunt. But the name of
GOD signifies here that majesty of GOD, power and infinite virtue that
shyneth, shows it self in every thing so wonderfully. Even as it is usually
taken in the Scriptures, and for the most part signifies. In the Prophet,
when he says: From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same,
Malach. 1.11.
my name is great amongst the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of hosts. Ihon. 12.28. Math. 28.
And, Father glorify thy name. And, Baptize in the name of the Father, the
son, and the holy Ghost. Whereas, I say, the word signifies not any
letters or sillables in this tongue or that, but that power and virtue of God
that shines in all things. So again in the name of Christ the Apostles cast
forth devils, Mar. 16.17.
that is, in the power and strength and virtue of Christ: for so Saint Peter
expounds in the Acts, Act. 3.12. and. 16.
when he says, it was not their power and godliness that had made the man go,
but it was the name of that holy one and just, whom they had betrayed, that is,
his power and godliness, his strength and virtue, not theirs. Philip. 2.10.
So, at the name of Jesus shall every knee bow, that is, not when the word is
pronounced we shall make a courtesy, but we shall all and every creature be
subject to his power, verse. 11.
authority and dominion: for by name there of Jesus is meant Dominatio and
potestas, dominion and power: and, genuflectionis vocabulo exprimitur
subiectio, by bowing there is expressed and meant subjection to that dominion
and power. But perhaps with more plainnes it may be noted, that the name of God
here respects three things chiefly, to wit.

Himself, His works. His word.
If we consider the Lord himself, The name of God what it is.
then we see in him ever majesty and holiness. And this is his name. If we
consider his works, we see justice, mercy, and power in them. And this is his
name. And if we consider his word, there is ever truth, wisdom, and goodness
in it, and this also his name. So that we may conclude this place even as he
that said it, Nomen Dei dicitur omne id quod de illo praedicatur. By the name
of God is here meant whatsoever it is that truly of him may be affirmed, as
that he is good, just, gracious, etc. And this shall have warrant evident and
plain even from the Lord himself in that manifestation of himself to his
servant Moses, Exodus 33.
were he says he will make all his good go before him, 19^
and proclayme the name of the Lord before him, and doing so in deed, his name
is neither this word nor that as, Jehovah, Tetragrammaton, or such like, either
in Hebrew or Greek, this tongue or that, Exodus 34.5. etc.
but it is this: The Lord, the Lord strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and not making the wicked
innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation. See then the great and glorious name of GOD what
it is.

Of the greek article Danaeus page 108.
And what is meant I pray you, by Hallowing of that name?

To hallow or to sanctify signifies two Adam, the righteous sons of God in
himself. Either else that which of it self and in it self is already holy,
so to repute and take so, with all reverence to acknowledge and confess, and
so ever to use and to speak of. In which sense again, wisdom that of her
self is most just, is said to be justified of her children, that is to be so
esteemed, judged, and taken. And in the third of John, Ihon. 3.33.
He that has received his testimony (says he) has sealed that God is true.
That is, nothing but this, does cause and bring to pass, that God as he is in
himself in deed true and truth it self, so he is acknowledged of others to
be. Now in his latter signification is it taken here. And therefore thus
expounded by the learned Sanctificari hic est reuelari, obseruari, glorificari,
honorari, vere agnosci. To be hallowed here, is to be revealed, observed,
glorified, honored, and truly acknowledged. And again, What halowing the
name of God is.
Sanctificari Dei nomen dicitur, cum sacrum, venerabile, purum, augustum esse a
nobis agnoscitur, et praedicatur, et nullo modo contemptim, aut irreuerenter,
cogitetur aut sumatur. The name of God is said to be hallowed, when it is
confessed and published as holy, reverend, pure, and high, and such as by no
means is either thought of, or taken of us contemptibly or irreverently. So
that in plain speech this petition is thus much: O Lord let that majesty and
holiness that is in thy self, that justice, mercy, and power, which thou
show in thy works, and that truth, wisdom, and goodness which is in thy
word, with all thy virtue generally whatsoever comprehended in thy nature, and
fit for the knowledge and use of man be more and more daily known of man, and
received among us with that dread and honor, and reverence that is fit for
such a name, both in word and work, thought and deed, and every way.

A notable request sure, and well beseeming the sons of God, desirous of
their Fathers glory. But thus me think you do not restrain it only to man:
so that in man only this glory of his name is to appear.

No in deed, neither ought I. But know it as a fault in Tertullian and Cyprian
so to do. For so large is the reach of this petition, as that it touches not
only men godly and ungodly, reprobate or elect, but even all things in this
world whatsoever, than to be ordained of the Lord. For in the very least
thing appears some majesty, power, eternity, and virtue of him, which in
this petition we desire as well may appear and be seen and celebrated to
the praise of him, as those greater matters that are in man. And therefore
cries the Prophet of God in his Psalm, to all creatures to praise the Lord:
Psalm. 148.
Sun and Moon, and stars, and light, heaven and earth, dragons, deeps,
fire and water, hail and snow, wind and vapors, storms and tempests,
mountains and hills, trees, beasts, cattle, worms, and all feathered fowls,
and in conclusion, every thing to exalt, hallowe, and sanctify the name of the
Lord. For his name only is excellent and his praise above heaven and earth.
verse. 12.
And to the same end is the 104. Psalm, a very notable song of David also,
Psalm. 104. Romans 1.20.
teaching us plainly, that in all the works of the Lord there is a portion of
this his name, that is, of his majesty, power, wisdom and goodness, which
in this petition and by these words we ought to beg of him, which may
appear, be seen, noted, marked, and observed, and celebrated in this world,
to his glory more and more. So that you see prayer does not mean only man,
but all things, in that order that I have declared. Every thing as it is better
and better known containing matter and argument of Gods praise, either in
respect of workmanship, use, nature, all, or some.

Yet it respects man chiefly, as the work of God, wherein he has showed
himself most, and laid down largest arguments to the glory of his name.

It does so, and therefore so let us think of it. And first see how it beggeth
for us knowledge and understanding still more and more of his name and nature,
because knowledge goes before obedience. Which request of knowledge carries
with it an industry and endeavor in us in all diligence, ever to observe the
Lord in his works, to mark the power, the wisdom, the goodness of him in
creating them, and in giving such nature, use, and operation to them, in
disposing them in such an order, in continuing them in such a course, and so
forth, and condemns the too too common and damnable dullness of the world in
so continual use and so little a regard of these things, being the maine
cause of grievous unthankfulness, and not sanctifying of the name of God in us.

Secondly, we beg in it, as one says, Non modo vt nomen Dei in intellectu
pe^ fidem et noticiam Dei, verumetiam ore, corpore, vitaque tota sanctificetur
et glorificetur. Not only that the name of GOD in our understanding by faith
and knowledge of GOD, but also in mouth, body, and our whole life may be
sanctified and glorified. Of which hallowing of the name of God speaks the
Lord himself by his Prophet saying: Ezekiel. 36.23.
I will sanctify my great name which was polluted among the Heathen, etc. How
will he do it, or what is this sanctification? Mark how it follows, verse. 25.
I will power clean water upon you, and you shall be clean: yea, 26.
from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will
take away the stony heart out of your body, and give you an heart of flesh. And
I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, 27
and you shall keep my judgments, and do them. So that then is the great
name of the Lord sanctified you see and hallowed, when we do not only know,
but do the things that redound unto his praise. For then they that see our
good works are thereby caused to glorify God in the day of the visitation.
1. Peter. 2.12. Math. 5.16.
And even contrariwise again if we do not, we pollute the name of the Lord in
causing it to sound evil amongst the wicked, and the sin is grievous. Of
which complayneth the Lord by his Prophet Esaie, Esaias. 52.
when he says, his name all the day continually is blasphemed: 5.
and by his Apostle to ye Romans, Romans 2.24. 1. Timoth.
and in diverse other places. And the same Apostle charging servant that are
under the yoke to account their masters worthy of all honor, 6.1.
makes this the reason why, Least the name of God and his doctrine be evil
spoken of. Thirdly what we pray against in this petition.
And therefore thirdly, as we seek the one, so we desire to be able to shun
the other in this petition, beseeching him in the sense of these words, that
all those things may be removed, Psalm. 104.
ouerturned, and taken away, 35.
which profane, blemish, or blot that glory of his, either in himself, or in
his works, or in his word and doctrine. Such as are these damnable Atheists
of these latter days, Atheists.
which with their ieasts, scoffs, and mockes deriding all goodness, do not
only discover the name of God, but to their everlasting woe in the flames of
the burning bottomless pit, affirming it flatly in their hearts, that there
is no God at all. Such are they that with their censures will correct the
works of God, and speak evil of them, Libertines.
complain of his providence, and murmr at his judgments, carpe and cavil
at his word, allure unto looseness, and daily work disdain of commanded
obedience, which al, if they be not reformed, are prayed against throughout the
world by all the children of God daily in this petition, to the unspeakable
terror of them, if they had grace to think of it. For how certain is that
vengeance which he that sends it, Mark it and think of it.
bids ask: and how dreadful must it needs be, and even importable when it
comes, which is so often, so earnestly, and by such a number as the whole
Church of God on earth is, in so many places asked, begged, and cried for? O
woe not once thought upon, and yet to be trembled at, shall it not be remembered
in deed? Shall these painted days so poison us quite with the love of this
world, and the fading follyes of a most uncertain estate, that all grace and
goodness shall be contemned of us. And whereas the Prophet of God said, Psalm.
^4.
One day in the courts of the Lords house is better than a thousand. We
say the contrary, that but one hour there is too much, though it be but once
a week, nay once in many weeks, and one day in the course of this world, to
the which yet the Apostle says, Romans 12.
Fashion not your selves, is better and sweeter, and more beseeming a man,
especially a great man, than a thousand in the other: Is it likely that ever
we will wish our selves with that Prophet, Psalm 84. verse. 11.
rather door keepers in this house of GOD, than to dwell in great renowm in the
tents of the ungodly; when we either loure or laugh to be told, we should
come in? Can it be hoped, that either now we do think (God often punishing
such great contempt with lasting blindness) that they are blessed that dwell in
the house of the Lord, being ever praising of God, yea, that the very
Swallows and Sparows that are there, are as it were happy and blessed? O it
is to be feared no. And therefore not David's prayer, not David's spirit,
neither consequently that election to life whereof that spirit is a certain
pledge. Which is terririble enough, if God were in us. That the names of all
feigned gods being utterly abolyshed the only divine name and majesty of God
the heavenly father be had in honor and called upon with pure minds by men of
all ages, countries and parts of the world.
Think of it, and think of this again with it, that all the Church of God
through the world, as I have said, pray against us when we are thus
irreligious and profane, saying, Hallowed be thy name, that is, O Lord confound
with speedy curse of death and woe eternal, all those that not living in the
laws of thy will, cause thy name to hear evil, and to be blasphemed in this
world. Let them perish O Lord, let them perish in the lusts of their own
hearts, and give thy name his glory. Which if hell have not already taken
possession of us, will pearce us, and make us think of reformation of our
selves: the Lord in mercy grant it.

Amen. Amen. And if it do not, How Gods name is unhallowed and polluted you may
further see in the 2. Com.
time passes and time comes, the which two times shall differ, as mercy and
judgment differ, favor and fury, love and loathing. And the word of the
Lord shall not deceive us, Romans 12.
saying vengeance is mine, and J will repay, but how soon that know not we.
2. Pet. 3.9.
But well we know, the Lord is not slack concerning his promise as some men
count slackenes, but he is patient toward us, and would have all men come to
repentance, and one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day, and this day will come. verse. 8. verse. 10.
But now I pray you let me move a doubt or two unto you. And first why the
Church of God should pray that the Lords name may be hallowed which is already,
ever was, and shall be most holy, pure and glorious?

Because we do not pray it, in respect of him, but of our selves and others,
such as we are: for the Lord in deed is holy, neither can any thing be added to
that holiness or glory of him to make it more, but we do not know it, so much
as we should do, neither speak of it, and imitate it as we ought: and therefore
we pray that as he is in deed, so more and more it may appear and shine out
to the world, all lettes and hindrances being taken away, that his due praise
may be given unto him of us, that is, we pray not in this petition, He
sanctifies us by making us holy, we him by confessing him holy, etc.
that any holiness may be added to his name, that already it has not, but that
as it is in it self in deed and ever, so we may have grace to see and
confess, and more and more daily may be reueiled, and manifested to this
world. For the Lord is said to sanctify us, either inwardly or outwardly.
Inwardly by his spirit, outwardly by his word, and this again either by
seperating us from our sins, quickening us by his holy Spirit, or continuance
of them both.

An other doubt is, Apoc. 22.11.
why it should be said in that place. And he that is unjust, let him be unjust
still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still. Seeing here we are
taught to pray, and all men, that our lives may be holy and pure ever, to the
end his glorious name may have praise thereby.

That place you mean is not so spoken, Permissiue.
as that we should continue and delight in filthynes or unrighteousness. But
it is a declaration of the course that the wicked will take, and withal a
secret confirmation of the godly, notwithstanding the same. As if he should
have said, be not you troubled or hindered in your most godly course of
obedience to me, either by the continuance and ever increasing of the wicked in
their wickedness, or by my toleraunce and long forbearing to smite them. But
follow you me and my commandments, stagger not, look not back, give not over
and as for the wicked, he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that
is filthy, let him be filthy still: their punishment they shall be sure of in
their time: and for you, go ye on without stop: let them be as they are to
their woe.

The prayer.
O Mighty GOD, look upon us woormes and wretches, here at thy feet lying
and begging mercy. Let us obtain of thy fatherly goodness, what thou have so
lovingly taught us to ask: that thy name may be hallowed. Let our eyes and the
eyes of all men lightened by thy grace, behold that majesty and holiness that is
in thy self more and more, that Justice, mercy and power, which thou show
in thy works and that truth, wisdom, and goodness which is in thy word, more
and more, with all thy virtues generally whatsoever comprehended in thy nature
and fit for the knowledge and use of man, let them be more and more daily
known unto us. And when in mercy thou have bestowed as it may seem good to
thine own wisdom, this knowledge upon us. O heavenly father let it not be in
us a bare knowledge, but join to our knowledge that dread and honor, that
regard and reverence in our obedience that is fit for such a name, both in word
and work, thought and deed, and every way. Make us O Lord ever more and more
to avoid and shun what polluteth thy name, and causes thy truth to hear
evil of the wicked. Remove and ouerturne also good Lord all those things in
thy good time, which profane, blemish, and blot this glory of thine shining
either in thy self, in thy word, or in thy works. Such as are these
irreligious Atheists of our sinful days, which with their mockes, and
scoffs, tants, and jests, deride all goodness, outface all conscience and care
to please thee, and daily work disdain where they may have hearing of
obedience to thy blessed will. O thou mighty God, remove their seats out of
kingdoms and countries. Out of Cities and towns, and out of private houses
and families. Awake Lord in thy power, and think of thy holy name, let not
these inchaunters and charmers prevail against thee, and glory that they have
banished out of so many places the fear of thy name. They are unholy and they
would have all such, they are unclean and they infect where they come, they
are grievous rocks of no small offense, and good Lord remove them from thy
chosen. Lessen also for thy holy name sake the co^playners of thy providence,
the murmurers at thy judgments, carpers and cauillers at thy word, allurers to
loosenes of life, and behavior, and all that polluting thy holy name, yet hate
to be reformed. Finally dear father, let not the shames of ungodliness daily
before our faces carry us away. Neither these deep waterfloods drown our
souls, the lewd and loose examples we behold with grief, let them never
prevail against us to pervert us, but if thy just wrath have sealed their
confusion they being unjust, let the^ be unjust still, they being filthy, let
them be filthy still to their own woe, not to our stop or hinderance to do
our duties, in seeking to know thy glorious name more and more, and to
sanctify and hallow it according to that true knowledge more and more. And
dearest God begin not only obedience in us, but confirm thy favor to us
evermore: strengthen and establish us in all goodness: make strong our inward
man against all assaults and these seely souls pend up in sinful prison
during life, by welcome change receive when time shall be with thee to live,
till thy day of doom, and then receiving their mates again, but immortal and
incorruptible, with them to live conjoined again for evermore in joy and
comfort. But not this for our sakes O mighty Lord, but for Jesus Christ our
only life and Savior. Amen.

The second Petition. Thy kingdom come.
Having besought the Lord in the former petition, The order.
that his name might be hallowed, that is, as then was said, that that
majesty and holiness which is in himself, that justice, mercy, and power
which he shows in his works, and that truth, wisdom, and goodness which
is in his word, with all other virtues generally whatsoever comprehended in
his nature, and fit for the knowledge and use of man, might be more and more
daily known of men, and receive amongst us that dread, honor, and reverence
that is fit for such a name both in word and work, thought and deed, and
every way: it fitly follows in the second place, to beseech the same Lord
to grant way and means, whereby that same shall be effected and brought to
pass, namely, that his kingdom may come. For if the Lord rule and reign in
us and over us, it shall be so. And if he do not, it shall not be so. No, we shall
be so far from sanctifying his name, that for want of his kingdom in us, Satan
shall erect his kingdom in us, the effects whereof shall be great and grievous
pollutions of his name. Wherefore the order is most convenient and good.

The words of the petition are few and easily understood, if we mark them.
For the kingdom of GOD is the ruling and reigning of GOD in the hearts of
men, and the coming of this kingdom, is the beginning, increasing, and
continuing of it in us. So thy kingdom come, is in effect thus much, as if we
should say: O Lord, erect and begin, O Lord increase and propagate, O Lord
establish and ever continue in our hearts thy rule and government, to the death
of sin and life of righteousness, the true effects of thy ruling ever. Which
yet is not so plain as it will be, when we have considered of the several
members implied in these words. For we must understand, that when we are
taught to pray for this kingdom of God, all the means whereby it is effected
in us, are included to be prayed for, as also all stops and lets, enemies, and
hinderaunces whatsoever withstanding this kingdom, prayed against, that they
may be removed and taken away. Regnum Potentiae. Regnum Gratiae. Regnum
Gloriae.

To be then as plain as I can, the kingdom of God is said to be of three
sorts, to wit, of power, of grace, and of glory. The kingdom of power is
that sovereignty which the Lord has over all the things in this world,
directing, guiding, ruling, and disposing of every one of them as his good
pleasure is, and causing all the creatures in the world, yea, all the worlds,
works, and thoughts of men, to serve to his glory, wisdom and will,
whatsoever is intended by man, or any means to the contrary, which the
Heathens have called destiny, or inevitable necessity. This kingdom is not
here meant, when we pray, Fatum.
Thy kingdom come. For the Lord never has, neither ever will loose this
kingdom, yt is, as I say, this authority, and power over al things, to make
them serve to his pleasure, and to bring to pass what he will have, whereby we
should need to pray for it, that it may come. Of this kingdom may it be
said, Psalm. 135.6.
that is in the Psalm: Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he, in heaven and
in earth, in the sea, and in all deapths. For it subiecteth, as you see, to the
Lord, al these, and al their works whatsoever. And then what is exempted out of
this kingdom of power, if heaven, earth, sea and deeps be ruled by it? Yet
stays not the Prophet so, but proves by examples what he has said, and
affirms it of ye Lord, that he brings up the Clouds from the ends of the
earth, and makes the Lightning with the rain: that he draws forth the
winds out of his treasures: that he smites the first borne of Egypt both of
man and beast: that it is he that sends tokens and wonders, etc. Of this
Kingdom may it be meant that is said by the Apostle: for of him, Romans 11.36.
and for him, and through him are all things: with a number such like places
speaking of the providence of God. Ephesians. 11.
And to this kingdom of God it may be applied that the wiseman says: Non est
consilium, non est prudentia, non est fortitudo aduersus Dominum. There is no
council, there is no wisdom, there is no strength against ye Lord. For he
has ruled ever, he does rule, and will rule for ever al things, let all the
world conspire against it what they can. Again, the Lord works al things
after the counsel of his own will: He gives rain upon the earth, Job. 5.10.
and powers water upon the streates: he sets up on high them that be low,
that the sorrowful may be exalted to salvation: he scatters the devises of
the crafty, so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they do
enterprise: He takes the wise in their craftiness, Iob^ 9.5.
and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish. He remoueth the mountains and
they feel not when he overthrows them in his wrath. He remoueth the earth
out of her place, that the pillars thereof do shake. He commands the Sun,
and it rises not, he closes up the Stars as under a signet. He himself
alone spreads out the heavens, and walks upon the height of the sea. verse.
2.
All these are said of this kingdom. Read Syrach the 17. to the 20. verse,
and see what a kingdom of power acknowledged over all the beasts and fowls,
men and matters whatsoever. Notable is the 4. of Exodus. verse. 11. Exodus 4.11.
For those seem casual in the mothers belly, whereof they must needs be
understood, man being not created so at the first. The kingdom of grace shall
much better be understood, if we consider how we were created, how by sin
corrupted, and how now in mercy daily by grace renewed. The creation of man
you know is laid down to have been according to the Image and likeness of God
himself. For God created man (says the book of wisdom without corruption
at the first, Creation.
and made him after the Image of his own likeness. And he clothed them with
strength, says Sirach, as they have need, Syrac. 17.3.
and made them according to his Image. Which Image of God makes not, GOD like
unto men with legs, arms, hands, a gray head, and so forth, as not only
other heretics but even our holy papists have imagined, and by so paynting him
in their Churches and windows, made ye ignorant believe it: but it makes man
like unto God, in holiness, righteousness, wisdom and so forth. For so
expounds the Apostle, these words to the Ephesians, and there might all
Papists have seen it, if they would. Put on the new man, says he, Ephesians.
4.
which after God (that is after the Image of God) is created unto righteousness
and true holiness, meaning by these two words all perfection, as wisdom, will
to do good, truth, innocence, love of God, power, and such like. See what the
Image of God is. Now then being thus created and made, who ruled in man, or
what kingdom, Corruption.
was he subject unto? The Lord you see ruled in him, and to his Kingdom was he
subject. But alas the time, this happy estate was quickly lost. The Serpent
deceived the woman, the woman the man: Sin entered, GOD was offended: and a
fearful change from al weal to woe, in a little time, and brought to pass.
So that now look on man again and his copy is changed. Satan rules, sin
is entered, death follows, Romans 5.12.
and this blessed Kingdom of God in man and over man is lost, gone, and
destroyed. Yea to speak playner, and not so generally, familiarity with GOD
is turned into a fearful flying off from God, for they hide themselves from
the presence of the Lord among the trees of the garden. Genesis 38. verse. 7.
Wisdom is turned into folly, and they think with a few Fig leaves to
cover their shame. Yea such is our wisdom now, as Romans 8.7. Truth is turned
into lies, and they deal not plainly with the Lord. The serpent deceived me,
the woman deceived me: verse. 12.
and there is not plainly, we have sinned, O Lord forgive us. Now is it said
of man, verse. 13*
that all the imaginatio^s of the thoughts of his heart is only evil
continually, Genesis 6.5.
that we are all become as an unclean thing, Esaias. 64.
and that all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes, that we all do fade
like a leaf, and our iniquities like a wind do take us away. Romans 7.14.
Now is it said of us that we are carnal, sold under sin, 19.
that we do not the good which we would, 21.
but the evil which we would not, that do we: that when we would do good
we are thus yoked, that evil is present with us: 23.
that there is an other law in our members rebelling against the law of our
mind, and leading us captive unto the law of sin which is in our members.
That the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 2.
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. Now is it said
of us, Ephesians. 2.
that by nature we are the children of wrath, dead in trespasses and sins,
walking in them according to the course of this world, and after the Prince
that rules in the air, even the Spirit that works in us the children of
disobedience. Now is it said of man that was so excellent, Psalm. 57.
Verily every man living is altogether vanity. Now cries the Prophet of men,
that his soul is amongst Lions, that their teeth are spears, Psalm. 14.
and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. That they are corrupt and become
abominable, that there is none that does good, no not one. And where rules
all this evil that we have thus purchased to our woe? What is corrupted in us
by our fall.
O further grief! our bodies, our souls, our minds, our wills, our hearts
our hands, our feet, and our whole man is corrupted, sin has entered over
all, and by sin Satan as Lord and King rules over all, till this other
kingdom come that here we pray for. For, eratis tenebrae, says the Apostle,
Ye were darkness, Ephesians. 5.
but now are ye light in the Lord. And more plainly before, having their
understanding darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through that
ignorance that is in them, Genesis 6.
etc. Therefore you see the mind corrupted. Of the heart and will it was said
before that the imaginations of the thoughts thereof are only evil
continually. And out of the heart (now says our Savior) proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, Math. 15.16.
fornications, theftes, false witness, sclaunders, and this is stuff that
defiles the man. With a thousand places more crying out of the waywardness of
man's heart and will, the crookedness, stiffness and stubbornness of it against
the Lord and all good. Romans 7.18. Romans 3.13. etc.
Of the whole man, says the Apostle, Noui quod in me, hoc est in carne mea,
non est bonum: I know that in me, that is, in my flesh there is no good. Our
mouth, our feet, our throat, our eyes, and all are charged with their faults
in the word of the Lord. That free will that was in man to do good, it is
gone says Saint Austen, and, homo male vtens libero arbitrio, and se perdidit
and arbitrium. Man abusing his free will, lost both himself and it. And now is
it true that we are not able to think a good thought as of our selves, but
both to will and to perform is of the Lord. Now is it true that our Savior
said, sine me nihil potestis facere: without me you can do nothing. Non dixit
sine me difficulter aliquid potestis, aut sine me non potestis aliquid magni
facere, sed nihil potestis, etc. He did not say (says S. Austen) without me
you can hardly do any thing, or you can not do any great matter, but simply
and flatly you can do nothing. Meaning in spiritual matters: for herein, quid
habes, quod non accepisti? what have thou that thou have not received? 1. Cor.
Gratia dei sum quod sum:.4
1. Cor.
By the grace of God I am that I am: 15.
whatsoever it be if it be good. And to go no further in this sort, now must
man and woman, be they never so righteous, cry out upon their
unrighteousness, and hide their faces from the judgment of the Lord, if he
should out of the comfort provided for them, seek to judge them. David the
dear one of the Lord and a man according to his own heart, yet must confess
of himself with woe. Psalm. 51.
Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified. The great Prophet Esayas must say, Woe is me for I
am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips. Esaias. 6.
5.
Mary the virgin and blessed amongst women must rejoice in her Savior, and not
in her self, and so all others whatsoever. For we are fallen. Our life that
should have been so pleasant, behold how bitter, heavy, and miserable. Great
travel is created for all men, Syrac. 40.1. etc.
and an heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their mothers womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all
things. 2.
Namely their thoughts and fear of the heart, and their imagination of the
things they wait for, and the day of death: 3.
from him that sits upon the glorious throne, unto him that is beneath in
the earth and ashes: from him that is clothed in blewe silk, and wears a
crown, 4.
even to him that is clothed in simple linen, wrath and envy, trouble and
unquietness, and fear of death, and rigor and strife: 5.
and in the time of rest the sleep in the night upon his bed, change his
knowledge. 6.
A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward in sleeping, he is as in a
watch tower in the day: he is troubled with the visions of his heart, as one
that runs out of a battle etc. Our days that should have been without end,
now are few and full of woe: for life we have got death: for pleasure pain: for
good evil: for heaven hell: and for endless joy eternal woe. O dreadful
fall. Thus created then innocent, God ruled: but thus fallen from that
innocence, Satan rules: and we are, as has been said, by nature the
children of wrath, walking after the Prince that rules in the air, that is
the Devil. But the Lord is gracious and his mercy indureth for ever:
Regeneration.
there remains therefore hope by a restitution or regeneration, which the
Scripture teaches us thus much of: namely,

That whereas Satan abuses that corrupt nature of ours through the great power
which he has over us for our sins, and drives us from the word and all
religion, into all blindness, ignorance, and errors; thrusts us into diverse
miseries and calamities, and in the end into eternal death, there being where
he rules, no true love of God or any grace but sinning, without sting, touch,
or feeling: the Lord our God in a contrary course of love, where it pleases
him, begins with that corruption of nature, whereby Satan before was strong,
and takes it away by little and little, begetting us anew to a better life, and
restoring that Image of his in us again, whereunto we were first created, and
which so fearfully we were fallen from. Our mind he illuminateth with some
heavenly light whereby it begins to know aright God, and grace, our will
receives a new strength to embrace the word, to rest in it, Romans 6.13.
and to incline it self to the testimonies of the Lord. Our heart is purged
and loves the Lord, and all the members of the body, before the weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin becomme by measure, the weapons of righteousness
unto God. So sin dies, grace lives, and we love him, fear him, trust in
him pray to him often, and in all our wants, with such like. This is now the
kingdom of grace, and this is that we pray for here immediately. The kingdom
of glory is that happy and eternal estate which follows in heaven after this
life, The Kingdom of glory.
which we also pray for here, but mediatly as we say, that is, when the
kingdom of grace in this world is ended.

Thus much being said then for plainenes of these three kingdoms, the kingdom
of power, of grace, and of glory, as also of which of them the petition is
meant. So now what we pray in plain words: namely thus much, O Lord subdue
unto thy majesty all power of Satan in us by any means: subdue our sinful
flesh and all the wicked lusts thereof, to the enlarging of thy kingdom here
upon earth, The sense of the petition brefely.
and grant that all the powers of body and soul may be enabled by thy holy
Spirit to work acceptably in thy sight, that thou may dwell in us, and we
in thee for ever, and all thine and our enemies utterly trodden down, thou
may gloriously reign and triumph over all, and we by Christ may finally as
thy children and heirs be made partakers of thy everlasting kingdom.

Now is not this brought to pass but by means, and therefore as we pray for
the thing that the Lord would grant it, so pray we also inclusiuely for the
means that in mercy they may be given to the effecting of it. The means are
these: first the word, even this heavenly and blessed word of God, so finally
accounted of in the world, and not only so, but even hated, despised, and
rejected of numbers. For so says the Apostle, it is the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecian: Romans 1.16.
that is, it is the mighty instrument of GOD, without which men are damned and
cast away. Yea such an instrument it is of power and force, where it pleases
the Lord, The means whereby this Kingdom of God arises in us.
that it has greater strength and authority than all the eloquence, than all
the wisdom, than all the learning, than all the policy and power of the
world. Let the days before us witness to this truth, I mean those primitive
times when the Lord began to power his mercy on mankind for Christ by the
ministry of his Christ and of his disciples, wherein notwithstanding this
divine word of his was resisted by all the worldly gifts and powers which I
named, yet had it marvelous success, and did wonderfully increase.
Demosthenes and Cicero for their eloquence, Solon and Aristides, for their
wisdom, Plato and Aristotle for their learning, Alexander and Pompey, for
their manhood, were of power, of fame, and in the world, when they lived, able
by these gifts to do much: Yet the best of all these had much to do, even a
few years, to keep their own Citizens, their own countrymen, their own
subjects in obedience, and to cause them to give place to good and wholesome
Counsel, and to obey laws provided for their own profit. Yea every one of
them almost to their own confusion, proved of how small force, their
wisdom, their eloquence, their power was, and with the end of their lives,
left their commonweals welneere utterly decayed and undone. But co^trarywise
the Apostles, not learned, but poor fishermen, not with any enticing words of
man's wisdom, The Apostles powrefull ministry by the word.
not commended or set forth with those gifts and ornaments that men so greatly
do esteem, went forth into the world preaching the disdayned Gospel of
Christ crucified, and by the simple doctrine thereof, did in few years for the
state of religion change the face of the whole world, notwithstanding that
the Empire of Rome, and other mighty principalities did to the uttermost of
their power resist it, and the reformation that by the Apostles in this manner
was begun, continued and spread it self mightily, and marueilously, even
against the assaults of most cruel and tyrannical persecutions, under Nero,
Domitian, Traian, Adrian, Anthony, Dioclesian, and many mo. A force far
passing the power of man, that in the midst of al such bloody deaths and most
exquisite torments, yet was able daily to get children to the kingdom of
Christ, yea and that so plentifully that well were they that might run and
profess themselves Christians, that they might dye the death for it
continually. It is a very notable story that is written of such as this word
of the Lord had begotten to Christ in Edessa a city in Mesopotamia, who being,
Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 5. Mark this history.
as it is said, banished out of all Churches by the decree of the Emperor made
their meetings in ye fileds. Which espied of the Emperor, in a very great rage
he struck his chief captain with his fist, and asked why therehence also
they were not removed according as he had commanded. The Captain the next day
determines to dispatch them, but yet in pity to them although himself a
Pagan, by secret means lets it go abroad that the next day he would destroy
all that were found at those meetings, hoping thereby to warn them to abstain,
and so to save themselves. But see ye power of this word in the hearts of men.
The next day the Christians, although thus admonished, yet flock thither in
more plentiful sort than at other times, yet run headlong as it were and in
great have, as men affraide to come to late to dye. Amongst all, the Captains
noted a certain woman, so hastily and with such speed to run out of her
house, as that she stayed not either to shut the door of her house, or to put
on her clothes as womanhoode would, and in her arms a little infant. When he
saw it, he commanded to call her to him, and being come, asked her whither she
made all that have. Into the field, says she, where the christians meet. And
have thou not heard, says he, that the chief Captain is going thither, to put
to the sword all he finds there. Yes, says she, I have heard it, and
therefore I make have that I may be there when he comes. And what will thou
do with this young babe, says he. Take it with me also, says she, that if the
Lord will, it may be vouchsafed martyrdom also. When the Captain heard this,
he stayed his course, commanded his charet to turn, and to the Emperor
presently he goes, told him, if it pleased his majesty to command him death,
he was ready, but to do what he commanded he could not: for thus and thus had
he seen it, and so declared unto the Emperor all this story. Who by and by
was appeased, stayed his hand, and restrained his intended evil to such
zealous lovers of their God. Romans 1.16.
See now how true it is that the Apostle says, it is the power of God, that
is, potens instrumentum, the mighty instrument of God to get men and keep men
to the Lord. Act. 17.6.
They were accounted the men that troubled all the world, yet were they not
discouraged. De ciuit. Dei. 22.
Ligabantur, include bantur, cedeba^tur, torquebantur, and tamen
multiplicabantur. They were bound, says S. Austen, they were tormented and
racked, and yet for all this they multiplied and increased. So was it eue^ in
these latter days of ours, when all pity and truth was buried as it were in
the bottom of the Sea, and Antichrist of Rome in his ruff, power and strength
exalting himself above all that was called God, and made Princes and Emperors
to kiss his feet, yea when it was death almost to think of the restoring of
true religion, even then I say did this word of the Lord in the mouth of one
simple man at the first against the clamors of Monks and Friars, against the
scorning of Bishops, against the power of the Pope, against the assistance of
temporal Princes against all torments by fire, by faggot, by sword, by
imprisonment: light such a candel as now shines to all the Country of Europe,
and by the power of man it cannot be put out. 2. Cor. 10.4. etc.
Wherefore judge whether the Apostle said not true, when speaking of this word,
he said it was a weapon not carnal, but mighty, through God to cast down
holds, casting down the imaginations and every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ etc. Wherefore we see by this, first proof plain enough
that a means and a most mighty strong and powreful means to erect this
kingdom of God in our hearts, which here we pray for, is the word of God. For
there is no wisdom, no Counsel, no strength against it. But though all the
heathen rage most horribly, and the people imagine continually, yet it is but a
vain thing. Though Kings and Princes and all the powers of this earth band
themselves against it, yet will it not serve. For he that dwells in the
heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and this word of his prevails where he
will, to whom he will, when he will, and as long as he will. Other plain
proofs, yt this is a means to erect this kingdom, are these, first Saint
James, where it is said: Of his own will he begat us with the word of truth,
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures. The author of all
good, says Saint James in general, Iam. 1.18.
and of this good in special, namely our new birth, is the Lord, and the
means is the word even the word of truth. Ihon. 17.
So says our Savior himself in the Gospel, Sanctify them O Father with thy
truth, and what is that, thy word is truth. So says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 4.15.
Though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many
Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you. (And by what means) through
the Gospel. And again, Philemon. 1^. Galat. 4.19. Galat. 3.2.
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus whom I have begotten in my bonds, to wit,
by the word. And again, this one thing would I learn of you, O foolish
Galathians, received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing
of faith preached unto you? Likewise S. Peter, Being borne anew, not of mortal
seed but immortal, Peter. 1.23.
by the word of god. And lastly father Abraham from heaven, They have Moses and
the Prophets, Luke 16 31.
let them hear them, etc. as if he should have said if thou would have
thy brethren begotten to the Lord, that he ruling in them, they may rule here
with him, and escape that place of torment where thou now justly art, the
means truly is Moses and the Prophets, that is the word of God, for if that
erect not the kingdom of GOD, in them it shall not be erected by any dead, if
they should rise and be sent unto them. For that is the means which the Lord
has ordained, and which to this day has had power to beget to him so many as
he would have. Esaias 55.1.
Wherefore when the Lord will promise a blessing to a kingdom, Country, and
people, that shall be in deed a great blessing, he promises this word, and
this word in plentiful measure, and when he will threaten a plague, Amos. 8.
and a grievous plague, then says he behold the days come that I will send
a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of
hearing the word of the Lord. And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from
the North even unto the East shall they run too and fro, to seek the word
of the Lord, and shall not find it. So then see we that this word of our
God is his mighty means to raise up this kingdom of his grace in us, this
day when we have it giving something, and so as it were laying one stone to
this spiritual building, the next day giving more, and so laying as it were an
other stone, and so on to a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fulness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.
that is till he have wrought his will in us in this world and means to
translate us to an other. Wherefore as we pray that the Lord in mercy would
erect this kingdom in us: The means prayed for as well as the thing.
when we pray, Thy kingdom come, so do we beseech the Lord in this petition
to grant us all the means appointed and ordained of him to this building, and
by name this mighty means and mercy great of his holy word, that we may
have it amongst us still, and enjoy it in peace, if it be his will, to the
raising up of these spiritual walls of a spiritual house of God within us
daily more and more, till it be fully finished to the pleasure of his majesty
here, and our eternal comfort here and elsewhere for ever with him in his
other kingdom of glory. And the God of heaven and all mercy grant this to us,
and make us thankful for it.

The word of God is either read or preached.
Now beloved, is this word either read unto us, or of us, without any
preaching, or preached unto us? For by these two means builds it in us, and
not by lying in our houses, bound in silver or gold, or any costly sort
whatsoever. No, mor then the Physicians prescription confected by the
Apothecarie and brought unto us, profits our disease by standing in the
window, and not further touched. And therefore as I have said that it was a
means, and proved it to you out of the same word, so let me say a little to
you of the using of this means also.

Of reading the word.
TWo extremities there are, Two dangerous extremities to be avoided of all men.
which of all Gods chosen are to be eschewed: the one is an estimation of
reading so great, as that being had we feel no want, neither think it a
want, never or seldom to have any preaching. The other is, so far to extol
preaching, as that we utterly contemn reading, yea exclude it from all power
in the blessing of God to work faith in us, or any. The mean betwixt both
which is a right and true conceit both of reading and preaching. Know we
therefore that in the word they are both commended, yea commanded and ordained
of the Lord, as means to erect this kingdom of his in our hearts, for which
we pray, and of which we now speak. And first for reading to name but a few
places of a number, mark what the Lord in his law laid down for all his
people. Deuteronomy. 31.9.
Every seventh year when the year of freedom shall be in the feast of the
tabernacles, when all Israel shall come to appear before the Lord thy God in
the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before all Israel,
that they may hear it. Garher the people together, men, women, and children,
and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and keep and observe all the words of
the Law. etc. See a direct commandment to read the scriptures to the people
as well as to preach them, and not only that, but even a mention also of
profit that shall come thereby, namely, learning, and fearing, and keeping of
the ways of the Lord. And therefore reading is not without all blessing. The
13. of the Acts tells us it was the custom of the Church then to have the
Law and the Prophets read unto the people. For, Act. 13.15.
after the lecture of the Law and Prophets (says the text) the rulers of the
Synagogue sent unto them, saying: ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on. This godly custom our Savior was so far
from misliking, Luc. 4.
16.
as that himself willingly used it. In the 15. of the Acts it is said, Act.
15.21.
that Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, seeing he is
read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day. In the 36. of Jeremy we read and see
how Baruch was commanded by Jeremy to write at his mouth, Iere. 36.6.
or as he did indite, and tell him all the words of the Lord which he had
spoken unto him upon a roll or book, and then to take that roll and to go
into the house of the Lord, and to read it in the audience of all the people.
In hope that by that reading upon the book to them in the absence of Jeremy,
who was now shut up, the people might be moved to pray before the Lord, and
every one to return from his evil way. And Baruch did so twice. See now and
mark both the warrant of reading, and a profit hoped for by it of the godly.
So far were they ever from either contemning this means, or from denying it
power in Gods blessing to work faith and repentance in the hearers.

Bullinger goes further then I now do Bullingers judgment of the ministers
reading.
upon these words (for I allege them only to show the warrant of this our use
in our Churches here in England of reading the Scriptures to the people) and
says he: Ne pigeat nos laborum, ne pudeat recitationis ex libro, si ea
destituamur vi memoriae, qua sine libro memoriter verbum Domini libere
annuntiemus. Nemo reiecisse aut aduersatus esse Baruchum legitur propter
recitatos ex libro manuscripto sermones Domini. Cur ergo tu fidelem ministrum
reijceres and audire dedignareris, qui fideliter ea praelegit quae reuelata
sunt a Domino? Non dico haec, quod non nisi recitari velim ex scripto sermones
ad populu^, sed si magna necessitas, and idoneorum ministrorum raritas ita
flagitet, ne fastidiant verbum dei auditores. That is: Let us not be weary of
our labors: let us not be ashamed to read upon the book the word of the
Lord, if we want memory fully to declare it by heart or without the book. We
do not read here that any man rejected or refused Baruch for his reading upon
the written book the words of God, why therefore should thou reject or
disdain to hear a faithful Minister, which faithfully reads those things
that the Lord has reueiled to him. A faithful minister.
This speak I not, because I would have nothing but reading of Sermons written
unto the people, but that if great necessity co^straine or a want of fit
Ministers so require, that the hearers may not loathe the word of God. Thus
far was he from the extremity I speak of, and his wisdom, gravity and
deep judgment is known sufficiently to all the learned.

Socrates in his story reports thus of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople,
Socr. histor. Eccle. lib. 7. cap. 2.
and a good Bishop. Primum cum praesbyterij gradum obtinuerit, co^ciones, quas
summo studio confecerat, ad verbum ediscens, in ecclesia recitauit. Postea
crebro vsu and diligentia, maiorem audaciam adeptus, ex tempore concionari
coepit, rationemque docendi magis popularem secutus est, etc. First when he
obtained the degree of a Minister, his sermons that with great study and
diligence he had made, word by word he learned without book, and then
recited them in the Church. Afterward with often use and diligence, he attained
to greater audacitie, and began to preach ex tempore, and followed a more
plain way of teaching. Yet do we never read that the Church then disdayned
this measure, neither refused to hear him, much less exclaymed against his
ministry as to him unlawful to use, and to all others to acknowledge and
receive. I lay not down what Theodoret writes of Flauianus, Theodoret.
histor. ecclesias. lib. 4. cap. 5. Possidon. in vita August cap. 5. Vrsinus
catechis. Defense against D. Br. page 46.
what Possidonius of Valerius and Alipius, what later writers say generally of
Ministers that they have their warrant, si mediocria dona, if they have mean
gifts, and in some measure be able to teach etc. I mention not as I might the
discrete care of some godly and reverent brethren protesting (...) conscience,
in frequenting their Churches, and communicating in prayer and Sacraments, when
themselves were restrained a while from their Ministry, and happily the
Ministers for the time in their places of far meaner gifts. Neither that
diverse under their hands have testified that they judge it schismatic thus
to do. Appe^dix to the answer of the obstr. page 214.
Yet might these things be considered and well school the violence of some.
But how school them? to the bolstring up and bearing with ignorance unthought
upon a dead conscience in them that should see? Far is it, the searcher of
hearts knows, from my soul. But thus far to school them never to disdain
for a less measure, whom GOD has blessed with some measure, and careful
diligence gives hope of better measure, Calu. aduersus Anabaptistas artic. 2.
page 582.
as GOD will. For truly even in this case it may be said with Calvin, Cum sub
specie studij perfectionis, etc. When under the color of desire of perfection
we can tolerate and bear with no imperfection and want, either in the body,
or in the members of the Church, then does the devil puff us up with pride,
and seduce us with hypocrisy, that he may prick us forward to forsake the
flock of Christ, well knowing that he shall have the victory, if he can so
do. For when as no where else either remission of sins or salvation is to be
had, although we make a show of a life more then Angel like, yet if with such
boldness we separate our selves from a Christian congregation, we become
devils.

Iustine Martyr says, that in his time the manner was, on the Sabbath day,
Apol. pro christianis.
when the people were gathered together, to have the Scriptures read in the
public congregation, and in the time of publyke prayer, for the space of one
whole hour. And how common are these speeches with Austen: Ye heard when the
Gospel was read, ye heard ere while when it was read, if ye gave ear to the
reading: dearly beloved, we have heard in the lesson that has been read us,
etc. And for the profit of reading, the Fathers and learned with one consent
have ever said that it is great. That we feed our faith thereby, The profit
of the Scriptures read.
raise up our affiance, fasten our hope, grow expert in the Scriptures, so
that we cannot so easily be deceived by false teachers, that we are made
acquainted with the phrase, and whereas by a preacher one book cannot be gone
over in diverse years, by this profitable and godly use of reading the
Scriptures, even all the books of God are gone over many times in one year,
to the great instruction of people, if they will themselves. Let no hardening
therefore in the name of al blasphemous Papists call reading of the Scriptures
to the people in the Church a spiritual dumbness, Papists call reading a
spiritual dumbnes.
and a thing unprofitable, but let us with ye chosen of the Lord ever reverence
the good of it, and bless God for our liberty. For it had never ben written
in letters to this day, it had never ben translated into sundry tongues by
the gift from heaven of the knowledge of tongues, neither ever had it been
commanded by the Lord to be read to the people, if it had not bin a sanctified
means by him to the great good of his people and Church. Wherefore to go no
further, since we see it plainly to be of the Lord both commanded and blessed,
let us see a little, if it be not also so for the people themselves to read
it, if they have the ability. Surely it is. For the words are plain: Ihon.
5.
Search the Scriptures. And they cannot with truth be restrained from giving a
warrant of reading to all men. Blessed is the man that meditateth in the law of
God day and night. Psalm. 1.
Is meditation lawful and all reading damnable. Psalm. 119.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? even by ruling himself after
thy word. Are young men then bound to rule themselves after Gods book, and
yet no man suffered to look within the leaves? A thousand such places there
are, which I need not to note. Timothy was brought up in the reading and
knowledge of Scriptures from his childhood, and the Lord has commended it. The
Beraeans took their Bibles, Act. 17.
and turned to the proves of Paule^ when he preached, and they are highly
commended. The Eunuch had his book in the Chariot, and the Lord looked on him.
Coloss. 3.16.
The word of GOD must dwell plentiously amongst us, etc. as is there written,
and therefore we may read it. We must take the swoorde of the spirit, Ephesians.
6.16.
which is the word of God, as well as either helmet or breast plate, or any
other part of our spiritual armor: and therefore we may read it. Wherefore
well said Saint Austen: Nec solum sufficiat quod in ecclesia diuinas lectiones
auditis, sed etiam in domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes
requirite. Let it not content you to hear the holy Scripture read unto you in
the Church only, Augustine requires reading of the word at home in our houses.
but in your houses also at home, either read them your selves, or cause
others to read them. Well decreed that first Council of Nice, that no house
should be without either a Bible, or at least a new Testament. Well cries
Origin, Vtinam omnes faceremus quod scriptum est: scrutamini scripturas, Would
God we did all as it is written, Search the Scriptures. Chrysostom.
Well cried that good Father, Co^parate vobis Biblia animaru^ pharmaca
seculares. Get you Bibles yelaie men, for they are the medicines of your
souls, etc. But see the iniquity of Rome. It shall be lawful to read any
man's book, Consider this well.
Si faciat pro nobis, that is, if he be a Papist, yea, and the mo we have in
our closets and chambers of such books, the holier Catholics we: but the
Lords book that is able to make us wise unto salvation, 2. Timoth ^.15.
and is sweeter than the honey, we may not touch it, we may not have it, or
read it. For if we do, we shall be heretics. So man's work shall make us
Saints, and Gods work devils, Popish writings Catholics, and heavenly
writing heretics, if they be read. O dreadful blasphemy and doctrine of
death. Great is the patience of the Lord that puts up this, and bears it
daily, when with great justice heaven and earth might agree together to flashe
out fire to consume such teachers, and the other to rend in pieces and swallow
up the ashes, when they art burnt of such blasphemers. Is not this to shut up
the kingdom of God before men, Math. 23.
and neither to enter in themselves, nor to suffer others that would enter?
And Woe to such, says the Lord there. Hoc non est sanantium, nec
viuificantium, sed magis grauantium et angentium. Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap 5.
Et multo verior hic lex inuenitur: Maledictum dicens omnem qui in errorem
mittat caecum in via. This is not the part of them that would heal or give
life, but rather of them that augment the burden, and increase ignorance. And
herein is the law well verified: Cursed is he that leads the blind out of
the way. What is this, but with the amazed ones in the Prophet to say: Tace,
et ne recorderis nominis Domini. Amos. 6.10.
Hold thy peace, and never think upon the name of the Lord. These men be the
right successors of Antiochus and Maximinus, who for like policy burnt the
books of God, least the people should read them. Whereas the godly and first
christened Emperor Constantine caused the Bible to be written out, and to be
sent abroad into all Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities of his dominion. And
king Adelstane here in England caused it to be translated into the English
tongue that all might read it. Of Julian the wicked Emperor, who charged the
Christians with it as an high fault, that their women were so skillful in the
Scriptures. Forgetting what Saint Hierome writes, that all the maidens about
Lady Paula were set daily to learn the Scriptures. Let us remember how many
saved souls are now with the Lord in rest, that being able to read never a
word upon the book themselves, yet by hearing others read unto the^, have
received blessing from the Lord thereof, even to acknowledge, to resist the
enemy, and to a strength, with their bloods to seal the truth of that they
heard, and by hearing learned: beside all other Churches, the Monuments of this
our Church will afford us many. What manner of men and women would these have
been, if they could have read themselves? Let us remember what Saint Austen
confesses of himself, Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
that being inclined to the heresy of the Manichees, he heard a voice,
saying, Toll et lege, Take up and read, meaning the book of God, which he
presently did, and so by reading was converted. And concerning reading of the
Scriptures either unto the people in the Church by the Ministers, or any other
appointed to that service, or by the people themselves privately at home in
their houses in a tongue that they understand. Let us conclude upon plain
recited proves, that it is a means of the Lord appointed, commanded,
sanctified, and blessed, to the raising, building, and creating this kingdom
of the Lord in the hearts of men, for which we pray, when we say, Thy kingdom
come: and to deny either of these members that now we have stood of, or to say
that they have no blessing promised and granted to them, but that preaching is
all in all, and reading is nothing, not profitable, not able to work faith,
etc. is to avouch a great untruth, and of such denial we may say as he
said: Archangeli nesciunt, Hylarie de vnitate Patris et filij.
Angeli no^ audiuerunt, Propheta non sensit, filius ipse non aedidit: The
Archangels know it not, the Angels have not heard, the Prophet has not felt
it, the son of God himself has revealed to us no such thing.

What then, do you match reading with preaching, or do you say, the people, if
they heard the Scriptures read unto them, though they had no preaching
sustain no want, neither need to care for preaching, or once to take any
pains to go where it is orderly, if i be not at home?

No, no, Preaching above reading.
for this is the other extremity I told you of, even now when I said we must
avoid two. Let them both therefore not only stand, but stand with their just
and due commendations. Reading is protable, but preaching does profit more
than reading does, because it is more apt for the ignorant and unlearned,
expressing more plainly the meaning of the Scripture: and applying the same to
their consciences as is thought fit. Wherefore with very fatherly care has
the Lord in his word appointed, that this means also should be used to his
people, to the erecting of this his kingdom in them: and tells us what
great blessing he has bestowed upon it from time to time. Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.
He therefore gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till
we all meet together (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of
GOD, unto a perfect man, etc. And, go and teach all nations, Math. 26.19.20.
baptising them in the name of the Father and the Son, Math. 6.
and holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, etc. In another place, The harvest is great, the laborers few,
Luc. 4.18.19. Luc. 24.27. Act. 2. Act. 8. Act. 10. Act. 13.
pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth
laborers into his harvest. Our Savior himself of this means says: The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me that I should heal the
broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are
bruised, and that I should preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And as he
went toward Emaus with the two that went thither, he preached unto them to
their good. Peter preached the word, and there were added to the Church about
three thousand souls. Philip preached to the Eunuch, he believed. Peter
preached to Cornelius and his company, and they received the holy Ghost, and
believed. Paul preached to Sergius Paulus a prudent man, and the Lord gave it
a blessing, to confusion of the Sorcerer, the overthrow of Satan, and the
erection of this his kingdom, of which now we speak, in his heart. So did he
to Lydia, and to the Iaylour, and to a number more. By this excellent means of
preaching he opened their hearts, and brought them to his fold, that he in
them might reign over whom Satan so long had ruled before, and so begging
this his kingdom in them in this life, might assure them of his eternal
kingdom with him in the life to come. And for this singular profit that this
means has to this purpose, it has as you have seen from time to time been
most carefully provided by the Lord for his people. Similitudes expressing
the profitte of preaching.
The spice when it is whole smells sweetly, but if it be broken and bruised
by the hand of the Apothecarie, it smells a great deal more. So is the
word read of us, or to us, sweet as the honey, and brings the light of life
to many. But if the spiritual Apothecarie break it and bruise it, cut it and
divide it, as the Lord has appointed by preaching, then reaches the savor of
such heavenly sweet to many mo, in a fuller measure, by reason of the blessing
of this means, as has been said. If the loaf be whole, the children get
not ever so full morsells as when it is cut and broken unto them: preaching
parts the bread, and makes us feed in this fuller measure, through the
gracious blessing of our God. If the fire be covered with any ashes, the heat
breaks not out so greatly as it would if the ashes were away: even so, if
in the word of God, when we read it, any one thing we understand not, as we
wish to do, this means of preaching uncovers that heavenly fire unto us,
that erst we felt not so much, and the Lord bestowing his grace upon his
own appointment, the fire flasheth into our souls, and we, as men and women
ravished with such heavenly good, perceive and see the power of preaching. Thus
did it to the Eunuch whom we named before. What he read at the first, he
understood not: but when Philip preached unto him, the fire brake out to his
lasting good, and he vehemently cried to be baptized. And so to the rest whom
so lately we noted. O powreful means therefore of ye Lord to the erecting of
this kingdom in us, the true and plain preaching of the word. Reading
profits, but preaching more: and reading therefore is good, but preaching is
better. This blessing pray for ever amongst us: this blessing use, if the Lord
vouchsafe it. Consider what has been said, and not only said, but proved, that
the Lord has appointed this means as the most notablest of al others to the
erection of his kingdom in us, whereof we speak that it has had this
blissing to thousands and ten thousand thousands that have hearkened thereunto:
that the contempt of it is death, and that eternal both of body and soul: and
then weigh with thy self what thou daily do. If thou want it, whither thou
seek it. If thou have it, whither thou use it, and shake to think of thy
shutting out of this kingdom here and for ever: for the contempt of the means
whereby we are brought into it all of us. Let neither ignorance of so great a
good withhold thee any longer, neither the deadly suggestions of that tempting
so induce thee in pride to make fearful exceptions against the Lords
ordynance, to save thy soul. Fearful exceptions against hearing the word
preached.
Either for that the man likes thee not, or his measure, or manner, or
whatsoever. For truly if he bring the glad tidings of the Gospel his feet
are beautiful. If he speak from the Lord he must be heard. And if he be the
appointed means betwixt the Lord and thee, I mean thine own Pastor and
teacher, think whilst it is to day of the strength in deed of thy exceptions
to hear him, and fear the judgments, shrink at the wrath, tremble at the
vengeance most assured to thee without repentance: if they be to weak. They
have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, said the Lord to his
Prophet then, and weigh it well, whether the Lord truly may not say it of thee
now to thy death, refusing the means appointed by him for thy life, upon such
grounds as Satan has suggested, corruption nourishes, and the triumphant
truth of the Lord will consume in judging day, to eternal woe. It was well
said of that worthy instrument in Gods Church upon like occasion. Agnoscant
Anabaptistae, Calvin. aduersus Anabap. artic. 5. page 583.
vbicunque minister rite constitutus est, ac fideliter munere suo fungitur,
vnumquemque qui pro Christiano haberi vult, debere ei adhaerere and cum reliquo
grege, ipsius ministerio frui, etc. Let the Anabaptists confess and
acknowledge, that wheresoever there is a minister duly placed, and does his
duty faithfully and carefully, there every one that will be accounted a
Christian must cleave unto him, and with the rest of the flock and
congregation use his ministry. But what do they? as many of us as will not
follow their errors, although we never so purely preach the word of God, yet
do they take us for ravening wolves, and they so abhor us, as that they
think they should commit an offense worthy death if they should be present
but at one sermon of ours. Then do they make suddenly ministers of their own,
and they being so made, in a moment then do they draw the people and make
contrary congregations of their own, to the renting of the Church asunder,
that the name of God cannot be called upon with that one consent and concord
that it ought to be. Meditate many times, ere the Lord strike thee, what Saint
James says: My brethren, Iam. 2.2.
have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.
Faith in that place includes the preached word, which if thou thus regard,
remember the stripes that they shall have that know their master his will, and
refuse to do it: remember whose head the blood is upon, when the watchma^ has
warned. Calu. aduersus Anabap. artic. 5. page 583.
If thy Pastors gifts be not so great, whom reprochest thou, but the giver of
them? May not he do with his own as pleases him, for thee? Refusest thou to
hear him, for his little, to whom the Lord will say, Euge serve bone, and
crown him for his faithfulness over little. O good and faithful servant.
Beware, I wish thee as a friend in Christ, thy feet are sliding fearfully if
thou stay not. Stand not upon his university upon his degrees, upon his age,
Yet degrees Gods blessings when worthily had.
upon his method, least of all except (O strange suggestion of a guileful
serpent in these evil days) against his writing: for his memory, as though
because his note helps his memory, therefore his lips keep not knowledge,
and thou will not hear him. But stand upon the message that is done,
remember whose it is: stand upon the messengers calling unto them above all
others in this world if he be thy Pastor, what measure of grace soever the
Lord has vouchsafed him, stand upon the ordinance of the Lord by preaching to
erect his kingdom in the hearts of men, and to save them that believe, stand
upon the ability of thy God to give thee good by the ministry of him that is
thine own, how mean soever he seem in the world to the curious: almost I had
said cursed creatures, stand upon the judgment done to the despisers of Jesus
Christ, and remember it often, Qui vos audit, me audit, etc. he that hears
you hears me, and he that despises you despises me. For these with a
number more such are true grounds of that commandment, the breach whereof
will be hellish woe for ever. Obey them which have the oversight of you, and
submit your selves, Hebr. 13.17.
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that they may
do it with joy and not with greef* for yt is not profitable for you. And if my
speech may not find a blessing unto some, 1. Sam. 2.25.
because the Lord has determined to destroy them: yet say I to my brethren
that am the meanest of them all, let us work the work of our calling
faithfully: throw the seed of the Lord into his field according to the hand
that he has given, carefully: give attendance to reading paynfully, though we
never take degree in University, pass with a worthy Apostle through good
report, and evil report, and if any man, we thus doing, refuse the Lords
letters because we bring them, the Lords message because we deliver it, the
Lords gold because we deal it, let us comfort our selves with the same
Apostle, that we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that perish.

2. Cor. 2.15.
But my brethren, if we do it not, but give our selves to ease and to the
ways of this world, fashioning our selves daily more and more in an
unlawful sort according to the same, then remember, that preaching being
means, yea ye chiefest means to erect this kingdom of the Lord in this
world, Romans 10.
we neglecting it, we neglect also the effect of it, namely, the kingdom of
God over and in his people, and so suffering as much as lies in us the Lord to
lose his people and the people to lose their God, we fearfully purchase to
our selves that dreadful woe that is pronounced to all them that preach not
the Gospel. 1. Cor. 9.16.
Aaron sounded we know when he ministered, by his golden belles in those days,
Exodus 28.35.
and therefore he shall not dye, Every man in his measure.
says the Lord: if we sound not when we minister by the golden gifts given of
the Lord, shall not we dye?

And is then all that we ask concerning this matter, namely, that GOD would
bestow his word upon us, that we may read it and hear it, and have it
preached unto us, to the building up of this his kingdom in us?

No in deed. But forasmuch as neither our reading nor hearing is able to
profit us any thing unto salvation, except the Lord by his holy spirit
make it fruitful to us, and give it a blessing, therefore we pray also
mightily these words, for that heavenly power of his grace, that what we
read, or hear read or preached unto us out of his heavenly book by the
ministry of men, 1. Cor.
may by him be made a savor of life unto life unto us. For though Paul
preach and Appollo water, yet neither Paul nor Apollo, but only the Lord
gives increase. Number. 22.31.
Except the Lord open Balams eyes he sees not the Angel of the Lord in the
way with his sword drawn in his hand, that is, neither anger nor love
perceive we ever, except the Lord work it in us. How came it to pass that the
Jewish people so seeing daily the wonderful works of God for them, the
proofs of his power, mercy and goodness, above all the nations of the world,
yet persisted unfaithful, stubburne, and wayward to so good a God? Deuteronomy. 29.4.
O says Moses, these things being done for you, yet has the Lord given you
an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day,
teaching us plainly, that such heart, such eyes and ears are only the Lords to
give, and without such gift we profit nothing, no not by the very evident
extraordinary mercies of God. Chap. 30.6.
In another place again: The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the
heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy GOD with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. As if he should say,
never think of any love of GOD faithful and true, as possible to be within
thee, and consequently no obedience, love being the root of all, except the
Lord circumcise thine heart, that is, purge all thy wicked affections, and
give hearing and reading a blessing, which thing is not in thine own power to
do. Esaias. 57.
It is I, says the Lord by the prophet Esaie, 15.
that receive the spirit of the humble and give life to them that are of a
contrite heart. If the Lord work in one he works in all: the spirits of
men are ruled and governed unto good, only by him. If he touch us we are
touched, if he turn us, we are turned, and if he revive not and give life,
we sink in all our sins, as unfeeling wretches, and abide in death. How
plainly says it again the Prophet Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 36.26.27.
I will give you a new heart and I will put a new Spirit within you, and will
take away the stony heart out of your body and give you an heart of flesh. And
I will put my spirit within you, and and cause you to walk in my statutes etc.
O see and mark how all lets be removed, and all grace given by the Lord
alone in mercy, seeking our salvation. And therefore know it true as the truth
is true that neither hearing nor reading, preaching or private speaking avails
ever to do us good except the guiding grace of the Lord direct us to it by a
blessing given to them all or any when they are used. And therefore as for the
word, so for the blessing of it by the Spirit of God do we ever pray when we
say these words, Thy kingdom come. Then opened he their understanding, Luc.
24.45.
says the Gospel of our Savior Christ, that they might understand the
Scripture. Act. 16.14.
And Lydia attended to those things which Paul spoke, because the Lord opened
her heart. So that neither one nor other, Lydia nor the disciples of Christ
see, hear, or understand, except the Lord give the eye, the ear, and the
heart. It is the holy Spirit that teaches and teaches into all truth, Ihon.
16.13.
and without whom still still all means remain unprofitable. There is an
ointment says Saint John from him that is holy, 1. Ihon. 2.20.27.
and that anointing teaches you all things, that is, the grace of the holy
ghost. Ephesians. 1.16.
Wherefore I cease not to make mention of you in my prayers says the holy
Apostle and to bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, through the
knowledge of him, that the eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that we
may know what the hope of his calling and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance is in the Saints, Chap. 3.14.15. etc.
etc. And that ye may be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, and ye may be able to comprehend
with all Saints what is the breadth and length, and depth and height, etc. See
Paul's refuge for profitte to his preaching, and for life and light for these
Ephesians, even to the Lord for his holy Spirit to soften and supple their
stony hearts, to illuminate and lighten their dark minds, and to make that
sweet to them that is sower to many, and fruitful to them by his mighty
power that is never so to any without the same. verse. 20.
Wherefore to go no further, know it for conclusion, that we praying for
Gods kingdom to come unto us in this petition by the hearing and preaching of
his word, the means appointed of him to erect the same, and seeing well by
all this that has been said, that neither one nor other of these means ca^
prevail with us any thing unless the Lord also with them give the power of
his Spirit and the blessing of his grace in our hearts by them: therefore there
is included herein also even prayer for this grace, and the petition being
understood of us is thus much with the Lord as we should in plain terms say,
O Lord give us not only thy word to read and hear, but the heavenly grace
of thy holy Spirit also to sanctify, bless, and make fruitful to us, both
our reading and hearing, that so reading and so hearing thy kingdom may come
unto us, and thou ruling, and we ruled, we may live for ever with thee
according to thy promise. See then still further matter of this petition.

Psalm. 119.
And since the Lord has taught us thus to pray for the help of his hand and
the blessing of his grace to all the means of good unto us, and so guided the
tongues of his children ever before this form was laid down unto them though
in other words, Let us brethren look upon this occasion into our corruption,
for truly the Lord reueileth a secret unto us of our natures, that thousands
see not when he thus teaches us that without his Spirit no means profit
us. We trust to our wits, to our skill, to our years and youth, and I know not
what, and we think we have wings of nature above our fellows many of us, to
fly aloft, and to see the secrets of the Lord, but truly it is not so, we
have all sinned, and sin has cut our wings, that we cannot fly above, we
have all in our first parents transgressed and that transgression has dazeled
and darkened our eyes, closed our ears, and benumbed our hearts that we can
neither see, hear, nor feel, except it be given us from above as we have
now fully been taught. As natural men we perceive not the things that are of
GOD, we are not able to think a thought that is good, but all our sufficiency
is of God, and by his grace only we are what we are that good is: if any truth
be opened to us, the Lord has done it, and concerning life eternal, flesh
and blood reueileth nothing to us but the father in heaven: read without this
spirit, and the book is sealed to us, hear without this Spirit, Esaias 49.
Ezekiel. 33.32.
and it is a pleasant song that sinketh not, but passes with the time: pray
without this Spirit, and we pray we know not what, for it is the Spirit that
helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26.27
and that makes request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed. And he
that searches the hearts knows what is ye meaning of the spirit, for he
makes request for the Saints according to the will of God. Have not this
spirit, verse. 9.14.15.16.
and be none of Christ's, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the sons of God. Want this Spirit and fear again the severe threatening
of the Law, but have it and cry in comfort Abba Father, the same Spirit
bearing witness with our Spirits that we are the children of God, sealing our
adoption in our minds, and therefore opening our mouths. This blessed Spirit
and sweet grace is that heavenly water that our savior speaks of in his
dialogue with the woman of Samaria, Ihon. 4.
when sitting upon the well with her, he said, whosoever drink of this water
shall thirst again, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well
of water springing up into everlasting life. And O my brethren how differs
all earthly water from this, if we mark it, let a man thirst for the honors,
titles, pleasures, places and dignities of this painted world, and if he enjoy
the^ even in great measure, do they quench his thirst? No truly, but if this
other water be away, I mean this moderating grace of Gods blessed Spirit
whereof we speak, they increase his thirst a thousand fold, and of a sound man
before he inioyed such heaps, he is stricken into a loathsome and deadly
disease, even a spiritual dropsy, that the more he drinks the more dry he
is, and never satisfied. Playing daily and hourly the part of Achsah in
seeking springs of water to her South country, Joshua. 15.19.
that is more to much and still something else to that that is had already. But
this water of Gods holy spirit springing not out of the veins of the earth,
but from the highest heavens runs about our hearts continually with a divine
virtue, most comfortably cooling al our Spiritual heats, refreshing us against
all burning temptations, quenching the fiery darts of Satan, and finally
quickening us to eternal life. This water therefore let us make account of, and
pray for a true faith: for he that believes in me, Joel. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Ephesians. 4.30.
out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life, says the Scripture.
Quench not this Spirit then, neither grieve him by whom we are sealed unto the
day of redemption. But remember the good that comes by him to this wretched
frame of our sinful hearts: the ground is hard if this dew drop not, and
utterly unfruitful if this grace bless not. Lend me therefore not thy
tongue and lips only, Psalm. 51.
but thy soul and heart chiefly to pray with me to the throne of mercy for
our selves, and all O Lord. O Lord create a clean heart and renew a right
Spirit within us evermore. Cast us not away from thy presence, neither take thy
holy Spirit from us. Give us the comfort of thy help for ever, and establish
us with thy free Spirit. Amen.

What else is concluded in this prayer?

The good Magistrate a great means to raise up gods Kingdom. 1. Timoth. 2.
Another good means to further this kingdom, is a godly, zealous, and careful
Magistrate, and therefore we pray for him also, and the blessing of his
service. This teaches the Lord us when he bids us pray for kings, and all
that are in authority, 2.
that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
They are the means, the Lord gives the blessing. The like does the Apostle when
he tells us, Romans 13.
3.
that Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil. And
therefore if we will be without fear of the power that we must do well, and
so shall we have praise of the same. 4.
For he is the minister of God for our wealth. But if we do evil, that then
we must fear, for he bears not the sword for naught, but is the minister of
God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Charging us as well for these
good uses of him, as also for the author of his office and authority, which is
the Lord, (for there is no power says he, but of GOD, and the powers yt are be
ordained of God) that every soul of us be subject to the higher powers, and
that we resist not, for if we do we resist the ordinance of God, and they
that so resist, receive to themselves damnation. This benefit of a magistrate
to the increase of Gods kingdom, appeared in Asa, 1. Kings. 15.12.
who took away the Sodomites out of the land, and put away all the Idols his
Father had made, displaced his mother for her idolatry, and destroyed her
idols. The like appeared in Ezekiah, Josiah, and all the rest. Read what they
did, and see what authority may do, nay ought to do. Virtue flourishes by
just encouragements, vice flies, and dies by just punishments, if the
magistrate be good: and then rules God, when this is so. Ezekiel. 10.17.
Blessed therefore well may be said, is the land when the king is the son of
Nobles, and when the Princes eat in time, for strength, and not for
drunkenness. That is, when the higher and lower, and all powers in a land are
famous for virtue and wisdom, and with the gifts of God. And why so? Surely
because these being thus, the Lord is king in such a place, and his heavenly
power is more and more daily spread over and into the hearts of men by these
means. Contrariwise, 16.
Woe to the land when the king is a child, and the Princes eat in the
morning, that is, when the chief of all wants wisdom and counsel, and
the inferiors are given to their lusts and pleasures. And why so again, surely
because then, for want of so forcible a means as careful magistracy is to
repress it, Vice flows, virtue flies, and God rules not. Finally therefore
do we pray here in this petition, and ask of the Lord as a great mercy,
that he would give us godly, careful, and zealous Magistrates, to the better
setting up of his blessed kingdom amongst us. Love due to* Magistrates.
And truly beloved, would God the just and often consideration of these might
work in us a faithful love to the^ for their pains, and a flaming
thankfulness to the Lord for them when we have them. O that we would
meditate of it upon our beds, and and think upon it when we are waking
what Moses felt when he said: How can I bear your comberance, your charge,
Deutro. 1.21.
and your strife alone. Or what he felt that said to his regal Crown or
Scepter, that he which knew the carke and care, the woes and griefs, the
toils and labors, and the infinite perils and fears that are incident to it,
would not take it up if he found it in the street. Then would we feel what
it is to govern and to be alofte. Then assuredly would we honor Magistrates
more, love them more, obey them more, and contend against them less, in a
very true conscience to deal unkindly with a means ordained in heaven of so
much good to man. God give us eyes, God give us hearts, and God give us the
blessing we speak of still.

Will you go any further in this Petition?

No in deed, this may suffice for my brief purpose I hope, and therefore this
only will I add that which I told you of in the beginning, that as we pray
for these mercies when we say these words, so pray we as effectually in sense
against the contraries of them. For if Gods kingdom come, All contrary things
to gods Kingdom prayed against in this petition. Amos. 8.
then must be done away whatsoever let either hinders or obscureth the
same: Contrary to the use of the words that fearful famine the Prophet
speaks of, contrary to godly and profitable reading is barbarism,
ignorance, and contempt or neglect of good letters, contrary to careful
hearing is that adderlike stopping of our ears against the charmer, contrary
to the sweet melting motions of Gods holy spirit in us, hardness, dullness,
deadness, and vnfeelingnesse of heart, profaneness, and whatsoever is the
property of bad ground, Math. 13.
contrary to preaching, dumbness, to plain preaching, unprofitable
curiosity, to painful and often, neglygent and rare preaching. Contrary to a
magistracy is auaricie, to a godly, a wicked, to a good a bad, and to a
faithful and careful, a neglygent and an Idol Magistrate. And to conclude,
contrary to the kingdom of God in any of us, is the devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of
the same, Romans 8.12.
and the carnal desires of the flesh, to follow and be lead by them. All these
therefore we pray as heartely and truly against, as we (...) for the other,
when we say, Thy kingdom come. And let all that hear me consider of it what we
see to day, namely, thus much, that if we feel no true testimonies in our
souls that we are the children of this kingdom, but enemies to it, A
fearful thing if we think of it.
hinderers, letters, and obscurers of it by our works, words, and thoughts,
our own tongues, and hearts, and all the tongues and hearts under heaven,
praying this prayer, rise up against us, and if we will not be reformed, desire
of the Lord that he will take us away, confound us and destroy us by his
judgments, that his kingdom may increase and rise. And what fearful thing
is this? To our own lips the Lord will grant the confusion of our selves, the
prayer of one shall be heard, of two or three by faithful promise, but the
prayer of thousands and ten thousand thousands, even of all the Churches and
chosen throughout the world, yea, of whatsoever millions in them that pray
this prayer, what a shrike makes it in the heavens to the Lord, and how will
he rushe up in his just conceived anger, and accomplish what they ask.
Therefore with shaking hearts at so great a peril, Ministers think of it.
let us consider of it. We feeders and Fathers spiritual of the Lords
people, let us think upon it, and enter into accountes how we do, further we
or hinder we this kingdom of the Lord, speak we or spare we, sound we or
sin we, labor we or loyter we, for Gods sake, what do we? Woe to us if we
do not work, and blessed is that servant who^ when his master comes he
shall find so doing. Magistrates think of it.
Magistrates and powers consider of it, put you forward or put you backward
Gods kingdom, sleep you or wake you, are you nurses or none to the Church of
Christ, to virtue and piety, and destroyers diligent of sin and wickedness,
judge you the cause of the afflicted and poor that you may prosper, or do you
contrary, that you may perish, what do you? Private persons think of it.
Private men judge, and every particular person one by one consider of it.
What do you? rules GOD in you by his holy spirit working faith to God and
love to men, with daily and sundry fruits of them both? Do you set up in
your own houses, places, and charges this holy kingdom as much as lies in
you by private admonitions, by virtuous examples, and by such means as you
may, or do you pluck and pull down, hinder and let by the contraries greatly?
As you love your selves think of it, and then shall we each of us see
whether we pray for our selves or against our selves, when we say this
prayer, and what hope we may have of the rest whatsoever throughout this earth.
Thy kingdom come is said often and in many places, A Communion of good by
prayer.
if it be well with us for our measure in our several places, then so often
is the Lord solicited to be good unto us, and there is a communion of good
unto the godly by their prayers, if it be otherwise, alas the time, we perish
as we live, if we change not speedily, and in some fearful sort to the
testimony of Gods justice: for the prayer of his chosen, so many, so often
making it, and with such spirit of desire must be heard at last. Thus pray
we for the kingdom of God, and for all the means that it arises by in the
hearts of men, and thus pray we against whatsoever hinders or withholdeth
the same when we say this petition: and in stead of much more that might be
said, let this suffice. The iniquity of our times and the fearful
looseness of these days, if it be considered, will tell al Christian hearts
how ne^dfull, even now especially, is this prai^^ to be made often. Let us
pray.

A Prayer.
O Divine Majesty and most mighty GOD, hear us we beseech thee, thy humble
servants here gathered together, and in that mercy that has no measure,
subdue all power of Satan and sin in us still more and more, and rule thou ever
over body and soul, over heart and mind, over word and work, for Christ his
sake: and not only over us, but over many more, even that number that thou have
appointed to eternal life. To this end give thee means appointed by thee,
thy holy, blessed, and eternal word. Make us careful readers of it and
careful hearers of it read unto us, and give thy blessing as thou have done of
old to this endeavor. Make us blessed with them that meditate in thy law,
faithful believers, as that Eunuch that had his Bible in the Chariot with him,
and read in it as he trauayled. Profiting searchers with those good Beraeans.
Feed our faith, raise up our affiance, fasten our hope, and increase godly
knowledge in us, as thou have done by this means in thy children ever.
Increase the number of able teachers to thy Church, O gracious GOD, and bless
their labors, a more mighty means to enlarge thy kingdom than reading is.
Add to thy Church by them thousands and thousands. Cast down by thy mighty
power all holds, and imaginations. and every thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of thee, and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of thee. Strengthen thy people that they never despise thy appointed
means to save their souls, but that thankful to thy majesty for the thing,
they may hate the persons in singular, love for their work sake, obeying them,
and submitting themselves to them, as their appointed overseers of them, that
they may give their accountes with joy and not with grief. If it fall out
otherwise, thy just purpose being to slay those disobedient scorners. O Lord, O
Lord make strong thy servants to endure this grief, and not fearing the face
of any whose hearts fear nothing, nor weighing the godless love of them that
love not the cheerfulness to go on through all pikes of worldly
unthankfulness through good report and ill report, and all snubbes, knowing in
a sweet feeling that they are unto thee a sweet savor of Christ in them that
perish, as well as in them that are saved. And let it never be said of us, O
heavenly Father, as once it was of others, that these things being done for
us, and we professors of thy great mercyes, yet thou have not given us an heart
to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day, but give us
heart* eyes, and ears, for thy mercy sake. Circumcise our hearts and the
hearts of our seed, that we may love thee much our Lord and God, and live with
thee for ever. Revive the spirits of the humble, and give life to them that
are of a contrite heart: Take away our stony hearts out of our bodies, and give
us hearts of flesh. Open our understanding, as thou did thy disciples, that
we may understand both by reading and preaching to our comfort. Give us
merciful father, that heavenly spirit that leads into al truth, that happy
anointing that teaches al things that spirit of wisdo^e and revelation that
the eyes of our minds may be lightened, that we may know what ye hope of our
calling is, and the riches of that glorious inheritance prepared for thy
Saints. That we may be strengthened by thy Spirit in the inner man, that
Christ thy son may dwell in our hearts by faith, and we able in some measure
to comprehend thy loving kindness to all penitent, weeping, and wayling
sinners. For O Father we have sinned, and darkness has entered to rule both
body and soul, if thou help not. Lord in that mercy that has no measure
look upon us, and let not his malice destroy the works that thy mercy has
made. His kingdom is death, thy kingdom is life and joy for evermore. O
heavenly God the^ let thy kingdom come, that we ruled here by that saving
hand of thine, may taste and feel, enjoy, and have for ever the reward that
follows such subjection in thy glorious kingdom, not for our sakes, but for
Jesus Christ his sake, with thee and the holy spirit, one majesty, mighty
and glorious, ever blessed and praised, from generation to generation
eternally, Amen.

The third Petition. Thy will be done, etc. why follows this next.
THE order, if we mark it, is most fit and good: for in the former we prayed
that the Lord might rule in us, but that cannot he do if we ever remain
unwilling, stirring and wresting against him and his will ( inter inuitos enim
and reluctantes nemo commode regnare potest) therefore very rightly do we
pray now in the next place that his will may be done. And truly very duty
binds al children to frame their life according to the will of their fathers,
and not contrariwise the parents to conform themselves to the will of their
children. In the volume of thy book, says David, Psalm. 40.8.
it is written of me that I should do thy will. So is it of us all: for this
is a matter that concerns not David only, but every man that hops and
looks for the place that David now has, and therefore with David we must all
and every one say most heartily, O my God I am content to do it, yea, thy law
is within my heart: that is not ordinarily or superficially thought upon by me,
but it is even my earnest and vehement meditation and desire continually. I
seek not mine own will, Ihon 5.30.
says our Savior Christ, but the will of the father who has sent me. And let
us think that if he did thus that was subject to no sin, but had received
all power of God, and himself was Lord of all, what excuse may we have before
his gloriouse face in that high Court of his, at the latter day, if called into
the Kingdom of God, and received into the adoption of the Sons of God, we do
not as good children, the will of our father, but as rebellious wretches every
one his own will? Again I came down from heaven not to do mine own will,
Ihon 6 38.
but his will which has sent me. Thus did he as a son to his father, and
thus must we do if we be sons with him. And therefore pray we ever, and pray
we heartily to our heavenly father as here we are taught Thy will be done. For
not every one that says unto me Lord, Math. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
father which is in heaven.

Why pray we that Gods will may be done, and not ours may be done? Genesis 6.^.
Because our wickedness is still great in the earth, and all the imaginations
of the thoughts of our hearts by nature are only evil continually. And because
the natural man (as says the Apostle) perceives not the things of the spirit
of God. 1. Cor. 2.14.
For they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. That is, because in truth we are so fallen by our
first sin, and our will so corrupted thereby, that of our selves we cannot
will the thing that is good, no not think it, but both the will and deed, if
it be good, yea and all our sufficiency is of him. But on the other side, the
Lords will is all holy and ever holy: yea holiness it self and the rule of
right for ever. Wherefore by good reason we pray as we do, Thy will be done.
And this being the true ground in deed of our doing, let us by the way
consider whether even this petition assures not our consciences of their error
that say it, and of our truth that deny it, that in us or any is left by nature
a free will to do good. The error of freewill is against this petition.
For are we not there taught to pray that his will may be done and not ours?
We see it. And may we contrary to this order pray that our will may be done,
that is, our own proper and natural will? Who will say it? But I will say it,
that if I were by nature and of my self able to will the thing that is good,
then might I lawfully and rightly pray that my will might be done. Wherefore we
see and the world may see how even this prayer, if there were no further
proof, yet satisfies the consciences of men as touching this loss in us,
namely, of freewill to do or wish good of our selves, till the Lord renew us,
and then is it not I, but the grace of God in me, says the Apostle: but this
doctrine has been sufficiently touched before.

What will of God is here meant: for I have heard that it is diversely
propounded unto us, though one and the same simple unto him or in respect of
him?

You have heard right, and to make this speech as plain as I can, Oculta,
reuela^^.
you must understand that the will of God is said to be of two sorts, to wit,
hidden and reueiled. The first, for that it is so, is in Scripture resembled to
a depth, and it is unsearchable of man. We cry out of it with the Apostle: O
the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Deutr.
29.29.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. And with
the Prophet David, Psalm. 36.6.
Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains, Thy judgments are like the
great deep. Romans 11.33.
We say of it, That no man presume herein to understand above that which is
meet to understand, Romans 12.3.
but that he understand according to sobriety. For curiosity in this behalf
the Lord misliketh, we plainly see. When his Apostles asked him of the
restoring of the kingdom of Israel, Act. 1.6.
when he would do it, then or no, we know he smot them for this entering into
the hidden will of God, and told them that it was not for them to know the
times and seasons which the father has put in his own power. When Peter asked
the Lord of that other disciple, hic autem quid? Ihon. 21.21.
Lord what shall this man do? Remember how the Lord answered this curiosity
of defense to know this hidden will, and told him that if he would have him
tarry till he came, what was that to him, let him do that which he knew to be
done. So that this will of God is not to be pried into, in a busy and curious
impiety of mind, as many wicked ones do, and that by most horrible means,
even by spirits and deuilles, seeking to pull out of heaven, and wrest from the
Lord, as they think, his secrets before the time. Forgetting quite what the
great servant of the Lord Moses said touching this thing: namely, Deutro.
29.29
that the secret matters belong to the Lord our GOD, but the things reueiled
belong to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do them. This will of
God is called secret or hidden, for two causes. First, because it is so in deed
to all men, till such time as God manifest by events, what he has appointed to
every one. In respect whereof S. James wills every man to put in this
condition, if the Lord will, and if we live to do this or that. Secondly,
because the reason of the Lords will thus or thus, Rom 9. Math. 11.25.
when it is manifested, for the most part is not comprehended of man, but
hidden in himself. As why he chose Jacob and refused Esau: why he put Saul
away from the kingdom for one offense, and not David for many with such like.
Only this we know with the Apostle, that he has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens. And this his will is our stay.

What then is man's duty in respect of this will. Surely as has been said,
non est curiose inuestiganda, Man's duty in respect of the hidden will of God.
sed adoranda, it is not to be sifted, but highly reverenced, and t^ll the
time come that ye Lord reueile it by effects in general thus to be disposed in
my self, that whatsoever this hidden will of the Lord be concerning me,
whether to live or dye, to be poor or rich, to be high or low in this
world, in the same I rest and am contented, let the Lord that made me do
with me and dispose of me at his pleasure. And then afterward when the Lord
shall reueile it by effects, much more to rest in it, and give him thanks
howesoeuer it is, taking with good Job even evil things at the Lords hands
as well as good, Job. 2.
that is sour as well as sweet, and lowering lots as well as smiling days.
Blessing the name of the Lord that has taken what before he gave, and yet
deals with us but in mercy ever.

Do we pray that this will may be done?

No. For this is ever done and shall be whilst the world indureth, neither
can any creature or power resist it. So says the Prophet. My counsel shall
stand, Esaias. 46.10. 2. Chron. 20.6.
and I will do what I will do. So confessed Iehosophat King of Judah. When he
said, O Lord GOD of our Fathers art not thou God in heaven, and reignest not
thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thy hand is power and might,
and none is able to withstand thee. And so notably confessed that wretched
Balam when he said, If Balac would give me his house full of silver and gold, I
cannot pass the commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine
own mind, etc. So confessed the devil, when he asked leave to touch Job, not
able else of himself to go against Gods will, and all those devils that could
not enter into the swyne, sent by the will of God, and all the actions of man
and beast ever bridled and ruled, and disposed by the power of his will. No
resistaunce therefore can there be against this will, and therefore no need
that we should pray that it may be done. No Annas nor Caiphas, no Herod nor
Pilat, Act. 4.28.
no Jews nor devils could have wrought the death of our Savior Christ except
the hand of the Lord and his counsel had determined before that it should be
done.

But do not you now say that GOD wills evil to be done, and so make him the
author of evil. God forbid we should make God an author of evil. Yet say we
in deed that God wills many things that in some respects are evil, and to
some persons, as this death of his own son named last, and such like. But as
he wills the^ they are never evil, neither to such as he directs a good to
by them, being not done by them, as in the example named appears. But surely
some larger speech to draw us to a right knowledge herein is not amiss, and
therefore a little I pray you hear. Man's will has two objects to wit good and
evil.
Will therefore has two objects, to wit, good and evil, sometime, it willing
the one, sometimes the other. And good things, (beside the Lord which is the
chief good of all) are said to be of 3. sorts, natural, moral, and divine.
The first belong, ad vita^ animatam, the sesond, ad humanam, the third, ad
coelestem and diuinam. All these the Lord wills there is no controversy,
and not only so, but is also even the fountain and giver, as S. James says:
Iam. 1.17.
for every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, and comes from
the father of lights with who^ is no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning.
So has evil also his distinction, Malu^ Culpae. Malu^ Poenae.

whilst some is the evil, some the punishment of the evil. The distinction is
Tertullians against Martion, and received usually. lib. 2. cap. 180.
That evil which is called the punishment of evil, there is no question
neither, but God wills, and is the author of it, he being ye judge, of whose
warrant it is done* and the punishment it self, being a work of justice
against sin, being also good. The question is de malo culpae, of that evil
that is the evil it self, how God wills it or not. And concerning this
matter see first on the one side what is truth, thou art not a God, Psalm. 5.4.
Hebr. 1.9. Hose. 13.9. Ihon. 8.44. Zach. 8.17. Romans 9.14. 1. Ihon. 2.16.
says the Prophet David, that love wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell
with thee. No, thou love righteousness and hate iniquity, Perditio tua ex
te Israel et auxilium a me: thy destruction Israel is by thy self, and of thy
self: and in me is thy help. When the devil speaks a lie he speaks of
his own, for he is a liar and the father thereof. See then the true author of
evil, not God, but Satan. Furthermore if God be all good, how can he will the
thing that is evil, every thing willing but that which is agreeable to the
nature thereof. This strives therefore with his goodness. It is contrary also
to his power, for what good that he will is not he able to bring to pass
without the means of evil? and if he be, How contrary to God it is to will
evil.
then needs not he to will any evil, to the end to compass some good by it,
that otherwise he could not. It is contrary to his mercy, which extends it
self upon them that have done evil. It is contrary to his justice, which
promises it in others. And plainly we see then that the Lord does not will
any evil. Which Saint Austen acknowledged when he said, Deus non est author
vllius rei, Tom. 4. quaest. 83.
qua homo fit deterior. God is never author of any thing whereby man may be made
the worse. Exodus 9.7. Romans 1.28. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. 1. Kings. 22.21.22.23.
Now on the otherside hear again what is truth also. The Lord hardened
Pharohs heart. The Lord delivers men up into a reprobate mind to do those
things which are not convenient, the Lord sends men strong delusions to
believe lies, the Lord sent a spirit to seduce Achab, and put him in the mouth
of all Achabs Prophets, with many such things testified of the Lord in the
word, which in us were evil, and seem so to be in the Lord also, if our
knowledge be not better to distinguish and to clear him, in whom there can be
no unrighteousness ever. Hereupon swell the Libertines in blasphemy against
the Lord, and excusing themselves, charge him with their wicked ways. Hereat
also stumbled the Manichees, and therefore made duo principia, two originals or
first causes of actions, the one most good from whence came al goodness, the
other most evil from whence came all evil, and the punishment of all evil.
And hereat also stick many, saying God suffers these things to be done,
but no further. But I pray you let us ask them whether God suffer them
willingly or against his will. If they say willingly, then confess they that
God has a part in the action, and that is more than suffering: if they say
unwillingly, then make they him not omnipotent, for cannot he let any thing
that he will not? we know he can, and there is none that can resist his will,
says the Apostle. Romans 9.19.
Wherefore to help this matter, and to answer with truth, we must understand a
few things, and I pray you hearken. We must distinguish of sin, and we must
distinguish of will. Malum culpae.
Sin has two distinctions fit for this purpose to be known, For either it
is considered simply in it self and by it self, Vti peceatum, vti causa
subsequentis peccandi, vti poena praecedentis.
as a thing contrary to the law of God, or it is considered as a cause of sin
and evil following, or thirdly as a just punishment of sin that went before.
The first GOD never wills neither can will: the second so also. But in the
third respect God is said to will evil, to wit, not as it is evil but as it
is poena peccati, the punishment of evil. Which in deed is a just thing of
the Lord. So does he punish sin with sin, as in the place before named he
punished the Gentiles with delivery up to a reprobate mind to work evil, 1.
Rom 24.28.
because when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful. verse. 21.28.
1. Ihon. 3.4. Act. 17.28.
The second distinction is this, in sin and all evil there is the action,
and the deformity or evil of and in the action. The first God may well for he
is in deed the very first efficient cause of every action according to that
saying, in him we live, move and have our being, and, deus operatur in omnibus.
1. Cor. 12.16. and of him, and for him, Voluntas tantum est boni, vel very, vel
apparentis. Arist. Eth. 3. cap. 4.
etc. omnia. Romans 11.16. Touching the second we must understand that will is
either proper or improper. Proper when we will a thing for it self, either as
a good thing in deed, or at least so judged of us improper when we will a
thing not for it self as good of it self, but for some other good, that shall
follow it. And thus may we will that thing that is evil, as a man wills the
cutting of some member, for the safety of all ye rest. So God wills evil
things, not because he allows them, or loves that which is properly to will,
but sees in his mercy, he so disposing them, some good shall follow of them,
which as I say is to will improperly, and herein we see how still the object of
will is good in the Lord. To apply then all this to God so far as our
question requires, let us understand, that that evil which is a punishment
inflicted by God for some former evil we may say that God wills. For so
teaches us the same God himself by his Prophet saying: Esaias. 45.7.
I form the light and create the darkness, I make peace and create evil, I
the Lord do al these things. Mark how the Lord says, he creates evil.
That is, the evil that is a just punishment of some former evil or sin. The
like again by the Prophet Amos: Amos. 3.6. Lament 3.38.
shall a trumpet be blown in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Out of
the mouth of the most high proceeds, not evil and good? Is it not a known
truth in divinity that the Lord punishes often sin with sin. Now all
sin we know is evil, if we respect it self, but if we respect it as it
comes from God to punish sin withal, then is in that respect not evil but
a just, right and good thing. The hardening of Pharohs heart in Pharoh was evil,
Exodus 9. 1. Kings. 22.
in God it was a just punishment of his sin. The deceyuing of Achab with a
lie in it self considered was evil, but as God did it for a punishment of his
sin it was not evil, but just. That strong delusion whereof Paul speaks in
it self is evil, but if we mark it, inflicted by God as a punishment for
want of love to the truth, Romans 1.
so it is a just thing, and not evil. So the delivering of the Gentiles into a
reprobate mind, and all such examples in the word. Tertullian against
Marcian, lib. 2. page 180. Tom. 7. lib. 5. cap. 3.
and Augustine against Julian handle this matter, and may further be read of
it. This suffices to show that although we say that God wills often that
thing that in it self considered is evil, yet as it proceeds from him that
it should be so, and consequently he the author of evil, it follows not. For
many times evil is the punishment of evil, and that is just with the Lord
ever.

God may be author of the action, and yet not of the evil in the action.
Concerning the second distinction how God may be the author of the action, and
yet not of the evil any way in the action, see by these similitudes. The Sun
lighting with his hot beams upon a dead carcass causes a strong and
loathsome savor, yet is not the Sun either unsweet it self, or the cause of
that vnsweetenes, but the carrion it self. For if the Sun were the cause,
then ever the like cause, the like effect, but we see it is not so, but
contrary, when it lights upon sweet herbs and odoriferous flowers, it
draws out of them great sweetenes and pleasant smells. Again the earth we
all know with her sap and moisture, feeds and nourishes all the trees,
plants, and roots that are, yet is not that earth cause why this tree
brings a bitter fruit, and that herb or root a bad taste, but the nature
several of ye things themselves is the cause of that. Thirdly the pure word
of the Lord is preached or read, and one sauoureth and gathers to life, an
other to death and destruction, is now ye word cause of those several effects,
or the creatures themselves blessed or not blessed with Gods holy Spirit. Thus
may the Lord then be author of an action and yet not of the evil in the
action, and so he seems to will evil, when yet in truth he does not.

What is now his reueiled will? All that which in the holy book of his word
he has laid down and declared to be the duty which he will have performed
of us toward him.

And is this that will which here we pray may be done?

Yea this is it, and therefore if we will understand this petition, let us
look what is required of us in this word, and all that we beg of the Lord,
strength and ability to do. To. 8.5.7. etc.
We beseech him that whereas the minds of earthly men burning with lusts, are
commonly carried to desire and to do those things that most displease God: he
of his mercy will with the moving of his holy Spirit so change and fashion
all the wills of us all to that will of his majesty, that we may will and
wish nothing that his divine will misliketh. Praecamur and optamus, vt non
tantum faciat Deus quod vult, sed nos fac^re possimus quod vult. We pray that
not only God would do his will, but that we may do what is his will, says
Cyprian. To run over all the duties of a Christian required in the word were
too long: let us therefore not so do, but for example sake of all the rest
consider these three. First we know it is the Lords will that we should
believe in Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and that by faith in his name we
and all the world should obtain remission of our sins and eternal life.
Ihon 3.16. Ihon 6.29.
So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And again, This
is the work of God (that is the work that God requires of you) that ye
believe in him whom he has sent. Wherefore in this petition we beseech him
that that will of his may be done in us, that is, that we may receive grace so
to do, and never to look for salvation in any other. Secondly, we know it is
the Lords will that we should in a true faith lead a holy and clean life:
for so says the Apostle: haec est voluntas dei, 1 Thessalonians. 4*^. etc.
sanctificatio vestra. This is the will of God even your sanctification, and
that ye should absteyne from fornication, that every one of you should know how
to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. What do we then in this
petition, but beseech the Lord that that will may be daily done of us, and we
daily changed by the renewing grace of his blessed spirit into such men and
women as he desires and delights in, namely, into holy creatures, walking
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, and so consequently sauouring not
the things of the flesh, Romans 8.1. verse. 5. Leuit. 11.44. Math. 5. Esaias 56.
Romans 6.4.12.13
but of the spirit. That we may be holy as he is holy. That our light may so
shine before men as they may see our good works and glorify our father which
is in heaven: that we may keep judgment and do justice in our callings:
that being buried with Christ by baptism into his death, as he is risen from
the dead to the glory of the father, so we also might walk in newnes of life.
That sin may not rule in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the
lusts thereof, or give our members as weapons of vnrightiousnes unto sin.
Ephesians. 5.3.
That fornication and al uncleanness or covetousness may not once be named
amongst us, as becomes Saints. Coloss. 3.12.
That we may put on as the elect of GOD holy and beloved the bowels of
mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, mekenes, long suffering, forbearing one
another, if any man have a quarrel to an other, and forgiving even as Christ
has forgiven us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and what should I say? We beseech the Lord even that very GOD of peace to
sanctify us throughout, that our whole Spirit and soul and body may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And with David we say in
effect, Psalm. 139.23.
Look if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting. Thus says Cyprian, Voluntas Dei (quam stabiliri and fieri
precamur) est quam Christus fecit and docuit: humilitas in conuersatione,
stabilitas in fide, verecundia in verbis, infactis iustitia, in operibus
misericordia, in moribus disciplina. The will of God which we pray to be
established and done, is that which Christ both did and taught, humility in
life, stabilitie in faith, shamefastnes in words, justice in deeds, mercy in
works, discipline in manners. And do we thus pray then to be holy? O my
beloved, what shall we answer the Lord then? I say not for our unholiness,
but even for our security, dullness, deadness, and conceived hearty pleasure
in unholiness? Was it ever counted better than a mockery to seem to ask a
thing and yet to do against it? To desire a Physician to help unto health,
and in the mean while our selves with all our might to feed upon the foes of
that wished good? Consider then our cases and the cases of thousands that
happily think not of it as they ought: we open our lips unto the Lord of
heaven, and pray that we may be holy, we would be thought by him and the
whole world to mean good faith, and yet what is holy we even hate to be drawn
to, misliking none more, neither wishing any company less tha^ theirs yt
either persuade us to it, or seem to expect it at our hands, and what is
unholy we wallowe in, we tumble in, we joy in, and we even wish to live and
grow old in. Think of this.
We pamper the flesh both with food and raiment above all Christian license,
so cherishing, so coying, so lulling and lapping, yea so bathing in pleasure
and ease, in softness and tenderness, in mildnes and wantonness that matter
of earth and worms meat, as if we neither thought there were corruption to
rot it, heaven to receive it, or hell to burn it. The mind we rob of all
meditation that is holy, and feed it with matter of all hellish impuritie.
Vile books are the devils banners.
The Lords book is laid in a corner, and the devils banners are displayed in
every window. Our tongues cannot taste the testimonies of God sweeter than
honey or the honey comb, but they can discourse the delights of sinful flesh
that shall send to hell. Our cheeks are red to talk of Christ as we go to
Emaus, and we blush apace to seem so holy, but the Morian blusheth as fast as
we, Note.
when fearfully and foully we sin against the Lord. We love the wicked, we
loathe the godly, we freeze in love, we boil in malice, we sell virtue, we
buy sin, we refuse Christ and choose Barrabas, we lay away life and play
with death: but O pleasureles play in the end! ^se. 42.
Let the Prophet Ose speak for me to you, and he will tell us surely that
there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. That by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, we break out, and
blood touches blood. And is this holiness? is this to pray Thy will be done?
Sink this i^ your heart.
For Gods sake think of it, and know with me now in time what I would be
loath you should know past time, that you may even as well spit upon Christ
Jesus, buffet him, and beat him with a Reed, kneel before him and say, Hayle
King of the Jews, with those cursed mockers, as kneel in this Church or any
where, and say, Thy will be done, and yet never care how you do it in a holy
life. For it is horrible mockery this, horrible hypocrisy, and the end will
be evil. You must with prayer to be holy join care to be so: to be
faithful and fervent, you must endeavor it, and you must perform it in some
measure, as truly as beg it, or else as truly you perish for ever. The Lord
will not be mocked always, the Lord will not have such seeming prayers made,
and such sinning lives retained still. Of our own mouths shall he judge us:
therefore once again as you love the Lord think of it, and to day harden not
your hearts against that you hear. You hear the will of God is that we should
be holy, and we pray that this will may be done. Prayer accepted of God may
not be without earnest care that it may be done, care to be holy casts
away the love of loosenes, cast away then what shall cast away you if you do
not, and care for that which shall cause a comfort for ever and ever. Let not
that Father speak it of us: Ad Deum omnes ire volunt, post deu^ pauci. to God
would all go, but after God will few go. To live in heaven together is
better than to live in Wilton together, and parting will be pain, if we part
in that day. Be moved then now, that you be not overmuch moved then, even to
cry to the mountains to fall upon you, and to the hills to cover you. Alas
why should I be a minister of death unto you, that so truly wish your life?
or a sweet smelling savor to my God in your destruction, because I have done
my duty, when I cry to the Lord yt I may be crowned with you, and never
loose you. As then hereafter you care to be what in this petition you pray to
be, so love you GOD, so love you your selves, so love you me, so love you
heaven, So love you God as you care to be, what you pray to be.
so fear you hell, and the GOD of mercy give my speech a blessing to us all.

Amen, I beseech him, now in time before the door be shut, and the
bridegroom come. For in vain did the foolish virgins knock when the time was
past. But what duties else will you name that God requires, and we pray for in
this petition.

One more, and that is this. It is the Lords will that in this world we should
take up our cross and follow him, as many as will be his Disciples, Math.
16.24. Act. 14.22. 2. Timoth. 3.12. Hebre. 12. 1. Cor. 11.
that through many tribulations we should enter into the kingdom of heaven,
and that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus should suffer persecution,
that if we be sons we should not be without correction, but now and the^
chastned of our God, that we may not be condemned with the world. This will
we beseech the Lord may be done in us, and we enabled by his holy spirit still
more and more, whatsoever we perceive to betide in this life, by his good
pleasure to receive it, and suffer it not only with contented, but also with
gladsome hearts. And this is a chief use of this prayer, for truly it is a
small thing in comparison, beloved, during the time of prosperity and comfort,
to say Thy will be done O Lord, but if in adversity when the world lowreth,
the storm arises, Princes persecute, and our own houses are divided, To say
with content under the Cross, thy will be done is a great grace.
our Fathers betraying us, our children forsaking us, and our friends defying
us for the cause of God, if we can then say both with content and joy, Thy
will be done, this is a strength and a grace of God above all treasure to be
honored. If it be not so high a matter, but loss of goods by some occasion,
loss of friends, want of health, and weary times by bittrr pain in body, or
soking sorrow in mind, yet if we can herein say it with true content and
comfort, truly it is a measure that notes a child of heaven, and happy we.
But O hard hard, yet not so hard, but God is able. For behold examples before
our eyes: Old Eli in the book of Samuel, when he had received from the Lord
of heaven an heavy message by his young waiter little Samuel, to wit, that the
Lord would judge his house, and that the wickedness thereof should not be
purged with sacrifice nor offering, but utterly destroyed for ever, what said
he, but even what here we pray, for our parts, we may be able to say in our
adversity, It is the Lord, 1. Sam. 3.18.
let him do what seems him good. That is, it is my God and my Lord,
wherefore with me and mine let him do his pleasure, for we are his. See
therefore this given grace, when the Lord will, though it be hard. The like did
David in his great extremity when Absalom was in field against him, and the
Arc brought forth by the Prophets to be carried with him. 2. Sam. 15.25.26.
Have the Ark of God (says he) into the City again: if I shall find favor
in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and the
tabernacle thereof. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here
am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes: therefore not impossible we
see, for the Lord to work in whom he will, though to our vile corruption, a
hard matter in deed, Our Savior Christ in our flesh said it with a true
content, Yet not my will, Math. 26.
but thy will be done, O Father. And in us can he work it by his painful
spirit if it please him. Good means to help us are the sundry comfortable
speeches in the word concerning the Lords care over us ever, and especially
when we have most need of him, by reason of any woe that we are wrapped in. Our
times are in the hand of the Lord, and he, not man shall dispose of our days.
Our hairs are numbered, and our tears are put in his bottell. What are hairs
and tears to body and soul, and other matters of ours more weighty? He
cares for the ravens, lions, and birds of the air, how much more for us? Are
we not more worth than many sparrows, Apoc. 12.
O we of little faith? If the Dragon would devour us, he is able in a moment
to give us wings to fly into the wilderness, and to escape him. If he will
not, but a trial must be had of us, hear and mark you, lift up your hearts and
rejoice with me. Fidelis est Dominus. The Lord is faithful, 1. Cor. 10. More
comfort in this promise then can be expressed.
and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will even
give the issue with the tentation that we may be able to bear it. O sweet, O
more than sweet, and the unspeakable comfort of my frail flesh, and all such
as I am. For let me do my duty, fear the Lord, and make much of his laws,
cut a pieces daily as he will enable me the cord of sin, cleave to that
which is good, and abhor that which is evil, with a single soul and heart,
that has no holes, if this life cause any worldly woe, though Satan and his
friends envy at it, or if the Lord please, for any cause to his majesty
known, to make any trial of me, fear not, muse not, sigh not, shrink not,
my God has given his word, as he is faithful, which ever was, and ever will
be, there shall no more be laid upon me, than he, he I say that has no
measure of might, will make me able to bear. Only do the thing that I
ought in my life now, A most sweet promise
as near as given grace inableth me, and trust to him for that day. Care away
then, my beloved, for the cross, ever in the power of the Lord let us say,
and since we have such a promise, let the remembrance of it as a mighty
means serve to work this in us, in all adversity to submit our wills to his, and
with true content to say, Thy will be done O Lord, for ever with us. Full is
the Scripture of other comforts to strengthen us in this, In the dialogue
btewixt faith and frailitie.
but else where I have noted them, and therefore I spare my self as you hear.
Remember then now, that though it be a harder matter in woe then well, to
pray this prayer, yet is it not so hard, but the Lord has given it, and can
give it at his pleasure to his weaklinges, and make his power known in our
weakness, 2. Cor. 12.
to his glory and our good, if we ask. O sweet God, then we ask it, and
beseech thee for the red blood of Jesus Christ, that in youth and age, health
and sickness, prosperity and adversity, weal and woe, thy will may be ours,
and we contented ever, Amen, Amen.

What mean the next words, Sicut in coelo, as it is in heaven? Are we able to
perform such service to God?

Aug. de tempore 136.
Hear you what Augustine says: Fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo et in terra.
Quid hoc? Vt quomodo tibi seruiunt Angeli in coelo, et nos tibi seruiamus in
terra. Angeli ipsius sancti obediunt illi, non illum offendunt, faciu^t iussa,
amando illum. Haec ergo oramus vt et nos praeceptu^ Dei charitate faciamus. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, what is this? Surely that as the
Angels serve thee in heaven, so we may serve thee in earth: his holy Angels
obey him, and offend him not, but in love do his commandments. These things
therefore do we pray for, that we also even of love may do his will. Hear
you also what Saint Hierome says: Petimus vt imitetur Angelos humana
fragilitas, lib. 3. contra Pelagianos.
et voluntas Domini competatur in terra. We desire of the Lord, that man's
frailty may imitate the Angels, and the will of ye Lord may be done in earth
fully. And in deed so it is, for we do not in this petition desire that
some part of his will may be done, For it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. Matthew. 3.15. but that all even fully and wholly may be
performed: and a half righteousness or obedience is neither righteousness
nor obedience, Iam. 2.10.
as Saint James teaches us. Non sufficit Christiano si vnam partem iusticiae
impleat, cui vtraque praecipitur. It suffices not, Ad Gelatium.
says Saint Hierom, that a Christian fulfill ye one part of righteousness,
when as both are enjoined him. For, Vera et plena fides vniuersa praecepta
complectitur. Benard epist. 77.
True and full faith comprehends all the commandments, says another. Yea
further we are not only by duty bound to do all, but with all affection
also, with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength. For,
Nec leprosa obedientia, nec canina patientia commendatur, nam velint nolint,
no^ modo homines, sed etiam daemones et faciunt, et patiu^tur, quod prouidentia
summa disposuit. Qui inscij and nescientes Dei voluntatem faciunt, eorum et
leprosa, and (...) obedientia. Qui vero scientes eam, sed reluctantes and
murmurantes faciunt, eoru^ est canina patientia: neutrum ergo in nobis
probatur, sed et scientes et volentes. Neither a leprous obedience, nor a
doggish patience is commended: for will they nil they, not only men, but also
devils both do and suffer whatsoever the divine providence has appointed.
Those that unwittingly and not knowing it, do the will of GOD, their obedience
is leprous. Those yt do Gods will, knowing of it, but yet striving against it,
and murmuring, such men's patience perforce is doggish. Neither of these is
allowed, but such as do Gods will both wittingly and willingly. Which perfect
obedience of ours as often as the Scripture speaks of, it uses to call us to
that coeleste (...), Ephesians. 1.3. Philip. 3.20. Coloss. 3.2.
that heavenly regiment, wherein perfectly and faythfullie the Lord is obeyed.
So does our Savior teach us, and therefore adds here these words, Sicut in
coelo, as it is in heaven. You see then the reason of them, and why they be
added, eue^ to teach us the measure of obedience that we are to desire and
thirst after and pray for, not halt, not lame, nor maimed, but all full whole
and perfect, such as is in heaven. That look with what spirit, measure,
affection and will: Apoc. 7.11. Chap. 19.10.22.9.
with what readiness and alacrity the heavenly Angels and blessed spirits,
Sun, Moon, and Stars obey God, even with the same we may do it also, that
as in heaven so in earth there be no rebellion nor repining against his holy
will. The obedience of all those heavenly creatures I need not to describe,
look but at the Angels and you shall see three properties of their
obedience, such as ought to be in ours. They obey God lubentissime, citissime,
and fidelissme, most willingly, most readily or speedely, and most
faithfully. Hebre. 1.4.
If they be sent to perform any service, they never murmr, but do it: and
therefore see their willingness. If to execute judgment upon the enemies, in
one night one of them dispatcheth an hundred four score and five thousand of
them, and then see their speed: Yea they spare no creature, neither give over
ever till the Lord say, it is sufficient, stay thy hand, and therefore
faithful. They are not like Saul, to save either king or fatlings: no, there is
no means to corrupt them in their service, such willingness then, such ready
speed, and such faithful obedience, we are taught to desire and pray for by
addition of these words, As it is in heaven. For these Angels we know are
there. And this obedience of theirs with the circumstances, has the Prophet
David laid down, if you mark it. Psalm. 103.20. Psalm. 103.20.


Why but still I say, can we perform such obedience as this in this life?

1. Cor. 13.
No in deed. Whilst here we live, both knowledge and obedience are in part.
And the most regenerate that ever was must pray, Forgive us our trespasses. It
is Anabaptisticall to dream of a perfection here. Yet for all that, so
perfect we ought to be, and so desirous of Gods greater and greater pleasure
in us, and glory by our service, as that we should never stick down our staff
as having obtained enough, till this be brought to pass in us. How we pray for
this measure.
Therefore then pray we for it, not as accounting to get it in this world,
but as professing our desire to have it, and our discontent with our obedience
whatsoever it be, till it be such. And if any man will conclude any thing
upon this form of speech, let him conclude, that such perfection we should
perform, not that such here we ever can perform. And if we ought to
perform it as duty due from us, then may we pray for it, that it may be such
still still, till it be such, and our prayer becomes us well.

What more then will you say touching this petition?

You must remember how we have said that in every petition are required of God
as well the means ordained of GOD to work such things as the things
themselves that we ask. For, Expetito fine expetuntur etia^ and quae ad fine^.
The end being desired, those things are also desired which belong to the end.
Wherefore understanding now what we ask in this petition, The means also
asked here.
even ability to perform that revealed will of our heavenly Father in his
word wholly and fully, after the example of his heavenly creatures, we must
consider the means whereby this is had, and know that in these words we
beseech his Majesty likewise for them to be given to us.

And what are they. They are chiefly two, the knowledge of his will, Cognitio
voluntatis, Impressio Spiritus. 2. Cor. 36.14. Galat 3.15.17. Deutro. 4.2.
and the strength of his grace, or direction of his spirit. The first has
relation to his word, for therehence only is his will to be learned, and
therefore it has pleased him to give it the name of his testament or last
will, and most straitely charged that nothing be added to it, or taken from
it. The second is that whereby the first is profitable, and sanctified to our
good. For illumination without sanctification avails not, but is even in the
reprobate. And they that know their masters will and do it not, shall their
knowledge save them? Had not Judas knowledge? there is no question, but of
Christ he had learned many mysteries: had not the Scribes and the Pharisees
the knowledge of the law? Yes they were able to teach many trueths out of the
same unto others, and whilst they sat in Moses chair, Math. 23.
that is, whilst they delivered truly the doctrine of Moses they were to be
heard, by the commandment of our savior, and to be followed also in that
they said. But because this Spirit of the Lord did not sanctify their
knowledge to them and make it powrefull in them to the death of sin, and the
life of righteousness, but that they knew and did not, therefore for all their
knowledge they perished: a man may speak with the tongues of men and Angels,
and not perish, a man may have the gift of Prophecy, and know all secrets
and all knowledge, and yet be no body in Gods eyes. 1. Cor. 12.1, 2. Spiritus
est qui foecundat animos. It is the spirit of the Lord that makes our minds
fruitful. Yea that makes our hearts good earth to receive the good seed of
the word to our comfort, that blesses our knowledge to us, to crucify us to
the world and sin, and to renew us to the Lord in daily obedience more and
more. This Spirit also inspireth our minds to will and after gives the effect
and execution of that inspired will. Philip. 2.13.
Deus enim ille est qui in nobis operatur and velle and perficere, pro gratuita
sua beneuolentia. The Lord is he that works in us both the will and the
deed, (to wit by his holy spirit) even of this good pleasure. And it is the
God of peace, says the Apostle, that brought again from the dead, Hebre.
13.21.
our Lord Jesus the great shephearde of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, that makes me^ perfect in all good works to do his
will, working in them that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ.
Whereunto agrees that of Cyprian. Vt fiat a nobis dei voluntas opus est dei
voluntate, quia nemo suis viribus potens est. That is, to do the will of God,
we have need of the will of God (to wit his assistance and strength) for by
his own power no man is able. Wherefore since knowledge to understand Gods
will out of his word, Knowledge of Gods will and a blessing thereof to
sanctification are here prayed for as means.
and the grace of his spirit to bless that knowledge to us are means to make
us able to perform this petition and to do his will, therefore we pray also
herein for these means, and the words are with the Lord as if we should
even in plain terms say: O Lord give us the knowledge still daily more and
more of thy will out of thy word, and give us the grace of thy Spirit to that
knowledge, that we enabled by these means may work thy will in this life as
we ought.

What else do we ask in it? Again, as we pray for all these things, so do we
as I told you before, and must still tell you in every petition pray against
their contraries. The contraries prayed against
For if the one be confirmed the other must be overthrown. Now the contraries
of these things may be said to be of two sorts, to wit, either such as do
utterly and wholly and ever resist his holy will, or such as are but certain
impedimentes whereby we do it not so readyly as either we ought or happily
would do, if they were not. Of the first sort is Satan, Sin, and the effects
of sin whatsoever, the flesh or the old man and his concupisence, the world
and such like. Math. 6.24.
For no man can serve two masters, especially contrary masters, Coloss. 38.10.
such as God and Satan are, the Spirit of God and the flesh, the new and the
old man. Of the second sort are overmuch care for worldly matters, fear of
men, and a number of things that like weightes or burdens upon our backs
press us, or like fetters about our feet hinder us that we go not on
altogether so readyly and so fully in this way of doing the will of God as we
in deed ought and would, if these lets were not. Whatsoever they be then, and
of whether sort so ever they be, forasmuch as they are against that obedience
that we pray for in this petition, therefore we desire of the Lord that they
may be remembered, and that no let or least impediment may be to hinder that in
us which both in respect of his goodness to us, and our duties to him ought
with all perfection both of will and work be performed. And thus might we end
this petition, saving that some profitable collections or observations may be
made of the words as they are laid down here by our Savior.

I pray you then add those also. How we fell and now may rise.
The first may be this. We may observe and see here both the beginning of man's
misery, as also the way to draw nere again to that old and former innocence.
Man's misery sprang by disobedience to the will of God, as we all know, and the
way to return to that good estate again wherein we were, is obedience to
that will, as here we learn when we are taught to pray, Thy will be done. For
we pray for the restitutio^ of those graces in some measure, which in our first
parents were most perfectly. And look then how much we perform to the Lord
obedience, and so much draw we near to an happy estate again. Wherefore the
Lord said it, Math. 12.50.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. And again,
Whosoever shall do my Fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my mother,
sister, and brother, Obedience then to his holy will is that which will set
us in good place again. And therefore try beloved, what measure of this is in
you, and so like or dislyke of your selves. A profitable examination of our
selves.
Try with what love you hear the word, with what care you are filled to do
thereafter, what conscience you make of sin, what name so ever it have: what
joy you have in the works of righteousness, what grief if frayltie c^use a
fall. If you find these in some measure, so much be glad, if in great
measure, much more be glad, for truly so much have we left the way of
death, into which we are fallen all by our first parents, and so far have
profited in the way of life, which is true obedience. But if our consciences
accuse us in this trial, that we have no desire to know Gods will out of his
word, although it be with many merciful circumstances offered unto us, no
care to live holily, no conscience of sin, but some little servile fear for
dread of punishment, no spiritual joy in well doing, no inward sorrow for
evil doing, then tremble we and fear we before the Lord of heaven and earth,
for as yet we are in the way of disobedience, which is the way of death,
whereinto our first parents fell: we are buried in our corruption, and dead in
sin, not risen with Christ, we are heapers up of wrath against our souls in
the day of wrath, and contemners of the word, which in such sort has been
preached unto us, for which cause that same word shall judge us in the last
day, and we shall perish. Try then I say, and so like or dislyke.

Ihon. 12.48. Merit overthrown.
Secondly, learning by these words, ( As it is in heaven,) that our obedience
ought not to be lame or maimed, but even such both for will and work, as that
of the heavenly spirits, we are notably taught what cold comfort there is
for us in our selves, and how far it is off, that we, or any living should
be saved by their works. Much less works of supererogation.
For dare any of us say we obey the Lords will in earth, as it is obeyed in
heaven, and that there is no imperfection in us more here than there? If we
dare not, if we cannot, then you see we have not done all that is commanded,
and therefore far from being justified by that means when we have not done
our duty. Cleave we therefore fast unto our true safety Jesus Christ the
righteous, and away with such dreams.

Thirdly, do we not see that this prayer wholly, called the Lords prayer, and
this petition particularly, is prescribed by the Lord unto al Christians, men
and women, of what degree, estate and calling so ever they be, and none
exempted? We see it plainly, for to all it is said in the Disciples, that have
been, are, No estate of persons priueledged more than other from doing Gods
will.
and shall be to the worlds end, when you pray, pray thus. We see it then by
consequence again, that all degrees, estates, and callings are bound to
perform unto the Lord such perfect obedience as here is noted, and not
Monks, Friars, Nuns, or some certain sort of this order or that only,
which yet has been taught us, and that others taking some more liberty, might
find mercy with God for their prayers, and strict observation in truth, not of
Gods will, but of some ceremonies of their own devising. Popish error.
But it has mightily ben showed to the world, and our eyes al, that every
plant which the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up, and
therefore let us believe no such follies. If we be the Lords, we acknowledge
our selves bound to perform as full obedience as is performed in heaven, and
that is as much as any of these devised orders could perform, and a little
more to I trow. And therefore no immunitie to us, neither further yoke to
them, that I know of, if this petition stand.

The cause of all evil.
Fourthly, we may here very well learn the true cause of all such hurly
burlies in ye world, of wars, of schisms, of heresies, of strifes amongst
neighbors, and finally of all calamities, even this: Quod neglecta voluntate
Dei, suo quisque sensu rapitur: that every man setting aside ye will of God
(which above al should be regarded) is carried with his own liking and will in
all things. Wherefore as one says, Oremus Deum, vt spiritum filiorum det
nobis, etc. Let us beseech the Lord to give us the spirits of sons and
children, that renouncing our own will, we may readily and heartily submit our
selves to his will, and not with lips, but life, show that we pray it
earnestly, Fiat voluntas tua. Thy will be done.

Fifthly, praying that his will may be done in earth, we acknowledge even in
this world also a place wherein God ought to rule, and not only in heaven.
And therefore are justly occasioned as often as we say this prayer, to gro^e in
our spirits, and sighe with right sorrowful hearts to see yet how far that
is of. To see what disobedience there is in every degree, yea, what stubborn
rebellion and defiance, as it were, with this will of God where it is known,
but much more to see what thousands and millions there be that know it not,
what whole nations, kingdoms, and Countries. And if they know it not, ill can
they do it. But where are these groans and sighs? Where is that plenty of
water that gushed out of David's eyes for like cause? Assuredly, beloved, if we
had sent forth these messengers to the Lord, and delivered these tokens of
inward zeal for his glory and our bretherens good, ere this day long, they
had perced the heavens, and the Lord of the vineyard had sent forth laborers
to breed knowledge, knowledge had displaced ignorance and rebellion, and
wrought true submission in many thousands of souls to this heavenly will that
here we speak of.

Sixthly, if we did not see this rebellion of the world against the Lord plain
enough, yet does this very petition so teach it, that we cannot deny it. For
why should we be taught to pray that his will may be done, if it were done, and
that he may be obeyed in thoughts, words, and deeds, if he were not
fearfully disobeyed in them all. If then both one and other shows it, A
profitable meditation to wake us and weyne us from the love of this world.
alas what cause have we to delight here to live and dwell as we do? Nay
what true matter herehence may we gather to defy it and to weane our souls
from it as the Lord will strengthen. It is a place of rebellion against our God,
a sink of sin, a cage (ye Lord knows it) of unclean birds, a sepulcher,
though outwardly fair and painted, yet full of rotten bones, yea rotten
bodies, and defiled souls, with horrible pollutions. Mundus totus in maligno
positus, in hoc virtus et pietas patiuntur, in hoc mill technae ad fallendu^,
quocunque respicitis impurus est totus, et sordesci^ indies magis magisque,
etc. This world is wholly set on mischief, in it virtue and godliness suffer,
in it are a thousand subtilties to deceive, which way so ever thou look in
it, altogether impure is it, and the impuritie of it still daily more and more
increases, sometimes tyrants disturb the public peace, sometimes
heretics oppugn the truth, sometimes private perils molest and grieve, and
what ever comfort yields it, that is true and permanent? He that had the most
proof of the pleasure of it that had ever any, and by proof might speak
what he found in them, has thus delivered to al ears for ever, Ecles. 1.
that they are vanities all and vexation of Spirit. The world will promise
her seven years servants fair and wished Rachael, The world keeps not
promise.
but when performance should be, the^ comes Leah with her sore eyes, that is,
a subtle slight to disappoynt thy pain, and a worse reward than thou seruest
in hope of. It will promise promotion high and lofty to prodigality, but it
will pay the contempt bitter and grievous for thy beggary, when al is spent in
hope of that promotion. By marriage it promises many comforts, but how often
pays it many cares with sops of sorrow, that soke full deep. The world is
full of false Prophets that will keep Achab from good Micheas council: full of
false merchants that will show forth the better end of the piece, and say the
rest is like, when it is far otherwise: full of cunning fishers, that under
pleasant baits have hidden hooks to destroy us if we bite: full of such
golden strumpettes as that of Babylon, which in cups of gold give drink that
kills even to hell: full of smooth alluring Iahels, which stand in their tent
doors and say to men, Iug. 4.18.
Turn in my Lord, turn in unto me, and fear not, but if in they come and
fall to sleep, the nail and the hammer walk, to their woeful end and fall:
full of flattering Ioabs that can say with a smiling face, how do thou my
brother Amasa, and stab him in that he shall not answer: full of treacherous
Iudases, that with a kiss betray their dearest master. And alas what place
is this? Run over the greatest things that here we have, or can have, and see
what is linked to them. If a man have riches, Note.
what fears and cares has he with them? If honors, what burdens and fears
again of a fall? If a man have friends, what a do to keep them? Our bodies
have diseases, our minds have passions, neighbors be comfortable, and to live
sole is solitary: yet see disco^forts, one toutheth our goods by law, another
our name by slander, this hates us, that enuieth us, another flattereth,
another deceives, another bears false witness against us: with a thousand
such. One cross counteruaileth a thousand comforts.
And if we be discontented and crossed but in one thing (see the misery of this
wretched world) though we enjoy a thousand contents, yet grindeth that day
and night upon us, and al our contents are as nothing to us, because of that
one discontent. The trial was had of that wicked Haman, who though he had many
and great preferments to rejoice in, yet felt he them all eclipsed, and as it
were taken from him by this one grief, the life of Mardocheus before his face.
And what should I say? Would God we did it often with profit, what we may
do ever with grief, to the better weaning our selves from this world of woes,
even search and see into the manners of it in every place, in every age, and
in every sort of persons. Shall we not see of all the things that are accounted
of, nothing so little accounted of as sin? Shall we not see justice sold,
verity wreasted, shame lost, and equity despised? Shall we not see the guilty
quitte, and the halter put over the innocents head? Shall we not see the wicked
advanced; and the godly depressed, wreaked and wronged, and troad upon? Surely
we shall see fools bid speak, and wise men bid peace. Yea, we shall see every
man's mouth over foul with looseness, and few men's lives governed with
virtue. Alas then again, what a place is this? Shall the sins of himself
make the Apostle cry, Cupio dissolui, I desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. And shall not all the sins of so sinful a world together with our
own, make us desire it? What pleasure had the good prophet, who for the very
sin that he saw, he desired death. 1. Kings. 19.
Did not our Savior say it when time was, Non rog^ pro mundo, I pray not for
the world? And shall we joy in the place so fearfully excepted in the prayer
of Christ. If we think heaven to be our home, are we not so long from home
as we are here? If to depart here hence be to go to life, is not to tarry
here to abide in death? If that life be freedom, is not this bondage?
Finally, if to be with God be our true felicity, to be absent from GOD is it
not our sure misery? 2. Cor. 5.^.
But whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from God, says the
Apostle, and therefore think of it. What may you now think you beloved, to stay
you from a true and Christian lothing of this wretched life in so vil^ a world.
Truly I know not, except you should unwisely say, there be few that do it,
and many that do it not. Which if you should say, then must I answer you as
he did that said it. Neque minor erit gloria tua si foelix eris cum paucis,
neque poena leuior si miser eris cum stultis. Neither shall thy glory be less
if thou be happy with few, neither thy punishment lighter, if thou be
miserable with many. But I hope you are far from being holden in evil with so
bad arguments, and therefore I pray you let us all remember what is said unto
us: Love not this world, ^. Ihon 2.
neither any thing that is in the world. For if we love the world, the love of
the father is not in us. And the Lord strengthen us.

Seventhly, we see here by this petition and form of prayer, the very true
nature of a child of God, namely to desire, and pray heartely, that both in
himself and others, Gods will may be known and done. Yea, so heartely and
earnestly does he wish this, that to see the contrary, is a vexation to his
soul very vehement and great. And he delivered just lot, 2. Petr. 2.7.
says Saint Peter. vexed with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked. And,
I saw the transgressors, says David, and was grieved because they kept not
thy word, Psalm. 119.15.
yea, mine eyes gush out with tears for this cause. But of this some thing was
said before. Laughing at other men's* faults.
The Lord enter not into judgment with us ever, for the want of this sorrow
to see other men do evil, saying nothing of our selves, and our own evil.
For how may we answer, not our sorrowing, but our laughing, even as we were
tickled, to see dronkards, to hear rimers and railers, and idle
counterfaiters, tearing their tongues against their teeth, to the dishonor of
God, the gauling or slander of others, and the death of their own souls for
ever without repentance, which in many of them God may work: but it is smally
to be hoped of as yet. God that shall judge us knows it, and tells us now
whilst we have time to leave it, that we cannot answer it. The Lord therefore
change us, and we shall be changed, and make the breach of his will to touch
us deeply both in our selves and others.

Lastly we may note here, if there were no other Scriptures to show us, what
an acceptable thing to the Lord the ready and careful doing of his will is, by
this that our Savior places this petition amongst the first and chief
desires of his children: we may see our dulnes that must be taught to pray for
this obedience, and we may see Gods rich and great goodness that will give us
strength to obey him, and then crown us for so doing with an immortal crown,
as if we had done all of our selves. The Lord give us feeling. And let thus
much suffice of this petition.

A Prayer.
O Sweet and gracious Father, how dear both is and ought to be to a good
child the goodwill of his earthly Father? And if so, how much more dear to thy
child the just and ever holy will of thee his heavenly father. In deed he
should pray with heart and soul that it may be done. And therefore feeling our
only sweet comfort this, that we are thy children, we again and again
beseech thy majesty that it may so be. Concerning thy secret will reserved to
thy self, O Lord let us never curiously be searchers and seekers to know
above that which is meet for us to know. Much less let us give our selves by
spirits and deuilles and vile means to wring out as it were by force from
thee the knowledge of times and seasons, and matters reserved in thy power: but
let us ever concerning this, be thus disposed by thy grace in our selves, that
whatsoever this hidden will of thine shall be concerning us, whether to live or
dye, to be poor or rich, to be high or low in this world, with the same and
in the same we rest and be contented: saying in our hearts as obedient
children, let my God and Father do with me and dispose of me at his pleasure.
And when it shall appear and be reueiled to us, then even more, if more may
be, to be contented, giving true and hearty thanks to thy majesty as well
for woe as well, for little as much, for low degree as high degree, if so thy
pleasure be, taking well in worth as thy servant Job at thy hands evil things
as good things, sower as well as sweet, and lowering nights as well as
Sunneshine mornings. Dear GOD make us ever bless thy name with a single heart
when we know thy will, and till thou show it, leave it to thy self.
Concerning next thy reueiled will, that is, all that which in thy word thou
have laid down and declared to be the duty which thou will have performed
of us toward thee, O Lord of mercy we beseech thee that whereas our minds
burning with lusts are commonly carried to desire and to do those things that
most displease thee, thou of thy gracious goodness would vouchsafe so to
change us by the power of thy blessed Spirit, that we may will and wish
nothing but what thy holy will allows. Give us faith firm and steadfast in
thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ. And to this faith join in mercy a pure
and clean life, granting us grace to possess these vessels in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the ungodly do. O pardon
herein, for the blood of Jesus, both words and works straying from thy will.
To name them it is impossible, for we cannot think of them: yet thou know
them, and with thee is mercy even for secret faults. Give us of thy strength
also, O blessed Lord God, that we may bear and suffer all crosses, diseases,
poverty, co^tempts, persecutions, and adversities, with all the changes and
chances of this mortal life, not only with co^te^ted, but with gladsome
hearts, knowing that it is thy will that we should crucify and mortify our
wills. And when that appointed passing hour shall come, that earth to earth
and ashes to ashes is to return, O Lord make us strong to welcome in this
also thy will. And finally what obedience we owe to thy majesty, give it us
good God that as thy Angels and heavenly creatures most willingly without
grudging, most speedily without delays, and most faithfully without affection
and partiality do their duties, so we may perform and do it, to our lives
end and ever, as it shall please thee to enable us, for his sake whom thou
love, Christ Jesus thy son and our most dear and blessed Savior. Amen.

The 4. Petition. Give us this day our daily bread.
Two things I have to ask you here touching the order before you come to the
words themselves. First, why these three Petitions concerning our necessities
follow upon the other which concerned Gods glory. Secondly, why of the three
this is first, seeing the other two concern better things?
Math. 6.
To the first, I answer you, that being warranted by the Lord after the seeking
of his kingdom and the righteousness thereof, which ought to be first, to
seek also at his hands whatsoever we have need of to the maintenance and good
of this life, we having done the former in the petitions before, fitly
follows the other now in these three. Psalm. 4.6.8.
And this is the order that David uses in his Psalm: first craving the light
of the Lords countenance to be lifted up upon him, and then assuring himself
next of peace and safety, the benefits of this earthly life.

Yea sir, but does not our Savior say expressly: Math. 6.
Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
nor yet for your body what ye shall put on, but seek ye first the kingdom of
God and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto
you: for your heavenly father knows that ye have need of these things? Why
then should we expressly pray for that, which both he knows we want, and
has in mercy promised us?

Although our Savior say, they shall be ministered unto us, in that place, yet
does himself bid us pray for them expressly in this place: and therefore well
we know by those words there he meant not to exclude this means here. The
examples also of his children which have done it, and the manifold promises
made to all them that shall do it, which will appear to us hereafter, tell us
the same. If you will know the reason why, understand you, not for that he
would not otherwise give them to his children that seek his kingdom chiefly,
except they were by name asked, or for that he gives them for their asking
(which in deed he gives freely) or for that he has need to be remembered,
but in deed that by such prayer we might witness unto the world that we
acknowledge the Lord the very fountain and spring head of all these things
also that concern either body or mind, that we might thus learn to depend
upon him fully and wholly and in all things, Iam. 1.17 Psalm. 37.5.7.
and whatsoever is wanting to us to fly to him, not to trust in our selves, or
in man, or in any arm of flesh whatsoever.

What say you to my second demand? To your second demand I answer thus,
that albeit the things that are contained in the next petitions be of more
price than those that are contained in this, yet has the Lord set this before
them not without cause, even to relieve thereby our infirmity, which do not
so easily and quickly perceive or pray for heavenly things as earthly things.
The fifth petition beggeth remission of sins: the sixth, an invincible
constancy and holy fortitude in temptation: these are great matters concerning
our heavenly life, and therefore not so near to our dull conceits and
knowledge. The matters of this petition are more easy and better felt of us,
and therefore in a most merciful wisdom our Savior begins with the
easier, and so draws us to the harder by degrees, that having had trial of
his goodness in the one, we might nothing doubt of his mercy in the other.
Having felt him friendly in matters of lesser good, we might full account of
favor in things of greater good to us.

Yet must I needs object unto you the prayer of Agur, which proceeds not in
this order, but first desiring that God would remove far from him vanity and
lies (matter belonging to the mind) in the second and latter place asks food
convenient concerning the body. Prou. 30.8.
And I have already answered your objection sufficiently, if you marked it. For
I have said in respect of the matters themselves things belonging to the mind
are to go before things belonging to the body, This order reregardeth our
infirmity, not the nature of the things.
and so no doubt would our Savior have set them, if he had regarded that
only. But looking from that to our infirmity and dulnes, he has placed that
first that was best known to us, and so from the more known draws us to the
less known: from the easier to the harder, and from the earthly to the
heavenly. Like a good teacher that wishing the profitte of his scholars,
delivers to them the lighter lessons first, and milk before meat, that is
strong for men.

You satisfy me well, proceed therefore now, if you please, to the words
themselves, this is enough concerning the order. Content, if this be noted in a
word before: that although we be now come to matters that concern our
selves and our own profit and have passed over those that concern Gods glory,
yet may we not think that we have now done with the Lord and his honor
quite, but this only is the difference, that then we respected the Lord
only wholly and immediately, now we regard our selves and our necessities
with him, and him, as we use to speak, mediatly. For otherwise even all the
things we wish and do, must regard the Lord and his holy honor, according to
the Apostle, saying, 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
And according to the confession of Saint Austen, Sufficie^tia vitae recte
appetitur, Aug. epist. 121. ad Probam.
non propter se ipsam quidem, sed vt eam habe^tes commodius Deo seruiamus.
Things fit for this life are rightly requested, but not for themselves, but
that having them we may better serve God. The true knowledge of this puts a
notable bitte in the mouth of our untamed desires, and draws them ever in
these worldly commodities to that measure and manner that may stand with the
Lords honor. Whereas otherwise when it is forgotten or not known there is no
measure in our coveting, no honesty in our using, no credit in our leaving
them.

Panem.
Now come we to the word, and the first as you see is this word Bread.
Which both in Scripture and in godly writers is taken diversely. In the sixth of
John it signifies Christ himself, Ihon. 6.48.51.
because as bread and flesh, meat and drink are to the use of this
transitory life, so is Christ sent from the Father to us, for the getting and
keeping of everlasting life. Joshua said, Number. 14.9 Ecles. 11.1. Romans 9.17.
fear not the people of the Land, for they are but bread for us, that is a
thing that we shall overcome and devour. The preacher says Cast thy bread
upon the waters, that is, be liberal to the poor. Stolen waters are sweet
says the harlot in the Proverbs, and hid bread is pleasant. By bread there
meaning adultery and pollution of the flesh. In the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 30.20
1. Kings 22
it is called the bread of adversity, in an other place bread of affliction.
Sometimes again it signifies the benefits of Christ, as when he said, It is
not lawful to take the childrens bread, and to give it to dogs, Math. 15.
that is the benefits principally appointed for the Jews, which are children,
and to give them to you Gentiles which be dogs. Mysticus sermo sacrarum rerum
est panis fortior. Ambr. ser. 14. in Psalm. 118
Sometimes it signifies doctrine and instruction out of the word whereby our
souls are nourished as with spiritual bread, no less than our bodies with
material bread, and thereupon the want of the word called a famine, as you
have heard. With many more sundry significations if it needed to repeat them,
but let these suffice. Here in this petition it is taken in his own proper
sense and signification, for such bread as we eat and are nourished withal.
Yet figuratively it stretches it self further than to bread only, and
includes whatsoever is necessary to the sustentation of this life. So says
Saint Austen, Necessariam corporis exhibitionem petimus aperte in pane,
significantes quicquid est nobis necessarium. All needful maintenance of the
body we ask in this petition plainly in the word bread, For this cause some
have thought panem to come of the Greek word (...). Genesis 3.
signifiing whatsoever is necessary. Nay, so says the scripture in many
places, showing this largeness of the word. Jn sudore vultus tui vesceris pane
tuo. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread. That is, whatsoever
thou inioyest in this world of these earthly things, thou shall come by it by
labor and travel, and not by bread only. 2 Kings. 6.2.
When Elizeus bad the king set bread before them, you see what the king did,
he made them very good intertaynement. All Jobs kindred came to eat bread
with him, that is, Job. last. 11.
to rejoice and be merry in all good sort with him: Genesis 11.
when Abraham prayed the Angels to stay and he would set a morsel of bread
before them, he meant by bread more than bare bread. When David said, he that
did eat of his bread, Psalm. 141.10.
lift up his heel against him, he meant by bread familiarity, trust and
credit, and a very near conjunction of friendship. So was it usual you see
with the Hebrews, in this word to comprehend all necessary sustenance of the
life.

And why think you? Happily because bread is most usual and most necessary.
For many have bread that have no meat, and they that have both may yet better
spare the one than the other, although neither well. As I remember the Duke of
Saxony Frederike, is said to have caused his people to see, when going to
hawke one day in the fields, A good example.
and seeing his servants so carelessly and badly to ride over the corn and to
spoil it, when he came home, commanded that their meat should be set
before them as plentifully as ever, yea and better if it might be, but never a
morsel of bread all that day. The service being strange, and no man knowing
the cause, at last the good Duke sent them word that if they saw any use of
bread to their comfort, let them learn to take more care of corn hereafter,
and not for any pleasure or pastime to ride over it, and spoil it as they had
done that day. A worthy example sure for all Princes and Nobles to follow, ever
making conscience of the Lords blessings to spoil them for any vain delight
and pastime. Some other reason may be given also of frugalitie, as that we are
thus admonished to be content with a little, and to say with the Apostle
cheerfully and heartely: Philip. 4.11.
I speak not because of want. 1^.
For I have learned in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be content. 12.
I can be abased, and I can abound, every where, in all things I am
instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, and to abound and to have want.
I am able to do all things through the help of Christ which strengthens me.
13.
We are not taught to pray for gorgeous clothes, for stately houses, Note.
or for great livings and honors, but for bread, bread, and that but for the
day, and therefore a stint made assuredly of our immoderate desires. If the
Lord give more, be thankful and use it well, but if he give but bread, that
is a little be very heartily well content even with that also, for therefore is
it only named here to teach us so. Sit oration, quae pro temporalibus est, circa
solas necessitates restricta. Let thy prayer which thou make for temporal
matters be restrained ever to things necessary, says Bernard. For he yt would
say in his prayer, for example, says Augustine. Doie multiplica diuitias meas,
Aug. epist. 121.
aut da mihi tantas, quantas illi vel illi dedisti, puto eum non inuenire in
oratione Dominica quo possit haec vota coaptare. That is, Lord increase my
riches or give me so much as thou have given such an one, and such an one, I
think that man in the Lords prayer will find no such direction. 1. Timoth. 6.8.
When we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content says the Apostle
for we brought nothing into this world, 1. Tim. 6 8.
nether shall we carry any thing out. And they that will be rich fall into
temptation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction: for the desire of money is the root of al
evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and perced
themselves through with many sorrows. And most sweetly in ye Epistle to the
Hebrews. Hebre. 13 5.6.7.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that ye have, for he has said: I will not fail thee, neither forsake
thee, So that we may boldly say. The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear
what man can do unto me. Rom 13.14.
Finally take no thought for the flesh, says the word again to fulfill the
lusts of it. Thus do you see then very fitly may we learn by the Lords naming
of bread only, barely by it self, and neither of gold nor silver, nor other
statelynes, to be content with any little that the same Lord shall think good
to give us ever: O think of this, and God give strength.
and not greedely to wish for any wanton abundance. Pray this prayer then
beloved with your heart, and think of this note. For the Lord knows how
frail flesh misliketh little, and seeks much: that walowing in wealth, it
might walow in woe an other day: rechlessely overtaken with the pleasures of
this life, through ability to have them, further than GOD will warrant, when he
falls to reckon.

Why Sir is it not lawful to pray for wealth and riches? You have heard
before that whatsoever is needful to the life of man is included in this word
bread, and prayed for here. Some men may pray for more than others may.
And you must know also that this needful is measured according to men's
several callings and charges, for great men have need of more than mean men,
and of both sorts they that have more charge either of children or other
necessary servants about the^, have need also of more. Wherefore if their
necessaries be great abundance, Rich Crassus said, to be rich was to be able to
nourrish an army yearly.
even that great abundance is lawfully prayed for by warrant both of this
petition and much other Scripture. But if we go from necessaries, to
superfluities, (as in deed the desire of man is) to the end he might bathe
himself in pleasures, that flesh feeds upon most greedely, Luc. 16.19.
be clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare most deliciously every day,
though woefully he cry when that folly is faded, for one drop of water to cool
his tongue in the burning lake: then must we remember that a wise man prayed
not so, but even flat contrary, Prou. 30.8.
saying Lord give me not riches (he means superfluity above need) and
adds this reason, least I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord.
Which reason the more we meditate upon, the more strong shall we see it: this
usually being a fruit of wanton superfluity, O fearful fruit.
to forget our God. Behold says the Lord to his people Israel, I will bring
thee into a good land, Deuteronomy. 8.7. etc.
a land in the which are rivers of water, and fountains, and depths that
spring out of valleys and mountains. A land of wheat and barley, and of
vineyardes and figgetrees and pomgranats, a land of oil olive, and honey: A
land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarsety, neither shall thou lack
any thing therein, a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains
thou shall dig brass. Here is the danger.
But beware, least when thou have eaten and filled thy self, and have built
goodly houses and dwelt therein, and thy beasts and thy sheep are increased,
and thy silver and gold is multiplied, and all that thou have increased,
(beware I say again) lest then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the
Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage etc. Beware least thou say in thine heart, My power and the strength of
mine own hand has gotten me this abundance, but remember the Lord thy God.
For it is he which gives the power to get substance etc. You see what a
danger the holy Ghost has here discovered in abundance of earthly things to
lift our heel against the Lord, what a vehement caveat he has given, and as
sure as we live, Psalm. 49.
it is a thousand to one we do it. If riches increase says he again by his
Prophet, set not thy heart upon them: as if he should say thy nature is to do
it. And charge the^ that be rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6.17.
says the Apostle that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in
uncertain riches, but in the living god. Why should men be charged, if there
were no danger. What said proud Pharaoh puffed up with his princely pomp, but
Quis est Dominus? Exodus 5.
Who is the Lord? What said Nabuchad-nezzar, Dan. 4.19.
when his greatness was so grown that it reached to the heaven, 26.
and his dominion to the end of the earth, 27.
when he walked in the royal place of Babel, I say what said he? But in the
pride of his heart against the Lord thus: Is not this great Babell, A great
example.
that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and
for the honor of my majesty. And by and by the hand of the Lord was upon him,
read it, and read many times it is a great example. What a damnable dream
was proud Haman in by reason of his grace in Court, Hester. 5.
forgetting God, hating his Saints, and so carried in the smokie cloud of his
favor with the Prince, and his great estate, that he never knew where he was,
till he was ready to climb the tree himself that he had set up for holy
Mardocheus? Can our souls wish a better example to tell us the danger of
earthly greatness, if the Lord assist not slyding nature? But these were
strangers all from God, you will say, and therefore no proofs but that we
which know more, may do better, though we swim never so much in all
abundance? well see you then the fault of better, 2. Chro. 32.4. 2. Sam. 24.
Psalm. 30.
even by the same Hezekias a good one, and yet thus deceived, David a good one
and yet so puffed up, that he numbered his people with a proud conceit, and
boasted in his wealth, that it would never decay. Job. 31.24.
Whereupon Job glories of it as of a special grace upon him beyond the course
of any whom the Lord assisteth not, that he never made gold his hope, neither
said to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence: that he never rejoiced
because his substance was great, and so forth. The heathen knew the danger,
and therefore usually handled it as a tried truth, that prosperity is
hardlier well endured tha^ adversity. Saint Austen said it, Three good Mothers
bring forth three bad children: truth hatred, familiarity contempt, and riches
pride.
and knew it true Diuitiarum morbus superbia. The disease of riches is pride,
and would God we knew not to much experience to infer against all denyals
this woeful conclusion in our days. And to tell us all, that honors, and ease,
and ability, to have what either wanton will can wish, or our own, or other
wild heads devise, banisheth too often religion, and all his exercises, Too
true though too bad.
private or public, cools and quenches all heavenly heates, forces away,
as too melancholic fooes, all sweet meditations of Spiritual causes, and
gives the bridle to all damnable pleasure and dreadful security. But they
shall know one day, and let us see now, that if the Lord give us but daily
bread that is things needful, not needelesse, a moderate, a competent, or
sufficient portion to pass this life along withal, assuredly he he does that
which is safest for us, in respect of our great propension to abuse his
plenty: and good cause we should without any muttering for more, be contented
with it. Yet should greater plenty cause greater piety, greater zeal,
greater thankfulness and all good, Job. 1.9.10.
but alas it is not so. The very devil could say that it was no marvel if
Job feared God, seeing that God had made an hedge about him, and about his
house, and about all that he had on every side, and had blessed the work of
his hands, and his substance was increased in the land, and yet are not many of
us able to reason thus to the stirring up of our obedience to the Lord for his
graces to us, albeit we would be judged great Christians. The Lord quicken
us. For assuredly to whom the Lord has given much, of them he will require
much, and they shall answer him.

It needs not that we run over all particulars, seeing thus much now is
said, that in the word bread is contained all that we may have any way need
of to this life? It were an infinite matter so to do, and in deed not
needful, therefore let us consider that we ask herein, food and rayme^t and
whatsoever we want. Houses to dwell in, Psalm. 107.36. Psalm. 107.109.10.
That our children be not vagabonds and beg their bread Psalm. 109 We beg
peace and quietness, private at home, public abroad: for this is needful and
a comfortable blessing. Prou. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel, if peace be with it, tha^ an house full of sacrifices
with strife. And it is a great goodness of God, when we may serve him, as
Zachary says, without fear, Luc. 1 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Wherefore the Lord
himself of peace, says the Apostle, give you peace always, by all means.
Romans 12.18. Psalm. 144.14.
And if it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men.
Grant Lord says David that there be no going out, no leading into captivity,
neither any complaining in our streets. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: Let
them prosper that love thee: 122.
Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnes in thy palaces. We pray also for
ye bounds of peace, good magistrates. Again for good health and strength of
body, whereby we may be able to walk in our vocation. For honest name and
fame, credit and favor with men as shall be good for us, and a thousand things
more that this life has need of. Neither do we ask these things in a bare and
needy measure only, but even in some comfortable measure, that we may not only
our selves live with some cheer, which ye Lord aloweth, but that we may be
also helpefull unto others. So you have some tas^ of the particulars of this
general word bread. I see here their doubt is plainly dissolved, that make a
question whether a Christian may pray for the outward things of this world,
because the Church must be subject here to persecution? It is very true: for
here is a short commandment to do it, Math. 7.7. Psalm. 55. Mar.10.29.
Give us this day our daily bread: besides other general charges in the word.
Secondly, we have his promises many and merciful concerning these things, and
what he promises to give we may be bold to ask. Thirdly, Genesis 28.20.
we have the examples of his children, as of Jacob when he went to Padan Aram,
saying: If God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey which I go,
and will give me bread to eat and clothes to put on, so that I come again
unto my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. Prou. 30.7.
Of Solomon that prayed for food convenient, and neither for riches nor
poverty. Of Leapers that prayed to be cleansed: of blind men that prayed for
sight: of men and women many in the Gospel that prayed for their diverse
diseases and infirmities, and were healed of our Savior without any rebuke
ever for their so doing. Fourthly, because the Lord must ever have a Church,
but that cannot be without food, government, peace, health, and such like:
therefore it is lawful to ask them. Lastly, because the asking and
expectation of these things is a notable exercise of our faith, hope and trust
in Gods promises. For we cannot assure our selves of these corporal goods,
neither ask them, except we be in Gods favor, and feel in our selves good
comfort of his good will toward us. By asking therefore we exercise our faith
to believe the Lord to be our good God: from which goodness of his we look
for these things, so far as they may be good for us. Otherwise the Lord might
say to us, you are none of that number that I promised these things unto.
Earthly and outward things are lawfully prayed for, but ever with a condition.
But yet this ever must we note concerning the manner of our prayer, namely,
that it be cum condition voluntatis, with condition of his good pleasure, will
and liking: and, in hunc finem vt seruiamus Deo, and proximo: for this end
that we may serve God, and our neighbor, by them, and with them. For who thus
beg the^ not, are not heard: that is, these things are not given them to
their good: but although they receive them according to their desire, yet is
God offended with them, and they receive them to their judgment. But
spiritual things we may ask simply and without condition, because GOD so
has promised them, and they ever profit us: as we may simply desire the holy
Ghost, because the Lord has simply and expressly promised him to them that
ask him, and so of other matters, whereas these earthly things now are good,
and now evil for us: and therefore left to the pleasure of him that knows
what is best.

What is the reason of the next word Our, and why is it called Our bread?

Not of merit or of due debt, but in respect of our necessity which cannot be
with out it. And see then I pray you, what great Gods we are become by our
first parents eating of the forbidden fruit, We be goodly Gods that cannot
give our selves a piece of bread.
surely even such as are not able to live, and have our being in this world
without a piece of bread to support and hold up, which piece of bread we are
not able to give our selves, if we perished ten thousand times for want of it,
but we must have it given to us by him that is good in deed. This is the truth
of that Serpents saying. You shall not die at al: Genesis 3.4 5.
but God does know that when ye shall eat thereof your eyes shall be
opened, and you shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. Yet cannot this and
many thousand of lies more, make me leave hearkening to his hissing. Secondly,
it is called our Bread, to teach us to be content with that portion which he
vouchsafes to give us, and not to bereave any others of that which is theirs.
Either our neighbors of their livings, our servants of their wages, o6ur
workmen of their hire, or any one what soever of his own. For that is not ours
that is another man's, and therefore we cannot make this petition to the Lord,
but our own tongues shall be our accusers to the Lord. For we shall in words
ask but so much as may truly be counted our own, (as being got by such
means as he allows) and yet in deed are not so contented, but rake and rob,
and pull from many men that which is theirs, Consider this.
and not ours: How this touches many a man, I wish very heartily may be
concluded by privy feeling of secret guilt, and not in any brother terms
laid open by me. Surely beloved, it is a grievous matter to disable my self
to pray the Lords prayer or any part of it: but so do all they that are not
content with so much bread as is their own, of which they may truly say, it
is ours, and therefore beware. Thirdly, this word Our, truly confirms the
property of goods, wives, children, servants, and such like amongst Christians,
contrary to all profane and brutish community, either by Anabaptists or other
heretics whatsoever sought to be establyshed. A long and a large matter if it
needed a confirmation, or a confutation.

And why do we say Daily Bread, or bread for the day?

The Lord has pleased so to call it, first, to note out unto us our mortality
and fading estate, if he should not even daily feed us. Secondly, to teach us,
that it is our duty daily to ask what daily we need, and not to make our
prayer at once for a years, or many years provision, because we would take
our liberty to pray no more. Thirdly, that thus he might bridle somewhat our
raging hearts, and our endless greedy, and insatiable desires. For many of us
are never satisfied, never pleased with any measure of blessing given us by the
Lord, but ever craving and crying, more, more. This immoderate humor and
sinful vain the Lord seeks here to help, teaching us to be so far from
wishing heaps or any wanton delicates, that we are content with daily bread,
that is, with so much as serves for that day, and as shall be fit to preserve
life honestly, not wantonly. Knowing it and feeling in the faith of a child of
God: that a small thing unto the just man is better than great riches to the
wicked and mighty: Psalm. 87.16.
and again, if nothing wants to them that fear the Lord, that is, no
profitable and necessary thing. Psalm. 34.9.
The wise man says it: The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous,
but he casts away the substance of the wicked. The King and Prophet says, I
have been young, etc. Cyprian says, Quum Dei sint omnia, habenti Deum nihil
deerit, si Deo non desit. And Fides famem non timet. That is, since all things
be Gods, how shall he that has God want any thing, except God be wanting to
himself. Faith fears no famine. Lastly, to assure us that so well our wants
are known to the Lord, as that for every day he can tell what is
sufficient, and what we have need of. Therefore when it is said in the
Gospel, Math. 6.32.
Your heavenly Father knows what ye have need of. We may add every hour,
every day, and do it by warrant of this word in this petition. A most
comfortable thing truly to every one, and especially to them that have any
great carke upon their hands, either of children or otherwise. For it assures
the^ that their God is privy to their estate, yea so privy, that he knows
for every day in the week, and for every day in their lives what they have
need of, both for themselves and their charges, and even for that cause,
namely, that they should know it to be so, he has caused them to pray but
for their daily bread, not naming any quantity, but leaving that to himself,
who knows better than themselves what will serve the turn, and will most
assuredly ever send it them. I pray you then think of it, and so earnestly
think of it, as the knowledge and remembrance of it may ever keep us from
distrust in such a God, and from the effects of distrust, namely, the use of
any badde means to relieve their wa^ts by. For the Lord knows our need, and
every days need, yea, every hours need, and his word is past, that he will
not only know it, but relieve it, as shall be best. I will care for thee, I
will not fail thee, neither forsake thee, says the Lord. And therefore cast
thy care in comfort upon me. 1. Peter 5.7. Hebre. 13.5.
What an encouragement also may this be ever to us, to go to our knees, and to
call upon our God by prayer, when we hear how privy he is to our estate. If
we have a petition to a man, our speeding often lies upon our vtteraunce: if
we speak well we speed well, but if either for fear, or bashfulnesse our
tongues fail to tell our case in such full sort as is needful it should be
known to the winning of relief for it, then fail we also often either of all
or part of that we seek. But (O happy we) it is not so with GOD. If we
cannot utter a word, oppressed with some woe, or otherwise hindered, if we but
sigh, he hears, he sees, knows, and knows more fully, than we could
tell him our selves in any words if we did speak. With what a cheer then
may we fall before him for any thing we want, and say, Lord thou know what
I would have, though my tongue foulter, my want speaks: look upon me in thy
mercy.

It seems by this, that laying up is unlawful.

You judge amiss, for Joseph in the cheap years laid up for dear, and so
saved his own, his masters, and many lives more, and the Lord directed him to
this providence. The Disciples of Antioch sent their ability to the brethren
in Iudaea, and it was reserved and laid up till the famine came that Agabus
had prophesied of. Act. 11.28. Christ badde gather up the broken meat, and let
none of it be lost, the holy Ghost says, the children lay not up for the
Fathers, but the Fathers for the children, warranting as you see, a laying up:
and much more proof if it needed is there. Wherefore by praying for daily
bread, or bread for the day, we are taught to be content if the Lord give no
more, but we are not forbidden to reserve it, if the Lord do give more, for
the Lords gifts may not be cast away by any negligence colored from this
place? Yet must our reservation be void of covetousness, made only in the
reverence of the Lords gifts, to lawful ends, and not to trust in any
store, and to rob the poor and needy when want is.

What shall we answer then to those words of Christ, Care not for to morrow,
for the morrow shall care for it self, etc.

We must answer thus, and answer truly, that our Savior there forbids
us to think of the morrow with distrustfulnesse, but not with prayers and
labors.

How can rich men pray this prayer that have bread for many days and years.

Because all use and comfort and safety of those riches comes from the
Lord. Which except the Lord give, either they loose by some accident their
goods, or having them they have no power to use them, or using them, they
nourish not, as after is proved.

But if it be Our bread, why should we pray the Lord to give it, the use being
to ask that which is not ours?

If it were ours by duty, you might be thought to say some thing, but if it
be ours but by mercy, as you have been told, you say nothing, for things in
mercy given must in a feeling of misery be asked: and that it is mercy, let
Jacob tell us, that great servant of the Lords, who yet confessed that he was
not worthy of the least of all the mercies that GOD had given him, much less
are we. See you further and I pray you mark them, what profitable things
this word may teach us. First, it teaches us, that God is the author and very
spring head of all good, be it spiritual or corporal that comes unto us. And
consequently we are admonished of our misery, that are not of our selves
worth a piece of bread, but made beggars of it at his hands that only does
and can give it. If we be not worth so much, surely we are not worth the
kingdom of heaven and everlasting life. This, little think they that like
brute beasts sit down to eat their given bread, and rise again when they are
filled, not once either in heart or voice, remembering the giver of it. Let such
remember what the Apostle teaches, that the creatures of God are not
sanctified unto us, so that we may use them with a good conscience, 1. Tim. 4.
Aues prius dulce melos fundunt, quam granula quaerunt.
but by the word and by prayer. Let them look upon the little birds, which
sing so sweetly in their kind, before they seek for meat in the morning. It
teaches us again ever so to get our wealth and riches in this life, as we may
truly say and comfortably feel that the Lord has given them. Which we
cannot, if stealth be the means, or usury, or oppression, or any condemned way
whatsoever. For then the devil helps us, and when any loss happens of
them there is a double grief, one at the loosing, and another at the secret
thought of the judgment of God over things not well come by. When as if the
means be good, as right inheritance, or true labor with Jacob, to our
masters or such like, then are our gettings the gift of God, the blessings of
his mercy upon our labors, and inioying it ever with a good conscience we
loose it also, if so the Lord will, with a quiet mind, saying with Job in a
Christian comfort, Job. 1.
the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the
Lord. Fourthly in saying, Give, we are taught that albeit we labor never so
much, being so commanded to do, Genesis 3.17. Psalm. 128.2. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Ecles.
7.7. Prou. 14.23. Act. 20.34.
yet except the Lord bestow the blessing, our labors cannot attain to any
thing, according to the Prophet, except the Lord keep the city the watchman
waketh but in vain, yea in vain do we rise up early, and go late to bed,
eating the bread of sorrow, except the Lord bestow a mercy upon our pains and
travel. With the Lord we have al things, Psalm. 127.
and without him we have nothing. If the earth fructify, it is not tilled
without God. Psalm. 108.33. Mich. 6.15. Agge. 1.6. Rex persicus apud Herodotum.
If he said it truly, Regnum Persicum creuisse, deo ducente, and ipsis Regibus
prompte seque^tibus, that the kingdom of Persia flourished because that God
lead, and the kings readely followed. Surely al men must say that by the same
means, and not otherwise either their Countries, Towns or houses, have their
good whatsoever it is. Respublica dei open and auxilio multo magis quam ratione
hominum and consilio gubernatur: the Common wealth (says Tully) is governed by
the help and hand of God much more than by any reason or counsel of men. Pro
Rabirio.
And vbi non deus, sed mortalis aliquis praeest, ibi malorum nullum effugium.
Where man, not God governs, there is no avoiding of evil when it comes
upon them, says an other. Again, Plato*
Scitis quod neque multitudo, nec robur in bello victoria^ adfert, sed qui deo
iuua^te, magno animo in hosts impetu^ faciunt, eos non sustinent hosts. Ye
know that neither multitude nor strength gets victory in battle, but if
any stoutly assail their enemies, God setting to his helping hand, such
assault is not ever to be abidden. So have heathens acknowledged what here
Christians are taught, that labor avails not to get any bread, except GOD
give it, and give it daily. It comfortably assures us again of God his
readynes to give, for otherwise he would never have commanded us to ask, and
say, give. Last of all we meaning in this petition not only that God should
give us bare bread, but the healthful nourishment also of it, and the strength
of it, and not only goods and living according to our places and needs but
the godly and honest use also of the same, we learn by this word, give, that
as well this also comes from God, as the other, a thing either not known or
fowly forgotten of a number. And therefore they rob GOD of his glory, and
ascribe to the creatures, that which is the power of the creator, and to the
means, that which they can not have, except the Lord bless them as means, I
mean to nourish us, and to sustain us healthfully and well. For mark you
what the Lord says to his people Israel: Leuit. 26.26.
When I shall break the staff of your bread, then ten women shall bake their
bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight, and you
shall eat, but not be satisfied. The staff of bread is the strength and power
to nourish, which you hear the Lord himself say is given and taken away by
him. If he take it away, the dainties and delicacie of Princes feed them not,
but they pyne away in the midst of them all, and if he give this staff to it,
the pulse and water that Daniel fed upon makes a fayrer face, and gives a
better liking than any portion of the Kings meat. See this in rich and poor
men's children also plainly, the one fully and costly fed, yet prospers not,
the other seldom fully and ever coursely fed, and yet both fat and fair, and
healthy: Such is the gift of God that now we speak of, and herein pray for,
yea so far may it be from nourishing us, that it may choke us, if the Lord
give not gift unto gift, and mercy to mercy, for so did the fly Adrian the 4.
and an hair an other. The Lord was able to make his Prophet Eliah to walk
forty days and forty nights in the strength of a course cake, 1. Kings.
19.8.
baked on the coals, and of a pot of water: and the Lord was able to nourish
Moses as long in the mount without any meat at all, Exodus 34.23. Math. 4.
to tell us that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes
out of the mouth of God. I said also, the use of riches came of the Lord, and
see your selves if it be not so. Does not the Preacher say that he had beheld
an evil under the sun, and it was a great one, and much amongst men, Cap.
6.1.
eue^ a man to whom God has given riches and treasures, and honor, and he
wants nothing for his soul of all that it desires, but God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a strange man shall eat it up. See you and mark it,
how God is not only the giver of riches, but even of the use also and power
to eat of them, which gift he bestows and withholdeth at his pleasure. The
rich man laid up for many years, but the Lord would not have him to live and
enjoy then the things he had: Luc. 12.
the use he had not, longer then God gave it. But even when he least thought,
his soul was called for, and then like a fool he had heaped too much up for
other men. This is that which the wise Syrach says: chap. 11.18.19.
Some man is rich by his care and nigardship, and this is the portion of his
wages (meaning his reward is to have them but not to use them) for when he
should begin to eat of them, the time draws near that he must leave al
these things unto other men, and dye him self. Wherefore I say, praying in
this petition not only for the things, but even also for the use and comfort.
When we say, give, we are taught that even the use also is of the Lord. And
thus do you see what great profit this one word has in this petition and
what we may learn by it.

Why do we say, give us, and not give me? First, to teach us to remember our
brethren as well as our selves, to be careful for them, and to wish them all
needful things as to our selves: 1. Cor. 13.5.
according to the true nature of Christian charity, which seeks not her own
things only, but even other men's also as well. Consider this ye couetouse.
Which when it is considered, what (O Lord) may those men say for the quiet of
their consciences, that have never enough themselves, but even as if God and
all his blessing belonged only to them, and that they only should dwell in the
world alone, rake and scrape to themselves with might and main, but of their
brethren they never think. No, so far are they from praying for them, that
God would give them their daily bread, as that if they have any part or
portion of it, they are heartily desirous to have it from them, yea sick upon
their beds often, as was wicked Achab, till they have gotten Naboths vineyard
and inheritance: do these men pray, Da nobis, Give us good Lord our daily
bread? that is, give my brethren as well as to my own soul, what is needful
to them, and give al thy children as to me their daily wants. No no, if they
might say it for shame, they would say, give me all, and let the rest receive
of me if they will have ought. Couetouse men had rather pray give me then give
us.
But what, they shame to say they shame not to wish: and therefore as often as
they say this prayer they abuse the Lord, and it is his mercy that presently
he strikes not so great hypocrisy, as to say us with lips, as if they
meant many, and me with heart, meaning but themselves. Learn therefore
(beloved) by a common word to have a common heart. It likes the Lord that we
love our brethren, and it likes him not that we love only our selves. We say
not, give me, but give us: and let us do thereafter, even join them in prayer
with our selves, and wish them bread as to our selves, that is, all
necessaries. The second use of the word us.
Secondly, we are by this manner of speaking taught the true use of such
portion as God gives us, namely, so to have it as that others have part with
us. For we are but Stewards of the Lords gifts. And, non tibi soli datur quod
habes, sed per te dat Deus alijs. It is not given what thou have to thy self
alone, but by thee GOD gives the same to others. His mind being that thou
should so impart them. Thy meat is given to comfort others as thou may,
and a joy it will be if thou can say with Job: Chap. 31.17.
I have not eaten my morsels alone, but the fatherless has eaten with me. Thy
wool is given thee to clothe the naked, verse. 19.
and a comfort great it is when a man may say with Job again: I have seen
none perish for want of clothing, neither any poor without a covering, but
their loins have blessed me, because they were clothed with ye fliece of my
sheep. Job had lodging, 32.
and he thought it given to relieve the stranger: 21.
he had authority, and he thought it given to help the poor in judgment,
not to oppress them. And so ever have others of Gods children possessed for
others, and not only for themselves, what the Lord bestowed upon them.
Wherefore if no other mouth should ever judge the^, their own mouths
sufficiently charge all miserable wretches and wretched misers of this earth,
as often as they pray this prayer, because they say, give us, in the plural
number, and yet where they have received they use it scarce in the singular
number, Note.
being so far from releeuing others with any comfort they have, as that they
little may find in their hearts often to relieve themselves. Let us be warned
before we smart for wretchedness. We pray not for our selves alone, but for
others: we receive not for our selves alone, but for others: and therefore let
us impart the Lords given graces both to our selves and to others. So shall we
show our selves children of our heavenly father, who is bountiful to all, and
hard to none, dealing his gifts in such favor and fullness ever, that all
tongues may speak of his praise, and all hearts conceive of his mercy. That
God and Father make us like him in this and all our duties. Amen.

The Prayer.
Mighty GOD and most loving Lord, after things concerning thy glory, it is
thy gracious favor to us frail wretches, that we should boldly ask what
concerns our necessities and wants, promising even therein also to be
merciful unto us, and to hear our prayers. Wherefore both in obedience to thy
commandment, and faith in thy promises, we throw down our selves here
before thee, and beseech thee to give us this day our daily bread: that is,
good Lord, as thou have taught us, all things needful to the maintenance of
this life. Give us meat, drink and clothing for our bodies. Give us of the
dew of heaven and fatness of the earth as thy blessed pleasure shall vouchsafe
us to our good. If it please thee to give more, O Lord make us thankful, and
faithful stewards to dispose thy mercies to our brethren that shall have need.
If it please thee to give less, and changing thy hand to bring us with thy
servant Moses out of the Court to keep a flock of sheep, and with David from
high favors, to many fears, O God and father merciful, even with that
portion of bread make us well content, and thankful also ever to thee for it.
Remembering well with our selves how thou caredst for these thy servants and
others many in their estate, and have even by this word bread, taught us to be
content with a little. Thy mercies, O Lord, we beseech thee give us according
to our charges, thou know our number, and our needs, and thou feedest the
very Ravens that call upon thee. The eyes of all things wayt upon thee, O God,
and thou give them meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand and fillest
all things living with plenteousnesse. To these favors, O Lord, grant peace
and quietness, private at home, and public abroad. Let there be no going
out, no leading into captivity, nor any complaining in our streates. Peace be
within the walls of Jerusalem, O Lord, to thy good pleasure, and
plenteousnesse in her Palaces, that is, to thy Church mercy and favor, we
beseech thee. To this end give us, O heavenly father, the blessing of prudent
and godly governors. Confirm their hearts in zeal and love to thee, and make
them ever careful of thy glory. Confirm our obedience and truth again to
them in thee, and both one and other make us thankful greatly for thy present
mercy in this behalf upon us. If ever people found favor at thy majesty's
hands, O Lord our portion has been great, must we say, and this daily bread
with a liberal hand above other nations now many years given unto us. O
dear father touch us with the feeling of it, and make us thankful, and
continue this mercy and loving kindness still upon us, giving us still these
co^forts of thine. What we have need of, deny us not, and what we have,
with thy favor, O Lord, and to our good let us ever have it, not to our harm
and judgment. So we that be thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give
thee thanks for ever. Hear us O Lord, O God and father gracious, not for our
sakes, but for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

The fifth petition. And forgive us our trespasses, etc.
Now are you come to a petition (as our estate stands) most sweet and
comfortable, most necessary and profitable, wherefore I pray you, even as fully
as you shall think convenient, speak of it, and first of the order as you
have done in the former.
Touching the order of it, Tertullian says very well: Quid alimenta proderunt,
si illis reputamur re vera quasi taurus ad victimam, what will any nourishments
in this life profit us, if with them we be accounted as Oxen to the slaughter,
Cyprian more plainly: Post subsidium cibi, The order of this petition.
petitur and venia delicti, vt qui a deo pascitur, in deo viuat, nec tantum
praesenti et temporali vitae, sed and aeternae consulatur: ad quam veniri
potest, si peccata dimitta^tur: after the aid of meat is begged pardon of
offense; that he which of God is fed, in God may live, and care had as well of
eternal life as of temporal, unto which eternal life then is the way open,
when all sins be forgiven. Wherefore since in the former we have craved of the
Lord what concerns this life, in these two latter we beg what concerns
that hereafter. In the former desiring him to forgive what is past, and in the
latter to strengthen against what is to come. Both which our requests have
ground upon his own promise, and are directed thereby. For the Lord in the
covenant which it pleased him to make with his Church has promised both,
Iere. 31.34. and 33.
saying, their iniquity will I forgive, and remember their sins no more:
which is the thing we now beg. And I will put my law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people,
etc. that is I will assist them with a new power of Spirit, and confirm them
with a further strength to stand hereafter, which is the matter of our next
question.

It might seem to some, by the order of the former petition, and this, that
the remission of our sins were a matter less to be cared for than our daily
bread, because it is set after in this prayer. If it had not been said before
in the beginning of the former petition that this order is observed of the Lord
in regard of our rudenes, that he might lead us from a matter better known, to
a matter less known: yet truly should they be very raw in religion that
would think things only respecting this life to be preferred before things
touching life eternal. God forbid therefore but this order of these petitions
notwithstanding, every Christian man and woman should make it their chief care
to find mercy with the Lord for their transgressions, rather then to inioye
ten thousand worlds with all the glory that might be in them, for what would
al these worlds profit them when they had lost their own souls, Math. 16 26.
in them all not able to find what to give for the recompense of the same
again? But without remission of sin there can be no salvation, God not so
much as hearing sinners, much less saving them. And therefore justly our chief
care to have sin pardoned that we may be saved.

If you would conclude any thing of the order of this petition following,
Religion is not cause of want, but sin.
the other conclude this, and that you may do both truly and profitably,
namely that true religion is not the cause of want of daily bread, but our
sins. And therefore presently after request to the Lord for that, Deutro.
32.14.
we adioyne the other as the true stop and let of the former, if it be not
taken away by his mercy: as if we should say, we request Lord the comforts of
this life, the fruits of the ground, and the fruits of our Cattle, butter of
Kyne, and milk of sheep, with fat of Lambs and Rams fed in Bashan, the
blessing of wheat, and the red licour of the grape, but neither these nor any
such may we look for, except in mercy thou take away our sin, the very stay
of all thy goodness from us, if thou deal in justice. And therefore Lord
forgive us our trepasses. Let no man then accuse religion for dearth and
scarsetie, for famine and hunger, but consider his own deserts, and the
deserts of thousands more, and remember ever both how these petitions lie,
and what also for more playnnes the Lord himself has spoken by his Prophet
Jeremy saying: Your iniquities have turned away these earthly blessings from
you, Iere. 5.
as rain both early and late in due season, with a pleasant harvest and such
like: yea your sins have hindered good things from you. Again by Esaias: Behold
the Lords hand is not shortened, Esaias. 49.1. etc.
that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear: but your
iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid
his face from you, that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with
blood, and your fingers with iniquity, etc.

Now then to the words themselves if you think good and of them in order:
for that is plain. The first word is Forgive, of it self so plain that it
needs not any explication, The hole petition teaches two things, quid
petamus and quid facero debeamus, Petitio: remit^^ nobis, etc.
and therefore not standing in that sort upon it, let us consider the
conclusions that arise thereof to a Christian mind that carefully weighs what
GOD has spoken. First then it contains a plain confession of our miserable
estate unto the Lord, and so teaches us that before pardon and forgiveness,
ought to go a true, faithful, and unfeigned acknowledging of our evil
whatsoever. For why should God vouchsafe to pardon, what we, not able in truth
to hyde from him, as being God, yet in the strong corruption of our untamed
hearts endeavor to cloak, and do not lay open in woe and godly sorrow before
him. Confession to God.
Very mortal man looks for confession of a fault, and we use to say that
half the amends is made when it is so done, yet may we cover from man very
great offenses, how much more may the Lord our God justly require that being
notable to blind him, we seek not to do it, but in all reverence of his majesty
and all vehement dislike of our selves and our sins, we lay them at his foot
and beg his mercy. It is a notable place in the Psame of David teaches us
this. When he says: Whilst I held my tongue my bones consumed, Psalm. 32.
or when I roared all the day long* for thy hand is heavy upon me day and night,
and my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer, then I acknowledged my
sin, neither hid I mine iniquity, For I thought I will confess against my
self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin. See how before he confessed he found no comfort, Number. 5.7.
and after confession how he found no punishment. Look in the Law of the
Lord, and mark these words to Moses: When a man or woman shall commit any
sin that me^ commit, and transgress against the Lord, when that person shall
trespass, then they shall confess their sin which they have done, and shall
restore the damage, etc. Confession God required and confession they performed.
Job. 13.15.
Although the Lord should kill me says faithful Job, yet will I put my trust
in him, but I will reprove my ways, for all that, in his sight, that is I
will confess my evil freely and fully with a single heart, as a wretched
sinner should do. Prou. 28.13.
He that hydeth his sin says the wise Solomon, shall not prosper, but he
that confesses them and forsakes them shall have mercy. 1. John. 1.8.9.
If we say we have no sin, then we deceive our selves and there is no
truth in us, but if we acknowledge and confess our sin, God is faithful
to forgive us our sin, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin. Shrift where found and lost.
This is not that filthy shrift in the ear of a filthy liver invented in Rome,
and thrown down in Constantinople upon just experience of vggly pollution by
it, but this is the Lords ordinance performed ever of the Lords people, to
the Lord himself. Psalm. 51.
David a sinner hydeth it not, when the Prophet spoke, but cried peccaui, with
a feeling heart and a grieved mind that he had so fallen. 2. Sam. 14.
That David when he had numbered the people, and the Lord offended had sent a
plague amongst them, cried in his woe. It is I, it is I Lord that have
offended, and these seely sheep what have they done? and again in an other
place: Therefore I said, Lord (...) mercy upon me and heal my sou^ ^^r I have
sinned against thee. Psalm. 41.4.
The straying son returning to himself and to the estate of son sees and
sigheth for passed folly, and confesses it freely as his bounden duty,
Father, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, Luc. 15.21.
and I am no more worthy to be called thy son. The humble publicane
beseeches God to be merciful to him, Luc. 18.13.
not a just proud Pharisie, but a poor sinful and wretched Publicane. We
are here justly, said the thief on the cross, and we receive things worthy
of yt we have done, but this man has done nothing amiss: a very plain
confession of a feeling heart. When Paul had preached against coniuring and
sorcery, Act. 19.18.
as we read in that place: what was the fruit of his speaking, and their
hearing, but this? Math. 3.6
Many that believed came, and confessed, and showed their works. John also
baptized in the wilderness, but whom? such as confessed their sins against the
Lord. Ever therefore before pardon must go confession, for so ever has it
done as by all these proofs is now plain. Private to God, if the sin be
private, Public to the Church if the sin be such as shall more appear
hereafter in an other place. Wherefore let us end this note upon this first
word, Forgive, and know it ever that we are taught, if we seek mercy, not
to hide sin. For the Lords pardon requires the sinners confession. Couers
and clokes, they do but cover the light of Gods countenance, that it shine not
upon us, and yet do what we can, we can cover nothing in deed from his eyes.
We show our will and we want our wish: sin unto sin, we grievously add,
and we deal with our souls as some sorry ones with their bodies, Note.
concealing their sore till the time be past, and the body perished. Wherefore
even as often as we shall ever hereafter say this prayer, let us add this
confession to it: O Lord our grievous trespasses, our many and great
transgressions, this blot of our bodies, or spot of our souls whatsoever it is
in that mercy that has no measure: forgive it, dash it, and wash it out, that
it never appear again before thee.

What Secondly? Secondly it teaches us the long suffering of the Lord,
wonderful and unspeakable toward mankind. Whereby he bears, and bears
with us wretched creatures, and although we daily and hourly, ever and
continually sin against him, yet casts he not away so unprofitable
servants, but deferreth his anger, spares his judgments, and if we turn to
him, he turns most mercifully to us, and forgiueth heaps of vggly sin
against him. If we worms and dust should be used of any, as he is used of
many, we would show our corruption quickly, and reckon up the faults committed
and pardoned by us, thinking we had showed great favor, and done much for our
brethren, if we had twice or thrice been entreated by them to forgive them, we
would deny at the last and say plainly to them, we might not ever forgive, if
they so ever would offend. The Lords great mercy and our great corruption.
Yet what are we? as bad as they. If not to them, yet to others, and therefore
no such cause we should be so strickt in measure. When often our selves must
need the same courtesy, and request a favorable hand to strike but softly.
But see the Lord. His purity blotteth both Sun and Moon, the heaven and
the earth and all the creatures in them both, he offends never, neither
needs that any should forgive him, and yet is he more favorable to his very
enemies, than we are to our liked and loved friends. For he spares the woorst
more than we the best, and though they sin often, yet forgiueth he still. They
ask and he grants, they knock and he opens, they cry and he spares,
yea though they have cried it ten thousand times forgive us our trespasses, and
he ever has forgiven very great and grievous ones, yet is he not weary when
we cry again, and casts us of, 2. Petr. 3.9
but he is patient toward us, says Saint Peter, and would have no man perish,
but al to come to repentance, and to be saved. O dearest GOD what favor is
this, what goodness is this to so great offenders? Yea mark it here how we are
commanded whilst we live and breath to pray this prayer, forgive us Lord, and
therefore plainly taught that even so long there is mercy with GOD without
wearynes, a gracious open ear to a sinful suter, and pardon for that sin
that frailty has fallen into, and now seeks in a better grace to have done
away. This is great patience that indureth till death being so often provoked
to deny such favor and with ravished hearts for the sweetness of it may we
hear and learn it, yet let us not abuse it, as some have done, but remember
well what the Apostle said when it was objected: Romans 6.1
shall we sin that grace may abound: God forbid. How shall we which are
dead to sin, live yet therein, and so forth, as follows there at large.
Romans 2.5
The riches of his bountifulnes and patience, and long sufferaunce leads to
repentance, says the same Apostle. If to repentance, then not to presumption,
if to amendment, then not to continuance in the evil, and therefore take
heed. Punit Deus sero quidem, sed duriter. Long does the Lord stay ere he
smite, but he smites home when he does smite. Conclude we then with wise
Syrach: Say not, I have sinned, Eccles. 5.4. etc.
and what evil has come unto me. For the almighty is a patient rewarder,
but he will not leave thee unpunished. Because thy sin is forgiven be not
without fear, to heap sin upon sin. And say not, the mercy of God is
great, he will forgive me my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath come from
him, and his indignation comes down upon sinners. Make no tarying to turn
unto the Lord and put not off from day to day. For suddenly shall the wrath of
the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou
shall perish in time of vengeance. That hour that the wicked hope for is often
denied, and suddenly they perish without repentance. Therefore presume not.

Thirdly what? Thirdly, we learn by this first word that the remission of
our sins is of mere mercy and favor, not for any merit of ours. For mark
I pray you how we are taught to say, not as the debtor said in the Gospel,
Lord refrain thine anger toward us, and we will pay thee all: but absolutely
and plainly, Lord forgive, that is quite rased out, and pardon without any
recompense or satisfaction from us or by us. Grace proved and satisfaction
improued.
So that even this petition, if there were no more Scripture, assures the
truth of that doctrine to us, that by grace we live and are saved. Mercy
pardons, mercy heals, and mercy does whatsoever God does for us. Merit
dare not peep to speak unto the Lord. Just as the Apostle says: We are
justified freely by his grace, not of works, nay, if of grace, therefore not of
works, Romans 3.14.
else were grace no grace. Again, we have the forgiveness of our sins
according to his rich grace. 9.11.
11.6.
And again: By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves,
Ephesians. 17.2.8
it is the gift of God: with a number such like places. Just also as the Father
said, Meritum meum miseratio Domini: My merit is the only and free mercy of
God: and so long abou^d I with merits as he abounds with mercies: but take
the one from him, and take the other from me. For my merit, I say, is his
mere mercy. Wherefore most grievously does that doctrine of Popery rob the
Lord of his true and due honor, when it teaches satisfaction by man to God
for his sin. For who can satisfy GOD, but his only Son, in whom only he
is pleased. And of whom flatly it is said, that he is the propitiation, that
is, the full, whole, perfect, and all the satisfaction that GOD requires or
can like of in this sense. Mary knew no other, the Publican knew no other,
Peter knew no other, nor the old father when he said of Peter, Lachrimas
lego, satisfactionem non lego. Peter's tears I read of, Chrysostom,
but of any satisfaction that he made himself to purge his sin and to please
God with I read of none: but of this also more in his proper place, if God
will. Let us see the truth, stand in the truth, thank the God of heaven for
it, and detest these Popish blasphemies against the Lord and his dear Son.
In that precious blood is the father pleased and satisfied for all our sins,
if we lay hold of it: and for our works they carry greater corruption in
their bones and bowels, than that so pure a God should be pleased with them,
or so vggly sins ever purged by them.

Why is it said, forgive us, and not forgive me. To teach us that which we are
dull to learn, namely, not to bestow our whole love and care upon our selves,
but to divide it also to our brethren, and even as heartily and earnestly to
beseech the Lord to blot out all their offenses as our own, and to be
merciful to the^ as to our selves. But alas beloved, where is this affection
amongst us? where is this care of the spiritual good of our neighbors? Truly
it is most rare, yea much more rare than can stand with right and true
profession of Jesus Christ. A great corruption in us.
If we do think of our brethren at any time, and wish them well, surely that
reaches but to earthly blessings, to riches, to honors, to favor and friends
in this sinful world, and so we might see them magnified and exalted in this
respect, our desire were answered and we fully contented. The pardon of their
sins, and favor with God by his beloved Son, their future joy in a place
of joy endless and eternal, alas we think not of, we care not for, God
knows we seldom (if ever) pray for. Yet is this all in all: for how suddenly
fades all worldly pomp, if it be obtained, and how often fail we, and never
do obtain it. Wherefore even in this and every petition of this daily prayer,
the Lord has quickened our earthly minds to love in a better sort our
neighbors and brethren: and I pray you let us learn it. Remember how
vehemently Moses felt the misery of the Jews, if God forgave them not their
committed evil, and how earnestly he prayed for that forgiveness. Exodus
32.31.
Oh (says he) this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods
of gold. Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear, but
if thou will not, I pray thee raze me out of the book which thou have written.
Remember the words of the Apostle Paul to the like effect: I say the truth in
Christ, Romans 9.1.
I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have
great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I would wish my self to
be separate from Christ, for my brethren that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh. See beloved and mark wherein the best love of man to man consists and
is showed, namely, by wishing his spiritual good, the good of his soul, the
forgiveness of his sins: Psalm. 4.
and as the Prophet David says, the lifting up of ye light of the Lords
countenance upon him. O patterns of love in this behalf to their brethren,
Moses and Paul, inimitable of us, unless the Lord assist. For where is this
heaviness of heart and continual sorrow to see our brethren sin, and by
sin to indaunger themselves here and for ever? Psalm. 119.
Where are those floods of tears which David said gushed out of his eyes,
because men kept not Gods commandments. Alas how strange a tale is this to
us! Well, it should not be strange. Neither Moses nor Paul would have wished
themselves accursed of God, to have gained to their brethren ten thousand
worlds, or any worldly good whatsoever, but to gain them spiritual good they
did it: and therefore much more are we to care for the salvation of our
brethren than for their glory in this earth, if we will imitate them. David
would never have gushed out tears to see them want wealth, but to see them
want grace he did. Wherefore let us learn how to love our brethren well: let us
learn what most pleases and displeases God: what most profits and hurts
our neighbors, and more heartily pray for the remission of their sins than
for any worldly good. It is good love to wish God and his comforts to our
friends, and to be greatly touched with their misdoings toward God. It was for
sin and the effects of sin that Jeremy saw in the people, Iere. 9.1
and ready to fall upon them, that made him wish his head full of water and
his eyes a fountain of tears, and that he had a cottage in the wilderness to
sit and sorrow in. Therefore much do we seek for our brethren, when we
seek the pardon of their sins at Gods hand for them. Now beloved, If we be
bound to beseech God to forgive our brethren their sins, are not we our
selves bound to forgive them?
if we be bound to beseech God to forgive them their sins against him,
judge your selves if we be not bound to forgive them our selves their sins
against us. And again, what their case is that will every day say this prayer
with their tongues, and desire God to forgive both them and their brethren
their sins, and by and by both go themselves and with many flattring baytes,
earnest allureme^ts, and even almost violent constraynts pull the same their
brethren to sin again without remorse and feeling. Can we both be
mediators for pardon, and tempters to mischief, with God his good liking.
Fearfully therefore do thousands offend and think not of it. If we will
pray for remission for our selves and others, we must keep our selves and
others, as the Lord will strengthen, from such evil again when we are
pardoned. Alurers of others to sin.
Away then with this good fellowship that tempts unto sin: and if any
allure you my brethren, if other denyals will not serve, ask them whether they
have said any prayers that day or not if they have not, judge if that be good
company to go withal or no: if they have, ask them if they have not therein
besought God to pardon both their own sins and other men's: if they have, how
may they then with one breath send forth good and evil, pray for good,
provoke to evil: ask pardon, and do the thing again. So shall Satan fly
from you.

The next word is Our, and what does that note unto us.

A lamentable exchange made.
It shows us what is the quality of our riches and wealth, for we have
playde the merchantes, and transsigned with an outlandish rouer called the
devil, and with him we have dealt by exchange. Our bark was fraighted with
knowledge, with love, with humility, with joy, with peace, with long
suffering, with gentleness, with goodness, with faith, with meekness, with
temperance, and to go no further, with all grace and innocence. So that we
might say of these jewels, that they were ours: but now we have vnladed the
bark by subtle persuasion, and freight it a new with this rouers wares, with
ignorance, with hatred, with pride, with sorrows, with adultery, with
fornication, with uncleanness, with wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, debate,
emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murder,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, yea, with all want of grace and
impuritie. So that now we must say the former were ours, and these are ours.
What is ours now.
This is our lading now, and this have we profited by this rouer now. Now we
must say, Forgive us our trespasses, then might we say continue thy graces:
the^ was grace our lading, now are we freight til we sink again with sins and
trespasses. Alas that this word Ours should be applied to these. But thus are
we fallen, and of us it is now said, that all the imaginations of the
thoughts of our hearts are only evil continually, Gen 6.5 Psalm. 51.5.
that we are borne in iniquity and conceived in sin, and that we are not
able so much as to think a good thought of our selves. Wherefore as I say,
this word in our petition, tells us the quality of our wealth, and that our
gardens have growing too much rue in them, and too little herb of grace. Our
gardens now have too much rue, and to little herb of grace. Ambro. de sacram.
lib. 5. cap. 4.
Trespasses be ours now, but no trespasses were ours once. This thought
Saint Ambrose of when he said, Dives eras, ad imaginem et similitudinem Dei
factus, perdidisti quod habebas, perdi disti pecuniam, accepisti a diabolo
debitum quod non erat necessarium etc. What is our debt but sin? Thou wast
rich, and made to the image and similitude of God, but thou have lost what thou
had, thou have lost thy money, and taken of the devil a debt that was not
necessary. The best way for us, is to unlade again this bad merchaundise
that we have got of this rouing merchant, by humble prayer to the Lord to
forgive us our trespasses, and to drown them in the botome of the Sea, that
they never more may be seen, aiding us, strengthening us, and confirming us
against our great and grievous weakness: which the Lord for his mercy sake
do.

If you will proceed in order, the word Trespasses is next.

Math. 6.12. ^er. ^.14. ^uc. 11.4.
The Greek words which the holy Ghost has used in these places here noted
are diverse, yet tending to the same matter (...) that he will not give over
whilst he has to spend. For this feeling heart of another man's harm, this
love and lenity, this tender compassion and care for them that have not grace
to care for themselves, is precious before the Lord. And he often rewards
loss in this respect sustained, with better measure than law would have
given either costs or damages. Finally, forgette not also even many times to
reason with your self thus, I see the fatherless and widow many times
oppressed for want of help, and weakness go to the wall for want of
countenance, yea, I see sin born out, and virtue borne down many times, to
the great dishonor of GOD, and offense of his Church, and I am not touched
thereat, or at least I spend not a penie, neither a days travail to help
therein, but now that my self am touched, and my transitory substance
endangered, I am ready to go to law, and to spend much, surely this may I
do, but that other should I not leave undone. Yet how am I more forward for
riches than for virtue, for every cause of mine own, than for any of my
neighbors. Thus I say, to reason with your self is most profitable, and will
greatly direct a good mind in this matter we speak of, namely, how he may
use law. Now then I trust you see a bridle put in our mouths from hasting to
law, as we do for every occasion, troubling our selves and whole Countries
with the unquietness of our natures, and ungodliness of our hearts. These
conditions and such other observed, let us know our liberty to use the Lords
good ordinance for the maintenance of peace, and right, and for the due
punishment of oppugners of either of them, or of them both. But let us not
abuse to our own revenge, what to those ends in Gods mercy to man is so
graciously ordained.

God make this cool the unregenerate humors of a number, and I thank you for
it. Now to proceed, I pray you how may we be said to forgive to our brethren
their trespasses, seeing none forgiueth sin but God only.

You must consider that in sin there be two things. First, the evil of the
action, and secondly the detrime^t that arises to man. The evil of the
action, is that impuritie and foulness wherewith the law of God, against
which it is contrary, charge it. And this concerns the Lord, Man does not
forgive the evil or vice of the action but the detriment arising by it to man.
because being by him prohibited, the committing of it, is also against him.
This properly is sin, and the remission of it only is in the Lord himself.
No man is able to do it. But the second which is the detriment or hurt that
arises by that trespass to a man, either in fame or body, or goods, as it is
against man, so man may remit and pardon it without any impeachment of the
Lords glory. Thus therefore do we forgive trespasses, when we forgive the
harm that has arisen to us by them, together with all conceived anger,
swelling, indignation, and wrath for the same. The Lords forgiveness is a
rasing out of the sin it self, I mean a full remission of the transgression
of his law by that trespass whatsoever. Let that man of sin therefore look
about him, and all his adherents well consider it, how their pardons may run
with remission both a poena et culpa, from punishment and guilt. The Popes
pardons. A poena est culpa blasphemous.
They are in these days of light, when the Lords mercy has made the Sun of
understanding shine upon his Church, and the day star arise in his childrens
hearts, compelled to excuse their Pope, by affirming, that he remitteth but
only the punishment, which by law is due to such offense, and medleth not with
the sin, as it concerns God. But let them look if they say true, when his
pardons be exta^t in this form that I have named, releasing for money both
poenam, the punishment, and culpam, the fault. Iwis they will see it, if ye Lord
be so gracious to the^, a pride prophesied as a note of Antichrist. And never
did the Jews more wrongfully mislike our Savior being God as well as man,
than we may rightly abhor this monster, being only man, and a most miserable
man in many respects, for yt he presumes to forgive sins, Esaias. 43.23.
which none ca^ forgive but god alone. For, it is I, it is I, says the Lord,
that put away iniquity, and forgive sins. And, the Lord has done away thy
sin, says Nathan to David, not I, nor any man. And this might we learn
even by this form of prayer, if there were no other Scripture. For unto whom
does the Lord teach us to say, Forgive us our trespasses, but only to God?
Surely if any man or woman, Saint or Angel could forgive us, then were it
and should be lawful for us to pray to the^ to forgive us, and so to change
this prayer from Pater to Matter, or Frater, from our Father, to our mother, our
brother, to holy Peter, holy Paul, or such like. But how spend I words in a
plain matter? it is enough.

Are all men and women to pray this prayer, or but only some?

Surely you remember me of that which is worthy noting, as well as any thing
that has been said, namely, how our Savior Christ has said unto all the
world, that there is just cause to acknowledge the^ selves sinners, and to pray
for the pardon of their sins. For whosoever have need to beg any thing at
God his hands, thus he teaches them to pray, but the whole world stands in
need to beg at Gods hand, all therefore the whole world must pray thus,
Both Jews and Gentiles, To. 3.9. Read. Aug. de. natura and gratia. verse. 46.
says the Apostle, are under sin, as it is written. There is none righteous,
no not one. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks GOD.
They have al gone out of the way, they have been made altogether unprofitable:
there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher,
they have used their tongues to deceit, the poiso^ of Aspes is under their
lips. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swifte
to shed blood. Destruction and calamity are in their ways, and the way of
peace have they not known, the fear of God is not before their eyes. verse. 23.
Galat. 3.22.
Again in the same Chapter, All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God. And to the Galathians, The Scripture has concluded all under sin. And
if any man say he has no sin, he deceives him self, and there is no
truth in him. With a number such like places. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant O Lord, says the prophet David, for no flesh shall be justified in thy
sight. Wherefore it is not for modesty that we must pray to the Lord to
forgive us our sin, The error of the Pelagians.
as most wickedly the Pelagians affirmed, but for conscience and truth, and as
Hierome says, Ex humanae fragilitatis, et nostrae miseriae conscientia: Upon
true feeling and fear of man's frailty, and misery, and the judgments of God
due to it. For a prayer conceived for modesty only, should be a lie and a
fained humility. And as Austen prettily speaks, Humilitas statuta in part
falsitatis, perderet praemium veritatis. False humility should loose ye
blessing that truth should have. Non ergo debemus sic laudare creatorem, vt
cogamur dicere, imo vero conuincamur dicere superfluum saluatorem. We must not
so praise our creator, as we be compelled, yea, convinced to say, that
superfluous is a Savior. And again, Quia nos creauit, ita simus grati, vt non
simus quia sanat, ingrati. Cathary etc. Anabap.
Let us so be thankful to the Lord for creating us, as we be not unthankful
to him for healing us. With many such like sentences, noting our too true
corruption, Some in the scripture are called just and up right: but this is to
be understood before God: or as Aug says* Affectu, non effectu by desire not
by deed.
and their most high pride that think they have attained to such holiness as
yt they need not say, Remitte nobis debita nostra, Forgive us O Lord our
trespasses. Is there any man now a days better than the Disciples? Yet the
Lord teaches the^ we see to pray this prayer. And surely as our garments
though daily brushed, yet daily and still need brushing again, because ever
when they are brushed, new dust and foulness lights upon them: even so
our souls and bodies, though many times altered by a gracious pardon from God
in Christ, yet daily and still so gathering dust again, as that daily and
still they need to be cleared. And therefore ever must all men pray this
prayer.

Furthermore even here also have the Nouatian heretics a plain fall with
their most uncomfortable assertion or heresy, Sin after baptism pardoned.
thinking and auouching that there is no pardon for any that after he is
baptized commits any public sin. For does our Savior here make any
distinction of public or private offenses, of men baptized or unbaptized, of
times before or after. No, no, to our great comfort he does not as has before
been showed, but al men he bids pray thus, at all times he bids pray
thus, and for all offenses he bids pray thus indefinitly. And except we
shall make a mocker of the Lord, what he bids ask he is ready to give, and
a sure comfort by his commandment to pray, may be drawn to my soul that I
shall obtain. And therefore little children these things I write, that ye sin
not. 1. John. 2.
But if any man do sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. Yea let us add to his words, but
not to his meaning, for sins both before and after baptism.

Now do you put me in mind of a question which I only also will ask you.
Namely what comfort there is for a frail creature that after repentance and
purpose never to offend so any more, yet shall fall again, even into the same
fault, of frayltie, not of malice? Surely you name a very notable testimony of
our most vile corruption, that solemnly professing our repentance for any bad
behavior, and vowing to the Lord, and with our selves, that no more we will
do so, yet contrary both to promise and purpose, we fall again into the
selfsame offense and sin. And if the Lord should never receive us again
after such a transgression, we had but what justly and greatly we deserved.
Yet is this mercy more, not to imbolden to so great impiety, but to comfort
grieved ones with so great frailty. Wherefore with desire to stand, and al
possible endeavor against such second falls, let us hear yet what the Lord
says, if in our great weakness we do fall, I mean into the same offense
again after repentance. For we see the Prophets in every place exhort men to
repentance, not which had once offended, but which with an obstinate contempt
of God had not stayed to run into all kind of wickedness, and which after a
show of repentance, yet returned to their sinful course again, the
Prophet Jeremy of all other is full of places, if you list to read any, Again
the Lord in his law would have daily sacrifices offered sometime in the name of
the whole people, sometimes in the name of a private person, as well for offenses
committed by ignorance, as for voluntary transgressions and falls, which
assuredly should not have been done, except there had been mercy even for
second faults. For the Lord would not deceive his people with vain figures.
Psalm. 78.
Thirdly in the Psalm we very plainly see that God was entreated to forgive
most hypocritical and obstinate sins* And now in the time of his Gospel
his goodness is not streyted or diminished, but even now also more plainly it
is proclaimed to the world, that at what time soever a sinner soroweth from
his heart, there is pardon with the Lord, without exception against often
committing of the same offense. When the Lord inioyneth us to forgive our
brethren seventy times seven times, does he mean new offenses only, such as
they never committed against us before, or he means all, whatsoever, or how
often soever fallen into by their frailty? And if so, does he require more
mercy of man than he the God of mercy will show? or shall the creature excel
the creator in any goodness? God forbid. See it therefore and be with comfort
most assured of it, that if we sin not seven times, but seventy times seven
times against his majesty, and even in the same thing, and so often with
weeping eyes and sobbing soul fall at his feet for mercy to so great
frailty, there is mercy with him and pardon to true repentance. Beware
presumption.
But take heed we turn not the grace of God into wantonness and presumption.
For if I suck the liberty out of this doctrine, be sure, I sauoure it to
death, and not to life, and what knew I whether ever I shall have grace truly
to repent, what so bouldly and presumptuously I have dared to commit. When the
Apostle says, If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Do you think
we may tie this to only such sins as were never committed before without a
very plain and great injury to that place of scripture? No, no, we cannot, and
therefore a true ground of comfort even for sins often fallen into, so yt
frailty and not loosenes be the cause, and read the 9. of Daniel, Dan. 9.6.
and see if he confess not sin often committed, and as it were in a
continued course, and yet dispaireth not of mercy? What means that article of
our faith, I believe the forgiveness of sins? shall we gloss upon it thus,
that is of such sins as I never committed but once. Surely if we do, it must
be said, cursed be the gloss that corrupts the text. For that article
compriseth al sin, before baptism, and after baptism, before repentance,
and after repentance, ever through the course of my life in this world,
whatsoever it is, how often so ever I have slyded into it, through frailty,
yet God giving me true repentance for it, Credo remissionem. O sweet.
I believe the forgiveness of it. Yea it is the comfort spiritual, that cannot
be spoken of, that God would have his children so sure of the pardon of their
sins, even of all their sins, without exception, whereof he gives them a
dislike and true abhorring, as that he would have it an article of their faith
so that they should not be sound christians if they believed it not. Lastly
even this petition of the Lords prayer, craving daily forgiveness of daily
trespasses, dare you restrain it to trespasses committed only before
repentance, and exempt all second falls after such repentance and purpose to
amend? the Lord forbid. And therefore take it also with the former as a sure
proof of pardon also for these offenses. So do you see what answer your
question has out of Gods book, only therefore beware presumption, beware
loosenes, beware negligence, and due care to avoid these second falls, say
not God is merciful, and therefore I will sin. For as he is gracious to a
sorrowful sinner: so is he dreadful to a presumptuous offender, and frailty
shall find mercy, when boldness shall find judgment and wrath for ever.

Surely I see it is a great comfort to a Christian conscience, that the Lord
has put into our daily prayer this petition, and it mightily assures us of
his mercy. In deed it is so, but yet this appears nothing so much as it
would if our eyes saw, or our hearts felt what loathsomeness lodged in us, and
what just matter of eternal confusion we have both in body and soul, if
mercy were not. For this is it that gives a feeling of the sweetness of this
prayer, when the Lord shall grant us a true sight of our own estate, and
pearcing eyes into our inward deepes. When the Lord shall enable us truly to
see what a mass of corruption we are, how vile, how miserable, how polluted
in our thoughts, works and deeds, in body and soul, in heart and mind,
within and without and all over, how filthy, how loathsome, and how
abominable we are, and when he shall join unto this sight a terror, and a
trembling at the true view of Gods most fearful judgment due unto this
estate, and most firmly tied unto it, even as God is just. And I say when the
Lord grants it, for most assuredly we have it not of our selves, nay we
flatter and deceive every man his own heart in this point, we think all is
well with us, and we know not our selves. But what are we? O my beloved, my
heart understands not the sins of man, and therefore my tongue cannot lay
them open before you. I say with David, mine own sins are secret unto me,
and therefore much more all your sins, and most of all the sins of all
mankind. Yet somewhat hear you of the meditation of my heart, to the better
opening of the necessity and goodness of this petition, and learn by this
little to think of more, and to wade your selves into the deepes that you
know and I know not, when I have led you the way as far as I do know.

I have before in this petition showed you the Herald of heaven blazeth our
arms, and expresses our colors, namely, that we are all become abominable,
and there is none yt does good, no not one. That no flesh living is able to be
justified in his sight: that none can say my heart is clean, I am pure from
sin. That the very imaginations of our hearts are evil, even from our youth:
that we are not able to think a good thought of our selves: with a number
such. All which places are not so to be taken, as if they charged any of us
with a little evil, or few sins, and small, but they convince us of huge
and great sin, and of general corruption, even in our ways, which will
very well appear if alyke we compare our selves with the Lords choice
children commended to us in the word. Stand before me then I pray thee, whose
heart quaketh not for any sin you know in your selves, and tell me whether
you dare, either with your tongues say, or with your hearts think that you are
in as great a measure sanctified, as David was? If you dare not, consider well
then what David notwithstanding his great graces given him, says of himself
in his Psalms, Psalm. 38.
There is no rest in my bones because of my sin: for mine iniquity is gone
over mine head, and as a weighty burden, they are too heavy for me to bear.
Had David no rest in his bones for his sin, and have you rest in your self,
and yet dare not compare with him in sanctification? How comes this to pass,
but because you neither see nor feel what is in your self as he did?
Innumerable troubles, says he again, Psalm. 40.12.
have compassed me about, my sins have taken such hold on me, that I am not
able to look up, yea, they are mo in number than the hairs of my head, and my
heart has failed me. O the dullness of our feeling, how should I lay it
before us better than by such examples? If David's sins were mo than his
hairs, how many are ours think you? Surely more than the sand of the sea: if
they had taken hold on him, what have ours done on us? If he could not for
them look up, how may we look down? And finally, if his heart began to
shake, how Lord may ours but shake and quake, if we knew our selves? Judge
even your self any one that is here, if it be not so, seeing you grant me you
dare not compare with David. Wounded then are we even to many deaths, and yet
we know it not. Ponder it with your self also what that great servant of God
Ezra says of himself in this case. O my GOD, says he, I am confounded and
ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God, Ezra. 9.6.
for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses are grown
up to the heaven, and we cannot stand before thee, because of our sin. And
Daniel again, We have sinned: we have committed iniquity: we have done
wickedly, yea, we have rebelled against thee, and departed from thy precepts.
See how no words can content him to express his guilt withal. Therefore I
say, when the Scripture charge us with sin, it is no small sin that we
must dream of, but monsterous corruption and horrible before the Lord, if we
could see it all. Yet does every one deceive his own heart, and being in this
most dreadful and desperate case, feels it not, but thinks all is well,
till even the last hour overtake us, and then Satan charge us to the full,
and we despair. But truly if we learn to charge our selves now in the time of
health, our burden shall not be so great in the time of sickness. And
therefore I pray you do it, either by many times comparing your lives with
these great Saints of God, or by viewing the commandments, or by any means
what souer, that may be good and profitable to this effect. And think with
your selves, that if these chose^ vessels, notwithstanding so great graces
given them, yet groaned under such weight of deadly sins, alas what may we
do that want many thousand degrees of their goodness, save only that we
feel not, through a deadness of heart, the burden of iniquity that is upon
us. By their feeling then, judge what you ought to feel: by their confessions,
what you should confess, and by their shiuering fears, what you may many
millions of times more justly fear. Think also of the punishment temporal and
of the death eternal, in that flaming lake of dreadful woe, due and assured to
all sinful creatures for evermore. Dei dicere est facere.
And see then if it be not sweet to hear of remission of all this evil. See
if this petition be not thrice needful to consciences crying, our Lord is
great. O dearest God, that would bid us ask, teach us and tell us, yea,
will and command us every day and hour to pray for pardon for iniquity.
For thus do we see thy willingness to give, never using to bid us ask, but
what thou art ready to grant even before we ask. Thus do we see our pardon is
ready, and though worthy we be never once to feel any inward joy, or
outward comfort, yet in thy mercy we shall find both, by thy gracious
forgiveness of our sins. And Lord of mercy make us thankful.

The Prayer.
O Lord and Father sweet and merciful, we fall down in our hearts here
before thy majesty, and beg thy mercy. For we have sinned, O Lord, we have
sinned and done wickedly, and our consciences cries, thy wrath is due, if we
find not mercy. Our thoughts, our words, and works have been against thy
blessed will and commandment, and still still our most grievous corruption
pulls us from thy ways. We may be ashamed and confounded to lift up our
eyes to thee, so increased over our heads are our iniquities, and our sins so
grievous even to the heavens. But with thee there is mercy, and therefore thou
shall be feared. O LORD in that mercy lift up the light of thy countenance
upon us, and save us. Let that precious blood of Jesus Christ dash and wash out
al our offenses, for we fly unto it, and with the arms of our faith clasping
fast that dear Savior, we set him before thee as our atonement, peace, and
propitiation for ever available with thee. For his sake, not for ours. O Lord
hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider, and do it, defer not for thy mercy
sake. Comfort our consciences with that sweet and dropping dew of mercy and
grace, for they shake and tremble at thy judgments. Strengthen our steps
hereafter for Jesus Christ his sake more and more, that they may be
streighter, and we possess these vessels of ours in more cleanness,
holiness, and righteousness, than we have done. And forasmuch as it is all
repugnant and contrary to our sinful nature and rebelling blood, to forgive
other me^ their trespasses committed against us without revenge, and to love
them that hate us, to pray for them that persecute us, as thou have willed,
dear Father we beseech thee help us therein, and by thy working power within
us make our hearts so meek and gentle, that we may gladly and unfeignedly,
heartely and wholly forgive all men that have hated or hurted us by word or
deed, and that we may behave our selves unto al men, friends and foes, with
such mercy, gentleness, and kindness, as we would desire, not only that they,
but also that thou, good Lord, should use unto us. Finally, dear Father, in
life have mercy, in death have mercy, and evermore have mercy upon us, in
that blessed kingdom of thine, for Jesus Christ his sake our blessed Lord and
Savior, Amen.

The sixth and last petition: Lead us not into temptation. etc.
We draw now near an end of this labor, and are come to the last request in
this prayer, wherein proceeding as you have done in the former, I pray you
first show the order of it.
THE order is marvelous fit, that after we have in a stinging woe for them,
begged of the Lord our God most heartely and earnestly the forgiveness of all
our sins and trespasses already past and done, we should next as obedient
children, not again to grieve so dear and good a Father, beseech him for his
mercies sake to aid and strengthen us against that which is to come, that we
may not offend and fault as we have done, but by an happy new birth and
spirit of power vouchsafed from his heavenly grace unto us, be able to fight
against all sinful corruption daily and ever vexing us, more and more. For in
this order speaks the Lord still still in his word, John. 5.14. John. 8.11.
Tit. 2.11.12.
that if we be made whole we should sin no more. That if the grace of God
that brings salvation unto al men has appeared, we should thereby learn to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present world. Cantic. 5.3.
And in this order reasons even the spouse her self, I have washed my feet,
and therefore how should I foul them again? Wherefore I say as concerning
order, after pardon begged for passed sin, most fitly do we ask next the
power of his grace against what is to come.

Surely it is not only fit in regard of order, but most necessary also in
respect of the thing. In deed it is, and that for these causes: first in
respect of our own corruption and vileness, of whom the spirit of God has
said by Job, that man is abominable and filthy, Job. 15.16.
drinking iniquity like water, that is, even so desiring to sin, as he that
is thirsty to drink. Secondly, in respect of the infinite allurementes and
delights that sin has to pull us on to it from God, which we are so far from
repulsing and gain standing, that we readily and most willingly yield to
them, except the Lord assist us, and enable us by his spirit. Yet are those
delicates our death both in body and soul for ever, if we follow them. For
it is true of al men which the Apostle speaks of the widow, 1. Tim. 5.6.
that she living in pleasure is dead whilst she lives so. And again, If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die. Of these allureme^ts and delights in sin
spoke the holy Ghost when he called them the pleasures of sin. Hebre. 11.25.
And David when he said, Incline not my heart to evil, Psalm. 141.4. Math.
13.22. Cantic. 2.15. Hebre. 3.13.
that I should commit wicked works with men that work iniquity, and let me
not eat of their delicates. There is also a subtlety in sin to deceive us,
a deceitfulness in riches to choke us, and therefore most needful this prayer,
that we be not hindered through the deceitfulness of sin. Thirdly, in
respect of the power of the enemy which is very great. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against principalities and powers, and against worldly governors, the
Princes of darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness, which are
in the high places, and which far exceed us in strength, and therefore great
need have we to beseech the Lord to stand with us, in this battle to help
us. Which we do in this petition. For Quicquid humana fragilitas cauere aut
vitare non praeualet, hic a nobis ab illo propitio conferri petimus, Whatsoever
(says Austen) man's frailty is not able to take heed of or avoid, Aug. sermon.
135.
that do we beseech the Lord here may be given us in his mercy. Lastly, the
diligence and endeavor of our adversary to win, and his cruelty if he do
win, is so great, that we have need and need again to use this petition: 1.
Pet. 5.8.
Be sober and watch (says the Apostle) for your adversary the devil goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. His continual walking
shows his diligence, and his blody devouring notes his cruelty. Thus have we
the equity of this prayer, yea, the necessity of it ever, whilst we live in
this wretched vale of these assaults and dangers. In respect of which
necessity, no doubt both our Savior first taught it, and also in his word so
often repeateth it. Watch ye and pray ye, Marc. 14.38. 1 Thessalonians 3.5. 1. Timoth.
6.9 1 Cor. 10.13.
that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit in deed is willing, but the
flesh is frail. With such like places. And very truly says Hierome, Non est
nostrarum virium cum hostibus nostris spiritualibus congredi, and eos vincere,
sed Dei. It is not our strength that may join with our spiritual foes, and
overcome them, but the Lord must do it.

Is all this (...) one Petition? They that make seven petitions in this Lords
prayer do divide this last into two, to make up their number, of which sort is
Thomas of Aquine, Lyra and others. But the better judgment is theirs that make
but six petitions in all, and but one of this. Of which sort again are Austen
and Cyprian, who make this later, as in deed it is, but an exposition of the
former, as if he should have said, to that end that we may be delivered from
evil, O Lord lead us not into temptation. And this whole last petition may
fitly be divided thus, into the petition it self, Ne nos inducas in
tentationem, and into the exposition or interpretation of the same, sed libera
nos a malo.

But men do not agree in reading this petition. For some say Lead us not, and
others say, Let us not be led. In deed it is true. Some are afraid and have
bin, that if they should say Lead us not into temptation, they should fall
into that foul error of the Manichees, that God might be the author of evil.
And therefore to avoid that, they have thought rather good to say, Let us not
be led. But both the best and auncientest translation and reading is the first,
and so translated and read it many a year ago Tertullian and others of the
elder fathers.

And does not, think you, that reading give some advantage to the enemy, that
we make God the author of sin? Not a whit justly. For as you have heard
before in this book, it is one thing to be author of a matter, and an other
thing to be author of ye form: in playner terms, to be author of an action,
and of the evil in the action, Act^ 17.28.
or of the action. When the Apostle says, in him we live, and move, and have
our being: what means he but that God is author of all our actions in
respect of matter, as we speak, that is, the motion, power, and strength of
body, to go hither or thither, and to do this or that is of God: for without
his help we could not stir: but as for form, if it be evil, that is, as
for the corruption, fault and evil of our actions, that is of our selves, and
not of God as author and worker, though even of that also he is the guider and
governor that it shall not pass the limits that he likes. As in Joseph's
brethren and many other examples are plain. Wherefore we may not for want of
true understanding how to take them, alter the phrases, and consequently the
truth of GOD. You see how the Spirit speaks: Exodus 4.21.
God hardened the heart of Pharaoh: God gave them up to vile affections, To.
1.26.28.
and delivered them up into a reprobate mind. The Lord mingled among them the
spirit of error: Esa. 19.14.
2. These. 2.
God shall send them strong delusions: and a number such. He does not say, God
suffered Pharaohs heart to be hardened, Esaias. 63.17.
God suffered them to be given to vile affections, or to a reprobate mind, etc.
Esaias. 42.24.
But God hardened, and gave, and delivered, 1. Sam. 16.24.
and mingled, and sent. These are all as much as to say, Lead us not into
temptation. And therefore if these may be used without making the Lord any
author of evil, If God suffer, then does he it either against his will or with
his will if against his will, then is he not omnipotent: if with his will, then
may we as well say he does it as he suffers it, understanding it rightly.
then may this petition also no doubt in this order* and if in these places we
need not to change the text and to say, God let Pharaoh be hardened, or God
let them be given over, etc. No more need we here to translate or interpret
this petition thus, Let us not be lead into temptation. But to remember ever
that though the Lord do, and be said to lead into temptation, yet is there
never any evil in him, but either justice to some to punish sin with sin,
or mercy to others to try them and exercise them, that after they have showed
patience and faith, obedience, humility, love and comfort in their tryalles,
he may set a Crown of great glory upon their heads, to their everlasting life
in a glorious kingdom. And in the mean time by those their virtues glorify
his name amongst men here, Se also the Tom. page 38. etc^ Petr. Martyr. in 2.
Sam. 24.
and incite others to tread the steps of so happy a course. So that what the
Lord does is ever good: and for further treatise of this thing, turn back
again to that which has been said before. Yet it seems we cross S. James
by this reading, who says, If any man be tempted, let him not ever say he is
tempted of GOD, for GOD cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any
man. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is entised, etc. Nothing at all truly, if you mark things well. For S.
James there descending from outward temptations, to wit, afflictions whereby
God tries us, to inward, that is, to those lusts whereby we are stirred up
to do evil, shows that every man is author of those temptations to himself,
and not God, forasmuch as we bear about in our bosoms that wicked
corruption, which takes occasions by what means soever to stir up evil
motions in us, whenceout at length proceed wicked doings, and in conclusion
follows death the just reward of them. All which is no other than the very
same that has been said. For we ever confess, that although God tempt and
lead into temptation, yet never tempts he any man to evil. And why? S.
James gives the reason, for God can not be tempted with evil, neither
te^pteth he any man (to wit, unto evil) that is, he desires not evil, and
therefore he can not be the author of evil doing in us. Non de exploratione,
sed de incitatione ad peccandum loquitur Jacobus. S Sames speaks not of the
temptations of trial, Vrsi^.
but of stirrings up unto evil, says an interpreter. And it is apparent
enough.

Now of the next word if you will, to wit, temptation. It is a word that
will minister much matter profitable for the Lords children to be still better
and better acquainted withal whilst they live. And I could happily wish to
speak so of it, as most of this company might most be benefited, and every
man, at one time, or an other, in one thing or an other, feel me in his
bosom. But such grace is the Lords to give, and not mine nor any man's to
take, and therefore with humble commending both my speech and your profitte to
his most merciful direction, let us set upon this treatise. It is therefore
said of the learned, that tentatio est opus diaboli, qua homines pios vel per
instillationem cogitationum malarum, aut per obiectorum occasionem, vel per
vitiosae naturae inclinationem and affectus, vel per res secundas aut aduersas
solicitat, and impellit ad peccata and calamitates, deo permittente, vt aut
certo iudicio propter peccata puniantur, aut explorata and probata fide eorum
and constantia coronam vitae accipiant. That is, temptation is a work of the
devil, What temptation is.
whereby he soliciteth, and drives men unto sins and miseries either by
infusion of vile thoughts into them, or by means of objects laid before them,
or by inclination of their corrupt nature and affections, GOD suffering him,
either that their sins by just judgments may have their due punishments, or
else their faith and constancy a due crown of life after that it has been
tried and made manifest. This distinction, or description rather, will fully by
all his parts appear either by the story of Job, of David, Job. 1. 2. Kings.
24.1.
or by diverse others in this treatise, if you mark it. Again it is said of
them also that temptations be of two sorts generally, Tentatio probationis,
tentatio perditionis. The temptation of trial, and the temptation of
perdition, according to which division Cyprian may be thought to have spoken,
when he said: Potestas dupliciter Satanae aduersus nos datur, vel ad poenam cum
delinquimus, vel ad gloriam cum probamur. Power is given to Satan against us
after two sorts, to wit, either for punishment when we offend, or for glory
when we are tried. But desiring altogether a very great playnnes in this
matter for diverse causes I choose rather an other division observed also of
s^^ne, Temptation of God. Man. Satan.

to say, that temptations are of three sorts, to wit, either of God, of man,
or of Satan. For all these are said to tempt. And according to these several
authors as it were of temptations, the word is diversely and in several
significations taken. When God in the Scripture is said to tempt, then is the
word taken and commonly translated in English to prove or to try, because
that the drift of the Lord is thereby not to hurt by leading to evil, for so
GOD tempts not. Iam. 1. but to make open and known by trial, either to our
selves, or to the world, or to both, either our corruption and malice against
him, or else our faith and patience, and many virtues. Thus is it said of
Abraham in Genesis. After these things God did prove Abraham, etc. Genesis 22.1.
What was this proouing or tempting of Abraham, but a merciful opening both to
Abraham himself, and to all other, even to us at this day, what a wonderful
measure of faith, love and zeal to his God he had vouchsafed unto Abraham. So
that both he saw then, and we see now, what neith^r we, nor happily he
himself knew till after this trial or temptation had had his place. This read
we again in the law. Then said the Lord to Moses, Exodus 16.4.
Behold I will cause bread to rain from heaven to you, and the people shall
go out and gather that that is sufficient for every day, that I may prove them,
whether they will walk in my law or no. That is, that it may appear both to
themselves and others, whether receiving but that which is sufficient only for
one day at once, they will patiently depend upon my providence from day to day.
Probat enim Deus homines, no^ quasi ipse experimento indigeat, sed quo magis
seipsos norint, and posita omni arrogantia and inani persuasione, humiliter se
in posterum Deo submitta^t. For God proves not, says one, as though he had
need of any trial to know any of us all, but that men may themselves thereby
know better what is in them, and laying aside al arrogancy and vain
persuasion, humbly submit themselves afterward to God. Exodus 20.20.
Again, when at the giving of the law the people saw the thunders, and
lightnings, the sound of the trumpet, the mountain smoking, and for fear
thereof fled etc. then Moses said to the people, Fear not, for God is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not. Deutro.
8.2.
Again in Deutronomy. Thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God
lead thee this forty years in the wilderness, for to humble thee, and to prove
thee to know what was in thy heart, whether thou would keep his
commandments or no. For in affliction either by patiently abiding or by
ungodly grudging and repyning, we show what was in us, though hidden before.
Most plainly again in the thirteenth chapter: If there arise among you a
Prophet, Deutro. 13.1
a dreamer of dreams, and give thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or the
wonder come to pass which he has told thee, saying, let us go after other
Gods which thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken
unto the words of the Prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams, for the Lord
your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul. Judge. 2.22.
Last of all in the book of Judges, I will no more says the Lord, cast out
before them any of the nations which Joshua left when he dyed, and why? it
follows in the next verse: That through them I may prove Israel, whether they
will keep the way of the Lord, to walk therein, as their fathers kept it, or
not. Thus do we see then how the Lord is said to tempt man, namely when by
such means as pleases him, he tries and proves man, not to win any
knowledge to himself that he had not before, for how should he that made the
heart be ignorant of any thing in the heart, no, he understands the
thoughts long before, but to the end that the parties themselves, that are
thus proved, and others also by them, and in them, may see what before was not
seen, either of good unto praise, or evil unto punishment and example to
beware. And thus much of this for a while.

Your next member is how man tempts. How man tempts.
Man is also said to tempt sometimes man, and sometimes God. His tempting of
man is also sometime in the better part, sometime in the worse. In the better
when he does but prove and try whether further he may trust, Cicero.
as it is wisdom always to do to our friends. For vtendum amicis tanquam
praetentatis aquis, aptae sint vado, an non. We must use friends, said that
wise heathen once, as waters that we have tried before, whether they may safely
be adventured upon, or no to pass over. Also when the Father or master leaves
some loose money to see whether his child or servant will steal or no, this
is a kind of tempting or trying, yet but in good part, with a number such
like, that men to men must and may, 1. King. 10.1.
as they shall see occasion, use. To this kind may be referred the Queen of the
South, who hearing the fame of Solomon, concerning the name of ye Lord, came to
tempt him or prove him with hard questions. In the worse part man does tempt
man either by questions or actions. By questions when they deal as the
Pharisees did about ye tribute with Christ, Math. 22. Luc. 20.20.
seek to snare and catch their brethren to destroy or hurt them. Such tempters
and temptations were those days of persecution full of under Queen Mary, when
no sooner was any apprehended and co^uented before them, but their
interrogatories inferred either death of soul by denying a truth, or death of
body by affirming the same. Neither does yet this world want these tempters by
questions, where true religion and knowledge of God rules not tongue and
heart, and all. Whereupon many innocent souls are trapped ere they wit, and
harmless hearts not spying hidden driftes, put the collar about their own
necks to destroy themselves, that is, speak or do simply, what is wrinched to
a vantage they never feared, nor thought of against themselves. Thrice
needful therefore with the simplicity of the dove is the wisdom of the
serpent. By actions man tempts when either by words or deeds of bad
example they alure other to sin and evil. Genesis 3. Job. 2. Tobiae. 2.
Thus tempted Eve her husband to eat of the apple, Jobs wife her husband to
curse God and dye, Tobias wife her husband to be weary of well doing,
Putiphars wife her servant to filthiness, and those wicked Priests that said,
Iere. 18.
Come let us imagine a devise against Jeremy, with many such in the Scriptures:
of which tempters and temptations that wise Solomon warns when he says: My
son, if sinners intise thee, consent not unto the^, Prou. 1.10. wisd. 2.
if they say, come with us, we will lay wait for blood, and lie privily for
the innocent without a cause, cast thy lot in amongst us, we will have one
purse, Psalm. 1.
etc. And truly blessed is that man and woman that walks not in those
counsels of the ungodly, stands not in the way of these aluring sinners, nor
sits not in the seats of those reprobate scorners.

And how tempts Satan? Satan tempts when he moves us to leave God and
that obedience that we owe unto him any way, and to do evil, and therefore
look how many branches of well doing are in the law of God implied, even so
many contrary ways does this enemy assault and tempt us Of this temptation
does the holy Ghost speak when he says, Then was Jesus led aside of the
spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. And Peter, when he
said, Math. 4.
Act. 5.
Ananias why has Satan filled thine heart that thou should lie unto the
holy Ghost. And Paul when he says, 1. Cor. 7.5.
let man and wife come again together that Satan tempt them not for
incontinencie. Again, 1. These. ^.5.
for this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent that I might know of
your faith, least the temptour had tempted you in any sort. With a number such
like places, Genesis 3. vidit pomum Number. 11. carnes, cucumeres pepones. etc.
In which assaults of his he uses our own corruption and concupiscence, the
world, the wicked and many means, but the Lord is stronger than they al, if
we cleave to him, either wholly to keep us yt we fall not at all, if it so
please him, as others do, or else to raise us up again, when they have us
down under their feet, and to give us victory.

And which of these kind of temptations do we pray against in this petition?
How we do pray against Gods temptations.
Surely even against them all in some sort. For first as concerning Gods
temptations which more properly may be called trials, we beseech his majesty
in this prayer that he would deal in mercy and favor with us evermore, and
never lay more upon us than he will make us able to endure, but that he would
give issue with the temptation, and help us. Thus far do we pray even
against these, as shall further be declared when we come to the second part of
this petition. How against man's.
Touching man's trials or temptations we likewise herein beg of his mercy that
for any questions moved to us he would tender his own glory and never suffer
our wants to make answer to prejudice his truth with the unbelievers, but
that he would help in time of need and either keep us from apposings above
our power to satisfy, or else give a mouth and utterance, that no haters of
his glory may be able to resist, that in our weakness he being strong, ye
glory may be his, as it is due ever, and we that be the sheep of his pasture
may give him praise for ever. How against Satan's.
The third sort which is Satan's temptations, it is our meaning, that the great
mercy of our gracious God would so far support us, that we may never be
vanquished and overcome of any of them, but delivered and saved by him from all
evil. And thus you see how we pray against them all in this order, as we
shall further show (I say) hereafter. Yet is this last chiefly meant, to wit,
that forasmuch as our whole nature is corrupt and given to sin, Genesis ^.
if the Lord forsake us we are headdely carried to what alurements and
prouocations soever we see before us, the Lord in mercy would deliver us from
this promptnes and aptnes of our natures to admit of sin, and by his grace
deliver us from evil.

Let us not now leave these things thus, but even yet further think of them.
And to begin with the first, to wit Gods temptations or trials, 1. Cor. 6.1.
and of those, first with those that are of the right hand, alas how few
consider thus much in prosperity, that thereby the Lord tries them, and
searches out what they are, and how they will show themselves to him for all
those blessings. Most true it is, the more pity. And yet does the Lord so in
deed, whenever he powers his mercies upon man or woman in this world.
Needful meditations in prosperity.
For as with a gager he gageth them by those blessings, opens and reueyleth
what manner of stuff they are within, thankful or unthankful, kind or
unkind, humble or proud, careful or careless to please the giver: finally,
whether good or bad, he makes it seen. Wherefore a little to help us in this
trial, it is good to consider many times of these points. First, how in truth
I come by the blessings that I enjoy: secondly, to what manner of persons the
continuance of them is promised: thirdly, the true end and right use of them:
and lastly, the fearful examples of abuse. These things will profit us if
we know them well. Concerning the first therefore, it is too common with both
great and small, to stick in second causes, and to light short of the chief
fountain and well head in deed. Why we have health, wealth, friends, marriages,
honor, credit, offices, children, and a thousand of Gods comfortable favors in
this life, we can allege many reasons that I will not stand to repeat. But the
reason of reasons, either we allege not ever, or it pearceth no further
within the teeth than the tip of the tongue is, The Lord has given. Job. 1.
Whereas in deed the whole course of Scripture teaches, that this is the
head, and root of all our joyful days and dealings, and ever was, and only
is and can be, either for our good, if we use them well, or for our plague if
we do the contrary. Joseph a poor man's child came to a great place in the
land of Aegipt, Genesis 41.40. etc.
if we mark it well when the King said to him, only in the Kings throne will
I be above thee. When he was over all the Kings Court, and over all the land,
when the King commanded al his people to be armed at his word, took his
own ring of his own finger and put it upon his hand, arrayed him in garments
then of the richest with a chain of gold about his neck, set him upon the
best Charret he had save one, and all the people cried before him as he rid,
for honor sake upon their knees, tender Father. Joseph was also wise and full
of the spirit of God. verse. 38.
Yet least we should prattle profanely of Fortune and luck, or dote
undutifully upon his gifts, and so rob the Lord of his due honor, it is
expressly said, Genesis 39.2.3
that the Lord was with Joseph, and made all that he did to prosper in his
hand. The Lord therefore author of all his prosperity and advancement
whatsoever. David the youngest brother that little ruddie cheeked Shepherd,
from his hook and his cloak his Sling and Scrip, came to the famous kingdom
of Israel, and therein ruled with great honor and princely majesty for his
time, yet neither by wisdom nor policy of himself or his friends, but the
Lord took him from following the Ewes great with young, and made him ruler of
his people. And David prospered and grew, for the Lord God of Hosts was with
him, Psalm. 2. Sam. 5.10. 1. Chron. 17.8
says the text. So that God was the fountain of all his good. Which as a true
child, and thankful to his God, the same David afterward remembered to his
son Solomon, when he told him that he should build a house for the Lord,
1. Chron. 22.
and should therefore prosper because the Lord should be with him. Solomon
again confessed it, when he said that every man eats and drinks and sees
the commodity of his labor, Eccles^ 3.13. chap. 2.24. Joel. 2.19.
this is the gift of God. Behold I will send you corn and wine and oil, and
you shall be satisfied therewith, and I will no more make you a reproach among
the Heathen, says the Lord. And again by another Prophet, The seed shall be
prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit, Zach. 8.12.
and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew,
and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all things. So ever it
is the note that the Scripture keeps, that all prosperitte and well doing in
this world is the gift of God, and cannot be attained against his will. Which
likewise might be showed in any particular that can be named, if we would take
that course. Al which we note not now so much to teach a thing unknown, as to
remember a thing not thought of, or at the least not so duly, and often, and
earnestly thought of as it should be. I speak what I know, and what hidden
consciences must needs confess to be too true. For could it be if we did
thus think, that there should be so little care of such a GOD in many, as
there is, whose backs be laden, yea, and even pressed, as it were, down to
the ground, with the hope of God his mercies? Whose tables richly he has
deckte in despite of their foes, whose head with balm he has refreshed,
Psalm. 23.
whose cups do ouerflow? No, no. But if our wretches hearts did feel it,
and that with a power, as these motions use to heave in Gods Saints. O my
sweet God and dear Father, this is thy doing for thy wretch, and all these
things that I inioye (go to particulars) they are thy gifts, who might
have set me at the door with my pitcher to beg my food, and far
otherwise have dealt with me, if thou would, I tell you it would wring
forth other love and fruits to such a God again, than appear in many. And
therefore assuredly we think not of the fountain and giver of these things
as we should. Amend then what is amiss, and give the Lord his due. It is he
that has lifted out of ye mire, and set any with the Princes, even with the
Princes of the people. It is he that blesses the basket and the dow, it is he
that has given whatsoever good thing we enjoy, and cursed we if we deny it,
or carelessly neglect the sweet meditation of it ever. But to what end now has
he done all these things? Truly even to prove me and try me what I will do
to him again, and that it may appear to the world, and to mine own eyes,
what manner of man or woman I am within and in deed; one that will be puffed up
and forget both God and my self in prosperity, or one that will even weep
water of mine eyes in ye zeal of my soul to please such a father, and grieve
that I cannot, as I wish, and most heartily would. And if I be the former, that
the Lords justice may be warranted, if he change my copy: if the later,
that my soul may feel comfort in so sweet a God, not only heaping his
mercies upon me greatly, but giving me further a childs heart withal to love
my kind father so much the more, which is above al. The effect that prosperity
should work in us.
And which in deed is the very end of Gods mercies and blessings, Let David
speak, that man according to the Lords own heart. What did Gods kindness
work in him whilst the spirit prevailed? O my God, what shall I render again
unto thee for all the mercies that thou have bestowed upon me. What I say shall
I render, render again as if he should say, I know these blessings require a
duty of me, a love, a zeal, a heart, a soul, a mind, a life to the glory
and praise of such a God. And in truth it is so. For we our selves for our
petite benefits require men to be ours in all lawful sort faithfully,
firmly, with tongue, and heart, and hand, with body and goods and al. And what
comparison with the Lord? O loving God what can man do for us like thee, and
yet how care we to please them, and forget thee? O Lord awake. Remember also
what the Prophet complains of, saying. But this people has an unfaithful and
rebellious heart, Iere. 5.23.24.
they are departed and gone. And why? for they say not in their heart, let us
now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain both early and late in due
season, he reserueth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest. As if he
should have said this effect should Gods blessings upon them have, even
earnestly and heartily to make them seek the Lord and serve him, and with many
a fervent motion to think of so good a GOD as in mercy pours so many
comforts upon unworthy wretches. And especially mark it that because they did
not thus, therefore he says they had rebellious hearts and were gone away. A
fearful sentence of a true judge concerning all unthankful users of
prosperity. Again the same Prophet in an other place, Iere. 31.12.
They shall come and rejoice in the light of Sion, and shall come to the
bountifulnes of the Lord (why?) even for the wheat, and for the wine, and for
the oil, and for the increase of sheep and bullockes, and their soul shall
be as a watered garden, etc. See still what Gods mercies should work in us,
even a rejoicing in so dear a Father, and not a going, but a running to his
service and worship that is so kind unto us. Know thou not says the
Apostle, Romans 2.4.
that the riches of his bountifulnes and patience: and long suffering leads
thee unto repentance. In effect, know thou not that if God be thy dear,
sweet, and tender Father, that thou again art bound to be his loving,
careful, and obedient child? In truth it should be so. And if the Lord were
not in his goodness past the reach of any mortal brain, he might say also
his benefits had caught a goodly reward or catch of my goodness, for alas what
are we? or what is our love? yet since it is his mercy unmeasurable and
unsearchable to stand so contented, and to seek no more, pardoning in his
dear Jesus, all imperfections, O my bleloued fathers, and brethren what soever
that vouchsafe your eyes to read these papers, let us not deny him, what if he
were not such a God as he is, were not worth having when we gave it, namely
our poor hearts, our weak love, our hearty obedience, our care and diligence
to be what with so many mighty mercies received we are bound to be. For
truly if giving man must have of all honest receivers not the words only of
mouth, but the sincere affection of the soul, our giving God must have the
very soul of our soul and all that is within us for his goodness to us. And
blessed is that man and woman that loved of the Lord above all measure, by his
given grace love him again in their measure as they can. Truly to such shall
be even a continuance of mercy as shall be good. For then shall thou prosper, 1.
Chro. 22.11.12.
if thou observe his statuts says David to his son Solomon, and therefore my
son, the Lord give thee only wisdom and understanding to do this. 2. Chro.
26.5.
Vzziah sought ye Lord, and the Lord made him prosper says ye text. 2. Chro.
27.5.
Iotham became mighty because he directed his way before the Lord his God.
What man is he that fears the Lord, him will he teach the way that he shall
choose. His soul shall dwell at ease, Psalm. 25.12.13.
and his seed shall inherit the land. Esaias. 1.19.20.
If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land, but if ye
refuse and be rebellious, Esaias. 30.23.48.18.
you shall be devoured with the swoorde, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. With a number such places in the Scripture. Finally there is no good
thing, Iosue. 17 2. Chro. 15.2.
says the Prophet that he shall withold from them that live a godly life.
But I will even mary thee unto me for ever, says the Lord, Psalm. 84.11.
yea I will mary thee unto me, in righteousness, in judgment, in mercy, and
compassion. Hose. 2.19 20.21.22.
I will even mary thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord,
and I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Israel,
etc. But if prosperity and the Lords blessings have not this effect in us,
then are they the Lords gagers to discover worse matter than happily either
the world or we our selves did think before to be in us, or at least so
much to be in us, as pride, envy, disdain, spite, malice, cruelty,
unthankfulness, wantonness, uncleanness, with a number such. So that still our
groundworke stands fast, that prosperity is one of Gods temptations, that is
one of Gods tryers and teachers of man what he is and will be that way. David.
P^al. 30.
It discovered in David both to the world and to David's own eyes his great
wickedness. For in his prosperity he said tush tush, this wealth and weal
shall not decay, in his prosperity, peace and rest from many former griefs he
looked from his turresse upon Bersabe Vriahs wife with a sinful thought and
deed in the end. Solomon.
It discovered in Solomon overmuch loosenes, weakness of mind, and unkindness
to God. For his wives were not as they should have been, they were chosen
amiss of him, and he made an Idolater by the^ etc. Manasses exalted to a
kingdom bewrayed manners far unseemly for the meanest in the world. The
Israelites in their prosperity how ever, ever forgot they God and waxed
wantons, yea grievous sinners against his majesty. Nehem. 9.25.16. Math. 19.22.
How sad was that young man that was so wealthy when he was bidden sell all.
So that what should have lift up both heart and soul to a good God, that
pressed down mightily and reueyled a secret both to himself and others, even
an unwillingness to forgo, for God, what God in mercy had lent upon that
condition: Luc. 12.
what bewrayed that rich glutton in his prosperity but pride, covetousness,
wanton delicacie, contempt of the poor and such like. Those unkind guestes
bidden to the wedding, Luc. 14.
what bewrayed they in their prosperity, the rich farmer, the wealthy
merchant they would not come, and the married man drowned in his pleasures, he
could not come. Act. 12.
Herod in his robes and chair of estate bewitched with the flattery of the^
that cried, the voice of God and not of a man, reueyled what he was in his
most fearful and soden fall. The Lord smote him and he was eaten of lice.
Charge therefore them that are rich in this world says the holy Apostle that
they be not high minded, 1. Tim. 6.^.
and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God. etc. as if
he should say they have need, not of gentle and soft admonition, but even of
deep and dreadful charges to take heed. So dangerous a thing is prosperity
to a frail man. Deutro. 8.7. etc.
When thou shall come into the good land that I shall give thee, that flows
with milk and honey, that is with all blessings, wherein are rivers of waters,
and fountains, and depths that spring out of valeyes, and mountains, a land
of wheat and barley, of vineyardes, figgetrees, and pomegranats, a land of
oil olive and honey, a land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarcity,
neither shall thou lack any thing therein, a land whose stones are iron, and
out of whose mountains thou shall dig brass, and when thou have eaten and
art filled, coming to houses that thou buildedst not, and vineyards or garde^s
that thou plantedst not, then, then beware thou forget not thy God, and him
that gave thee al, neither be lifted up, says the Lord. As if he should say,
then is the danger, if ever, that thou will wax wanton, bathe thy self in
pleasures, melt away in dainty curiosity, or curious dayntines, and lift up
thy heel against a kind God, bid him adieu, and take thy leave of true and
due obedience for all these mercies. And therefore then, then take heed and
beware. Which assuredly that wise Agur remembering, and considering, well prayed
that he might not have too little, least I steal, says he, Prou. 30 8.
and take the name of my God in vain, neither yet too much, least I be full,
and deny thee and say, who is the Lord. Others in their times knew it, and
therefore wrote diverse things this way: Faelicitas and moderatio diuiduum
contubernium habent. Prosperity and moderation dwell in two houses. His
meaning is, hardly they are found dwelling together. Raro bona fortuna bonaque
men's homini datur. Seldom is good fortune (that is prosperity) and a good
heart given to a man together. Magnae faelicitatis est a felicitate non vinci.
It is a great felicity not to be overcome of felicity. With a number such
like sayings. Wherefore to go no further, we see how the Lord tempts us,
tries us by prosperity, to the discovering and opening of our hidden secrets
either good or evil, and for the Lords sake thinking seriously of it, let every
man and woman particularly view what breaks out of them for all the mercies
that are upon them. And I say no more.

You said an other of the Lords temptations or tryalles of man was adversity,
and therefore I pray you also touch that. True it is: sometimes ye Lord tries
one way, and sometime an other, and many and often times by this deep gager of
men's hearts adversity, and the cross. For so says ye scripture. Thou shall
remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee this forty years in the
wilderness, Deutro. 8.2.
for to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether
thou would keep his commandments or no. And, Fear none of these things,
which thou shall suffer: Reave. 2.10.
behold, it shall come to pass, that the devil shall cast some of you into
prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be
thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Chap.
3.10.
Again, Because thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore I will
deliver thee from the hour of tentation, which will come upon all the world,
to try them that are on the earth. Which places with many mo that might be
alleged, teach us evidently, that thus the Lord tries his children, when it
pleases him, even in the furnace of adversity, causing them thereby, not unto
him, who knows all things before, but unto themselves and the world, to
discover and open what before was not so known, namely, either patience or
grudging against the Lords visitation: as in examples plainly we may see.
Abraham waited a long time for his wished child, and that delay of the Lords
was his great trial. What opened it in Abraham, but a most singular faith,
before not so well known to men, Romans 4.18.
that even above hope he believed under hope, that he should have what was
promised, and not weak in faith, considered neither his own body, which was
now dead, being almost an hundred years old, neither the deadnes of Saraes
womb: but without doubting rested fully assured, that what the Lord had said
he was able to do. Jacob wonderfully tossed with the waves of much bitter
adversity by his wives, by his children, by his friends, and every day almost
by one thing or other, yet ever showed forth a patient heart, a believing heart,
and many great virtues, of all Gods children to be many times thought of. And
so was affliction a discouerer of his good graces to the praise of God the
giver, the true commendation of himself the receiver, and all our examples
that consider them. How did adversity manifest in Joseph again ye gifts of
God? What a faith did affliction in her daughter bewray and lay open to all men
in the woman of Canaan, Math. 15.
when the Lord Jesus gave this testimony of her, O woman great is thy faith,
be it unto thee as thou will? So that you see where the Lord had wrought any
good, there this trier and gager of the Lords adversity opened it, and
reueiled it to his glory. Now look at other some, and you shall see an other
course or other effects of this temptation. The children of Isreal's case in
Aegipt is known unto us, how grievous and even marvelous their bondage was,
as also how the Lord sent Moses and Aaron to deliver them. Who at their first
coming were welcomed and reverenced of all the Elders greatly, they then
expecting by them a release from those woes. Genesis 5.
But after a while when the King increased their affliction, and charged the
taskmaisters to deliver them no more straw, and yet to require the whole number
of brick, upon sharp punishment, if they performed it not, what then bewrayed
this trial in them? O see and consider. They fly upon the Lords Ministers and
messengers with an open mouth, with raging passions, and the Lord look upon
you, and judge you, say they. For you have made our savor stincke before
Pharoh, and before his servants, in that ye have put a sword in his hand to
slay us. Genesis 14. Chap. 15.24. Chap. 16.3.
When they were in fear of Pharaohs host pursuing them after they were
delivered, they did the like: when they wanted water they did the like: when
they wanted victuals they did the like, and their murmurings, grudgings, and
cursed speakings are even fearful when we read them. So that we see now in
these how adversity bewrayed corruption, incredulity, impatiencie, and many
foul faults, hidden before from men, and happily even from their own eyes.
The like might be showed in many more. Even the Apostles themselves declared
their weakness when they were thus tried by the apprehe^sion of their master
and they fled away. Peter more than all the rest, when a poor maid made him
deny, and every question redenye, and forswear. Every way therefore
adversity is a tell tale. And being sent in the wisdom of the mighty GOD to
any man or woman with commission to examine them and to discover them, it does
in deed effectually, and quickly show what is within. If faith, patience,
hope, humility, love of God, and such like virtues be there, so he shows by
and by: and if not, so he shows also without partiality, and makes even a
world often witness of it. Syrach. 27.5. Prou. 17.3.
Truly therefore, says Jesus Syrach, The furnace tries the potters vessel,
and affliction tries the just and godly. And Solomon, as silver and gold is
tried by fire, so does God prove and try the hearts of men. Your fathers (says
Judith) were tempted, that they might be tried and proved, Judith. 8.21.
whether they truly from their heart worshipped GOD. The want of the true
knowledge hereof makes many hasty Judges and judgments in the world, men by
and by entering into some evil conceit of their estate with GOD, whom they see
in this case.

Truly it is too true. Esaias. 53.3.^*
For even as the Prophet says of the head, so is it found in the members, they
are judged as plagued and smitten of God, we hide as it were our faces from
them, they are despised and we esteem them not. A very grievous fault in
whosoever do so, and checked with the practice ever of the living God upon
his children, and many sweet and true comforts out of the word. For, what
son is it, says he, Hebr. 12.7.
whom the father chasteneth not? As if he should say, there is none, neither
ever was, or ever shall be. But even all and every one less or more is thus
tempted, tried and proved of God in time. And therefore, verse. 8.
if ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards
and not sons. Whosoever will be my disciple, Math. 16.
let him take up his cross and follow me. Act. 14.
For through many tribulatio^s must the entrance into Gods kingdom be.
Wherefore forget not (says the Apostle) the consolation which speaks unto
you as children: Hebr. 12.5.
My son despise not the chastining of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chastineth, and he scourges
every son that he receives. Iam. 1.12.
And James again most comfortably: Blessed is the man that indureth
temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. In the conference of faith and
frailty.
But my purpose is not to enter into this common place now, I have done it
elsewhere, and there is scarce a leaf of the whole scripture that stays not
our hearts against this hellish conceit, that adversity, affliction, and these
crossing tryalles, or trying crosses should import an angry God toward us
ever. God forbid. The truth is otherwise, as I say.

And I also very willingly confess it. But yet give me leave I pray you a
little. This generality in my opinion contenteth not every man: for oftentimes
when a man confesses the general, namely, that the Lord by adversity
proves his children, yet fails he in the particular, and looking at his own
estate enters into some fear, yt yet not in such and such a sort he deals
with any but who^ he has cast off. And therefore in my opinion it should not
be amiss to derive the general into particulars, and to show some several
trials of this kind, with their comfortes or examples out of the word of God.
Let it be so since that contenteth you. Afflictions inward or outward.
And then taking this course let us remember that these things are either
inward in the soul and conscience, or outward in body, goods, children,
friends, fame, and such like. Of the inward speaks with no little vehemency
Job, when he says: The arrows of the almighty are in me, Job. 6 4.
the venom whereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight
against me. For hereby he declares that he was not only afflicted in
body, but wounded in conscience, which is the greatest battle the faithful
can have. Now of inward conflicts, How to know our election if we be tempted
with any doubt of it.
the great maine one is, when a man or woman falls into fear, and faintings
concerning election, doubting in themselves after some sort, least they belong
not thereunto, and therefore let us make this our beginning, yet speaking but
briefly of it, because many have handled the point right well. Know we then
our comfort herein if the Lord ever please to try us thus. Election is a
thing revealed by steps, and whosoever will surely and safely find it out must
keep the same. For as it were a madness if I desired to climb a ladder, to
seek to set my foot at first upon the highest step, so shall it be if I
seek out my election first before I look unto other things. And as there the
highest step is truly troad upon at the last, if I begin at the lowest, and so
go upward: so is election certainly found if we keep the like order. This
spiritual ladder then stands thus. Whom the Lord electeth before all time,
them does he ever call in time, either at the morning, at the ninth hour, or
eleventh hour, or some hour. Then Whom he calls, Election.
them does he justify, that is, whom he effectually calls Whom he
justifies them does he sanctify, and whom he sanctifies, them does he
glorify. Vocation. Justification. Santification.
So now then I would come to my election, and consequently my glorification
which is the highest step, and is in heaven with GOD, then must I begin at the
lowest step, to wit. Sanctification, which is in my self, and ascend thus: If
I be sanctified, then justified, if justified, then called, if called, the^
elected, and so sure to be glorified. Our sanctification every one of us
knows, feels, and finds, and how truly it carries with it a note of Gods
child, chosen in time to inherit heaven. Mark the Scriptures. As the branch
(says our Savior Christ) cannot bear fruit of it self, Ihon. 15.
except it abide in the vine, 4.
no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches, he
that abides in me and I in him, 5.
the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. Here
you see a conjunction comfortable, namely, of holy fruits and Christ, of
fruitful branches and the vine, so that if the Lord have wrought this blessed
work in us, that we are dead to sin and alive to righteousness, then are we
in him and he in us, yea, even so surely as it is certain that the bearing
bough is not broken from the tree, which if it were, it could not bear. It is
a meruaylous proof to us of this good, and therefore mark it well. The
Apostle again says, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. To. 8.1.
Yea, but who be those? See what follows. Which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. So then if I would know whether I be in Christ Jesus or
no, I must look how I walk, that is, still how I am sanctified. And if I
find that the God of mercy by his perpetual spirit has wrought in me a
change, that whereas once I walked after the flesh, that is, was ruled,
guided, and governed by my corrupt nature, now it is not so, but the holy Ghost
leads me into a fervent love of God, and a true hatred of evil, then is the
conclusion inferred by the very spirit of truth himself, I am in Christ Jesus,
and there is no condemnation to me, nor for me. So that Sanctification, the
lowest step leads me surely to election, the highest of the ladder. Give
rather diligence, 2. Petr. 18.
says Saint Peter, my brethren, to make your calling and election sure. Yea,
but how (might they say) shall we do it? Peter tells them, If ye do these
things you shall never fall. And what be those things? He also shows them,
namely, verse. 5.
If you join virtue with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, with patience godliness,
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness love, etc. Now
what is all this but sanctification of life. So that still our rule is proved,
that if we would know whether we be elected to live in heaven, we must ever
look how we lead our lives in earth. And if there the Lord has changed us
from careless to careful men and women, to please him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, then is this Sanctification a note of
Justification, Justification of Vocation, Vocation of Election, and so heaven
is ours. But now take heed that in this search for holiness of life, we be
not carried away with outward shows. For such holiness holds not either in
promises or conclusion of our former argument. The Lord abhors approaching
lips and reproching hearts. Esaias 29.
And Except your righteousness says he, exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharesies, Math. 5.
you shall never enter into the kingdom of GOD. That is, except you have more
tha^ a painted visard which they had most glorious, and a counterfeit
hypocritical show of holiness, your reckoning of heaven will be without your
host, and you will fail of it. Write, Romans 3.1.
says the Lord to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, I know thy works, for
thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. It is not then a name
only yt will serve the turn. Having a show says Paul, of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3.5.
As if he should say, vain and thrice vain is the show without the power,
and truth, when this search of our election is in hand. Note.
O beloved, consider then of this earnestly, and think with your selves, if
there be no comfort to be had in our hearts that we are the Lords, appointed
to life and bliss in the world to come, but only by a true espiall of
sanctification of life in our selves, how careful should we be by hearing of
the word, by praying, by reading, and by all appointed good means to have
this change wrought in us, that our light shining forth, may not only make
others glorify our heavenly Father for his graces in us, but even unto our
selves as Saint Peter says: 2. Pet. 1.18. verse. 18.
Make our election and future state in the glorious kingdom of God sure? Truly
there should be no cares greater than this, neither any diligence as the
Apostle speaks more faithful whilst we live. And see with your selves in
your secret meditations often, this difference of holiness and vnholynes, of
sanctification and profaneness, the one proves unto me my everlasting joy
with GOD, when this course is ended, and the other my assured woe with the
devil and his Angels in the blackness of darkness for ever. O what are the
pleasures of sin then for a season, when sweet meat shall have so sour a
sauce? Could the Lord with a more pearcing argument prick us forward to holy
life, or with a sharper knife cut in sunder the cords of vanity, iniquity,
and sin, wherewith thousands of us are so fettered and tempered, than to
teach us that the one assures us of lasting life, and the other of lasting
death in the world to come. Truly he could not. And therefore every one lay
his hand upon his soul betimes. Believe the Lord and we shall not be
confounded. Had I wist, says the old Proverb, comes ever too late. Now
live like a Christian amongst men, and ever live like a Saint among the Angels
of heaven. For the Lord has spoken it. But now soake in sin with the bit in
thy teeth vnrestrainable, and then rot in the reward of it, an everlasting
curse from God and all his joys, for the Lord has also said it. And if this
sanctification beloved, may not be in show only, as has been said, but in
truth and verity, how desperate, how woeful, how wretched and miserable is the
estate of that man and woman, that has not so much as a show? If there be no
comfort got by a glistering outward appearaunce, what comfort may be in the
soul, if the Lord awake to think of it, where even this also utterly wants,
and the contrary, to wit, all liberty, looseness, and sin abounds
meruailouslie? Shall we forget the curse of our Savior Christ in the Gospel
upon the fig tree that yet had goodly leaves fresh and green, because also
with ye leaves it had no fruit. If so fearful a curse light upon that, O
curses of curses, how many of them shall be upon those trees that have not so
much as leaves, no not one green leaf, but are altogether withered, twice
dead, and plucked up by ye roots. Wherefore I pray you even again, as you love
your life with god another day, and desire any assurance of it to your soul in
this world, To. 12.1.
Give your bodies daily a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable serving of God. Philip 4 8.
And fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be you changed by the
renewing of your mind, that you may prove what that good and acceptable, and
perfect will of GOD is. And, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, or if there be any praise, think of these things. For as you have
heard and seen truly proved, these things shall assure us, that we are the
Lords, cared for here, and chosen else where to be with him for ever and ever.
And the want of this reformation preaches nothing unto us, but that as yet we
know no interest we have to those lasting joys, and that heavenly father. The
Lord strengthen us, and the Lord change us that we may be changed, Amen.

You say this Sanctification must be true and right, or else it does not prove
unto us our election, I pray you therefore how may this be known, namely when
it is true and right, and when not?

Matter.
To know this we must ever look at the matter and manner of our actions,
whereby we worship God. Manner.
For if either of these be wrong, then is it not that holiness which the Lord
allows. Concerning the matter, we must look that the things wherewith we
serve God be commanded of GOD, and not invented and devised by our selves or
any man else. Math. 15.9.
For, in vain says the Lord Jesus, do you seek to worship me, teaching
for doctrines men's precepts. Which one thing sticks to the very heart a
thousand will worships in Popery never commanded of GOD, but brought in of
sinful man for advantage sake, as Masses, Pilgrimages, holy water, holy
bread, censings, creepings, and such like. Manner.
Then though the matter be good, yet if the manner be evil, we fail to
please God. And therefore even those sacrifices and ceremonies that the Lord
himself ordained, he often teaches he does abhor, for want of a right
manner of doing them. What have I to do (says he) with the multitude of your
sacrifices. Esaias. 1.11.
Bring no mo oblations to me in vain: Incense is an abomination to me, I
cannot suffer your new Moons, nor your Sabbath days, it is iniquity, my
soul hates them, they are a burden to me, etc. Again of prayer. Math. 6.
When you stretch out your hands I will hide mine eyes, and though you make
many prayers, I will not hear. An example we see in the Scribes and Pharesies
alms, and long prayers rejected. Alas Lord, and why so, might the Jews
say. Surely would he answer, because though you do these things rightly in
respect of matter, because I commanded them, yet do you not rightly in
respect of manner, and that also I seek of all men.

I pray you then what is the right manner that God allows. This must we
learn by diligent hearing and reading of the word. For therein has the Lord
laid down both what we shall do, and how we shall do. Generally thus much
now consider and take with you, Hebr. 11.6.
that without faith it is impossible to please God, and therefore concerning
manner, no action can please GOD, though it were never so glorious, except it
proceed from an heart purified by faith. Cain and Abel offered both sacrifices,
the one pleased, the other not. And why? But for this thing, because Abel had
true faith in his heart, from whence that action flowed: and Cain had none but
only did the outward work for fashion sake and order. So thousands mo then in
those days, and now in ours, that one day shall know with woe what it is to
have outward show without inward faith. Then is it required concerning manner,
that all our works be done in humility and lowliness of mind, we ever
confessing truly, that we notwithstanding all our works are unprofitable
servants. The want of this made the Pharesies actions abhorred, Luke. 17.10.
which otherwise in respect of matter were well. For who does not acknowledge
yt not to be an extortioner, Luc. 18.11.
unjust, an adulterer, to fast, to give tithe truly of all we have, are good
things, but to do these in pride and conceit, with boasting and bragging, and
without humility, alas the Lord abhors it, and sends us away like proud
praters, not like Christian prayers to his heavenly majesty. Thirdly, it is
required that we have hope. For although we ought to be humble, yet not so
thrown down must we be, but that still we rest assured of accepta^ce with God
for Christ, although not for the worthynesse of our work: and in that hope
offer cheerefullie our obedience to the Lord. Thus teaches Peter when he
says: 1. Pet 2.5.
Ye also as lively sons be made a spiritual house, an holy Priesthod, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Mark these words
(acceptable to God by Jesus Christ) upon which words our hope is ever surely
built, which now I speak of. Fourthly our actions must be done in love both
to God and man. For if we could speak with tongues of men and Angels, if we
have no love we are but as sounding brass, and tinckling Cymballes. Yea though
we feed the poor with all our goods and give our bodies to be burned,
having no love, it shall profit us nothing. Lastly, all our works words and
thoughts should respect the Lords glory, and not our own. For if we do any
thing to be seen of men, verily says our Savior they have their reward.
Math. 6.5.
And thus do you see now which is true sanctification and holiness of life,
such as will truly move to us our election and future glorification with
Father, Son, and holy Ghost in the kingdom of heaven. Even words, deeds,
and secret thoughts thus warranted both for matter and manner as has been
showed. Think of these rules and examine your selves by them.

My heart consents to all these properties of a true Sanctification, and
right obedience, but yet give me leave to question for my most comfort. What
now if these things be in a man or a woman with great imperfection, shall
therefore their work be rejected, and yield no comfort concerning their
election? God forbid. And therefore thus much take with you further yt
exercising your self in things commanded, and doing the^ in this manner as has
been said, so nere as ye Lord inableth you, wrestling according to ye measure
of your faith every day to be less sinful and more righteous, though yt
perfect righteousness which ye law requires be not found in you by reason of
your weakness, yet are you counted in the sight of GOD Sanctified, holy and
acceptable in Christ Jesus, and so Sealed up to the day of redemption. And that
I may not say it to you, but prove it, consider I pray you the example of S.
Paul himself, who though he were so sanctified and borne a new as that
thereupon he might safely and surely conclude his election for ever, to
inherit heaven by Christ, yet felt he and found he very many imperfections in
himself, and says plainly: Romans 7.15.
I allow not that which I do. For what I would, that do I not, but what I hate
that do I. Again when I would do good, I am thus yoked, that evil is present
with me. Again, In my mind I serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law
of sin. O wretched man that I am therefore, who shall deliver me from the body
of his death: with sundry other speeches to the same end in that place.
Whereby I say we are plainly taught that humane imperfection is far from
proving any thing against our true sanctification. Yea this is the true
perfection of of them that are borne anewe, to confess with the Apostle that
they are imperfect. And to our great comfort let us note it, that this Apostle,
sanctified thus imperfectly, and groaning under the grief of sundry wants and
weaknesses, yet so assured himself of his election, by so much as he had,
that in the next chapter he is not afraid to break out thus, I am persuaded
that neither death nor life, To. 8.38.
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. See then, and never
forget it, that sanctification though but in part and with much want, yet is
accepted with God and man, and ought yield that man and woman that has it such
a comfortable persuasion as this, namely, that nothing shall be able to
separate them from their God. So that they be not negligent in hearty hungring
still after more. Which ever is to be searched for carefully in our selves. For
even so did this Apostle if you mark it. I delight says he, in the law of
God concerning the inner man. verse. 22.
And as long as he found some measure of grace, and an heart that still wished
more, and sighed for more, and delighted in good, so long was he cheerful
touching his estate with God, verse. 23.
albeit till his dying day he saw another law in his members rebelling
against the law of his mind, and leading him captive to the law of sin,
which was in his members. This example then is notable to this end, and let us
not forget it. Would God also the contrary were more earnestly considered than
it is, namely, that if some measure of holy conversation, together with a mind
most fervently wishing more, and even grieved for want of more, yield men's
souls comfort, that neither life nor death, nor any thing shall separate the^
from the Lord, what will, neither any measure at all, neither any desire of
any, nor any grief for want of any, or for huge floods of ungodliness that
ouerflowe us both body and soul, our words, our works, our thoughts or
looks, and all things we do: I say what will this yield to the conscience
one day, but even a dreadful blow, that as the other never, so we ever are
appointed and red to be separate from Christ Jesus. O then take heed betimes,
and cutting off every day by the swoorde of Gods given grace, iniquity, and
sin, let us hunger and thirst to serve GOD in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life, and by fruits of a true new birth to
make, as Saint Peter has told us, our election sure. 2. Cor. 12.
Another proof to your question, that imperfections in our new birth and
sanctification may not discourage us, is the same Apostle again, troubled in
another place so grievously with his own concupiscence that pricked in the
flesh the messenger of Satan, that he besought the Lord thrice that it might
depart from him. The Lords answer as we know was this, that his grace was
sufficient for him. For through weakness his power was made perfect. Plainly
teaching us and graciously cheering us, that for our imperfections he will not
reject us. It is one thing to have sin reigning in us, and an other thing to
have it dwelling in us. The one we are forbidden, the other we shall be subject
to whilst we live. For, Romans 6.12. Romans 7.18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing, confessing
with grief that sin dwells in him, though to his comfort, through grace it
reigned not in him. Full is the Scripture of strength against this fear of
imperfections, but I trust this suffices. O, but the children of God are
subject many times to such a dullness and deadness in comparison of sweet
rauishing motions that they have felt, that Satan catching and watching his
opportunities is ready to persuade that surely now they are fallen away, and
GOD has given them over. Most true it is, and yet all for the best. For
surely, if we had not such alterations and chaunges, we should think that
grace were nature in us, we should not esteem of that sweet power of the
spirit as we do, when after a dullness it returns again, neither any way
be thankful as now we are. But to be too much cast down with such tumblings,
and to enter into such desperate fears, truly the Lord would it not. Psalm. 51.
For what change think you felt David when he cried, O let me feel the
comfort of thy spirit again, and when so often he cries, 119.
O quicken me as thou wast wont, quicken me, quicken me. Yet was not David
cast away, though for his sin or trial, or Gods glory, or others example,
he was thus many times troubled by a grievous dullness and many tempting
fears. Alas it is the course we must ever account of, for our better
wakening, and which Gods chosen have ever tasted yet without reiection. The
mother after she has felt her child move, hops the best, though ever it
move not, and when weakly it stirs, she cheerfully hops of greater
strength in time, and so must we. This sweet spirit is not always alike,
that difference may teach us, it is great mercy to have much, and make us
thankful. The Sun shining so fair is often covered with mistie clouds from
us, yea, and every day sets, and as it were takes his leave. But we see
those clouds vanish away in time, and the cheerful rising follows after
his heavy setting. It is not ever Winter, nor ever Summer, but after a fair
day comes a foul, and back again. The tree is not always green and
flourishing with his cheerful leaves. Yet lives it in the root when outward
show is gone. And truly so do we, (let us in comfort know it) in our Christ
rooted remain alive safe and sure, when blustering storms of shrewd
temptations have shaken off our leaves, that is, our cheerful thoughts,
words, and countenaunces, and for our better schooling, the Lord a little has
left us to our selves. The foundation of our hope stands fast, who^ he
loves, to the end he loves them. And I am persuaded that he that has begun
this good work in you, John. 13.1. Philip. 1.6. To. 11.29.
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. For the gifts and calling
of GOD are without repentance, with a number of such. So that though the
sadness of soul come upon us, and great disquietnesse be within our breast,
yet must we like faithful children as the Lord shall enable, say, Still
trust in God my soul, for I will yet give him thanks, Psalm. 42.
etc. O tarry thou the Lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thy
heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. Many times read that 77. Psalm,
Psalm. 27.
and see the down falls of Gods children, and how again they catch hold and
scramble up, confessing it to be their infirmity, as in deed it is. And the
Lord of comfort work our comfort.

Will God then accept some obedience?

Yet again do you ask me that? Was it not proved even now that sanctification
with imperfection, is nevertheless true sanctification and accepted. But you
show a passion still following the godly mind, that what it wishes to have,
it fears to want, and therefore never is weary of proof to have what heart
desires. Therefore even again I answer you that he does. And be judge your
self. When the Father cried with weeping eyes, Lord I believe, Marc. 9.24.
help my belief. Did the Lord answer him roughly, sir, I accept no
imperfecte faith. No, no, he most graciously accepted his some faith, and
helped his child. 1. King. 15.13
Do we not read it to our great comfort what the Lord badde the Prophet
answer to Ieroboams wife, that came disguised to ask concerning her sick
son, namely, that he only of Jeroboam should come to the grave, because in
him there was some goodness toward the Lord of God of Israel? Therefore even
some goodness, some grace, some faith, some love, Sweet.
some obedience you see is not ouerlooked of our most merciful father, though
it be but little. For it is not the quantity but the quality, that is, not
how much, but how true, Note.
that the Lord regards. All those eyes that looked upon the brazen Serpent
were not alyke great, and yet the least eye received health by that looking. So
are not all men's faith alike. For the Lord gives at his own good pleasure in
great diversity, and yet the least being true looks upon the true salve of
our stings resembled by the brazen Serpent Christ Jesus to eeternall life, as
well as ye greatest. Though our father chidde them for their little faith, yet
did he never reject them that had any. Every poor beggars hand is not alike,
and yet the least serves him to take a penie as well as the greatest. So shall
our hand of faith do I warrant you, and therefore reach it out with cheer,
fear not.

And what if even in that little obedience there be also some imperfection
mingled? Be it never so little, if it come from us, be you sure it will have
his dregs and impuritie. For even all our righteousness is like a stained
cloth. But what then? O sweet God. What did he when the midwiues with a good
action intermingled a lie? Did he refuse their good for their evil? No, no,
he received their obedience though thus stained, and mercifully he turned
away his face from the other, as a dear father, that has an Eagles eye to spy
any thing well in his child, and even no eye to see what he would not see,
being the frailties of his chosen children, whereof they sigh to be
disburthened. And it is a heaten truth and known to us, that if he looked not
away from imperfections and wrath, yea, even winowed as it were his childrens
actions, keeping the grain, and blowing away the chafe with a breath of
mercy in Christ, he should never accept any obedience in this world at any
man's hand.

Alas then why should we fear so often and much as we do, and faint, since
all things are thus comfortable to the Lords children? O sir, Iere. 4.4.
these fears and wreastlings and spiritual struglings that the godly are ever
subject unto, are as the Lords plowe to break up the fallowe ground of our
hearts, and to tear them that otherwise would be whole lumpes, unfit to
receive seed into fine small earth, soft, and mellowe, and fruitful, that no
sooner the seed may be throwe^ in, but it sinketh and is covered, and sets
it self to fructify, when otherwise it would not, nor could not upon whole
ground, but lying only upon the outward face, and not sinking, the fowls
would devour it, Math. 13.4.
or at least it take no rooting. And therefore thrice necessary and profitable
are these spiritual buffets now and then to work in us that broken and
contrite heart which the Lord shall never despise. Psalm. 51. Ezekiel. 36.26. 1.
Cor. 10.13.
To take from us our stony hearts and to give us fleshie in their places. Let
them be then as the Lord pleases, espeally when he has given us so sweet
a promise, that he will never lay more upon us than he will make able to
bear. Let him plowe us, and bruise us, and break us at his pleasure, it is
the Lord, let him do what seems him best, he knows our mould, and his
mercy help us in all our fears, Amen.

And Amen say I again to this prayer, leaving you now to your liberty to go
forwards with other temptations as you will. Not to have our prayer heard by
and by.
It is a spiritual trial many times to Gods children to cry and pray, and as
they think, not to be heard, because their petitions are not by and by
granted. But they forget then other dear ones of the Lord and the Lords often
practice. For David in many Psalms says, I cry and thou hear not. Job
says, When I cry unto thee thou do not hear me, Job. 30.20.
neither regardest me when I stand up. The woman of Canaan cried heartily, Marh*
^5.
and received no comfort of long, yet did he hear her well enough, but the
end made amends, and so shall it to us all, as may be our good, which he best
knows and not we. Heaviness of heart.
It is a temptation to be heavy hearted, and we think, O Lord, why should I
be thus. Surely sorrow consumes the life, Prou. 17.22. and 25.20.
and a cheerful heart prolongeth our days. But yet we must know what
befalls the godly. My soul is powered out upon me, Psalm. 30.16. Psalm. 42.
and the days of affliction have taken hold upon me, says Job in his
heaviness. David's soul was sad, and it would not presently be lighted. Yea,
from the ends of the earth, says he, Psalm 61.2. Psalm. 102.4.
will I call unto thee when my heart is in heaviness. My heart is smitten down
and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread: with many such
places. Sometime for sin: sometime for worldly accidents, sorrow will
assault the godly, and being men and women we must be content to endure the
smarts incident to our nature. Yet ever remembering to hold faith and a
Christian measure in all our sadness. Cherefulnes and mirth.
And many times beating it into our minds, that a cheerful heart pleases
GOD and man: Rejoice in hope, Rom* ^^.12. Philip. 3.1. Chap. 4.4. 1. These. 5.16.
says the Apostle, rejoice in the Lord, rejoice in the Lord always, again I
say rejoice, and evermore rejoice. What iterations and dublings are these? And
if the Lord must be heard when he speaks single, how will he take our
deafnes when he speaks dubble. Galat. 5. Prou. 17.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is joy. It causes good health, says Solomon, and
refuse it not then. The greatness of Sin.
The greatness of sin is an other of the uncomfortable meditations now and
then of Gods dear ones, they fearing and shaking to behold the same, least the
Lords justice should break out against it and consume them. But good beloved
let us be wise as the Lord would have us, and that is thus, not to meditate
of sin, but still with an eye to the salve of sin Christ Jesus, and then
though it be never so terrible by his foul shape, and seem never so strong to
give us a fearful fall, yet shall it be found too weak, and we receive
after a mazing fear, true comfort against it, and the deadly sting thereof. If
a man were upon the top of a high tower without battlements, it would seem
fearful unto him to look down: but if he have high and strong battlements
that he may take hold on, not so. Even so it is with sin, look upon it
without our strength against it, and it astonisheth to death, but with him it
vanishes as too weak to condemn Gods chosen. David's adultery and murder
were great sins, yet repentance found mercy, and they were pardoned. Peter's
denyals were great sins, yet in Christ rased out, when he wept bitterly for
them. Paul's persecuting and making havoc of the congregation was no small
offense, yet a wounded heart found a forgiving God, when opened eyes saw what
was done. Exodus 17.
Those murmuring Jews after so many strange works and wonders wrought of the
Lord for their deliverance, making a question whether he were amongst them or
no, did they lightly offend? Or does not the Scripture every where speak of it
as a most horrible and dreadful offense? Yet was there mercy with God and
pardon to repentance. But this course might be long if I should note all
particulars. Let us stay therefore with those murdring Jews, not of a
malefactor but of a just one, not of the son of a man, but of the son of
God Christ Jesus, and consider well whether the earth has yielded since her
first creation a greater indignity, or whether the heavens have beheld a more
vggly transgression? Surely no: neither any whit comparable: Act. 2. and 3.
yet in Christ was this pardonable, and even then when their hands were red
with the innocent blood of Christ Jesus, and the spear scarce washed that
pierced his holy heart, even then I say, preached Peter pardon to repentance,
and as many as repented had mercy. To the greatness of their sin add the
vnfeelingnesse of their heart that had no remorse for any thing they had done.
And then consider, will the Lord offer mercy before it be sought, and shut up
mercy when it is sought? Will he so graciously seek to draw men to
repentance, and show no pity when we repent? Will the Lord forgive the death
of his dear son to the bloody murderers of him, and never be entreated for
sins (though grievous) yet not comparable. O God forbid that after this
example of mercy to these crucifiers of the Son of GOD, Satan should ever
shake our faith by fear of any sin to be unpardonable, which with wai^ing
hearts we lament that ever we committed against our dear God. Therefore take
fast hold of it, and print it deeply in your memory. I omit Jacobs children,
I omit Manasses, I omit many that might be named, peruse their sins, and
behold with joy in a gracious God their full remission. When the Spirit of
truth says, were thy sins as red as scarlet, does he mean to comfort
against small and few offenses, or against great and many? Truly even against
all, must you needs confess. And if you will not, S. John will reprove you,
who says, 1. John. 1.
that blood shall cleanse us from all sin, making no distinction of few or
many, great or little. Some, not all. And if the Lord distinguish not, that
must show me mercy, I defy a distinguishing devil, of whom I seek no
mercy. Consider it often, that the same Apostle says, 1 John. 1.
If we acknowledge our sin God is faithful to forgive us. Making the
assurance of pardon to a confessing sinner, no less sure than it is that GOD
is faithful. O beloved, can God be unfaithful? if he can, then fear: if
not, be of good comfort, for so certain is mercy to a bleeding heart, as he is
faithful that can be no other. O sweet foundation of our wished joy, the
essence of our God. Again, is it not an article of our faith that our sins
shall be pardoned? Comfotable.
Will you say little sins? God forbid, restrain not Gods mercy, deny not your
faith, and then must you be comfortable. Remember again what the Lord Jesus
says: Ihon. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes to me I
cast not away. What a speech is this, if we mark it? And what a comfort and
joy is there in it, if we have but even a piece of an heart to receive it? For
to let pass the former part, so plainly taking away distinction of Jew or
Gentill, of bond or free, in affirming that all that the father gives him shall
come to Christ, what nation or language soever they be of, how sweet is the
second part to a sinful soul groaning and sighing under the burden of
iniquity, sore laden and even pressed down with thoughts, words, and deeds
in the sight of the Lord damnable? For what might be your case, look at your
self: Have you read in the law, that if God enter into judgment with you,
sin is so great, that you are but gone? Do your transgressions prick you,
and loose course of life begin to sting you? What then? are you dead, and will
you not live? are you ill, and will you be no better? Smarteth your soul
within through the deep wound of sin, and will you have no ease? O yes full
feign, say you, but my sins, my sins are so out of measure, great and
horrible, that I fear the Lord has cast me off, and has no mercy for me? Ah
deuell auant. Does my Savior say here, he that comes to me, and is not a
very great sinner, I cast not away. No, no Satan, my God and Lord, my Christ
and joy speaks indefinitely of any man, of any woman, in any case, he that
comes unto me, be he Jew, be he Gentill, be he bond, be he free, Greek or
Barbarian, and what sin or sins so ever he be troubled for, how weak and
frail so ever, how poor and vile so ever, yea be his sins mo than ye hears
of his head, mo than the sand of the sea, so that his heart fail him with
David for them, yet if he come to him, he is welcome, he is accepted, and he
will not cast him away. O soul awake then, be of good cheer within me, cast
away the mourning weed, and hearken to thy most gracious GOD, may you say.
Sorrowing and sighing for that which is past, as my duty is to him will I go,
knowing that he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. His pity
decreaseth not, his mercy fades not, others have found it, and why should I
doubt of it? Never came sinner with sorrow and faith but he was accepted, and
his own mouth in this place says it, No man that comes to me will I cast
away. Nay see further comfort here by these words. Were it so that my heart
were as it were closed up for a time (the Lords will being in this sort to
exercise me, humble me, and try me) that I could not believe, nor pray, nor
sorrow nor feel any comfort, yet if ever there was a time wherein I could do
these things, and did them in and with a feeling of sweet assurance of Gods
favor in Christ to my poor soul, that time does tell me that the Father
has given me to Christ, and that I did come to him then, and now I hear that
he that comes to him he casts not away never, never. Therefore be of
good comfort, his spirit is not gone, it is but hidden, and withheld for a
time, as fire covered with ashes, it will come again doubled and increased. For
he that is once given to Christ of his father is never cast away finally, but
reuiueth again though many times humbled very greatly for a season. Psalm.
32.10. Esaias. 1.16. to the 20. mark the 18. well. Ezekiel. 18.23. John. 20.17.
John. 17.23. Hebre. 4.16.6.18.8.12.
You have had examples before. And thus in the Lords help and blessing may
this assault of the greatness of sin be salued. Much and much again is the
strength in Gods word that may be brought to lay in this breach if I intended
volumes. But by this example go further your self as you need. These are
large fields to walk in, blessed be God for his comforts.

Sometimes again I know the Lord humbles his dear ones with this cogitation
beating in their inwards, Perseverance.
surely I shall not continue, I shall have a fall, I do but flatter my self
with a persuasion of Gods favor. For albeit I now do well, hear the word,
read it, pray, and so forth, yet in deed I am not settled and grounded in the
fear of God, for these things will away. Many have had as much as I for a
time, and yet have fallen away, and so I fear me shall I. Truly a dangerous
temptation, 1. Cor. 10.13.
I must needs confess, yet no other than appertains to man, and be of good
comfort, the word is stronger than this also. And first again it serves that
short prayer of the Apostles, Psalm. 51.
Lord increase our faith, and that of David, give me the comfort of thy help
and establish me, establish me with thy spirit Then those places following with
such like which you may find by your own reading, and partly have been quoted
before, when this temptation almost was in speech. Philip. 1.
I am persuaded says the Apostle of this same thing, that he that has begun
this good work in you will perform it until the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Consider well of the place, and of the Spirit that directed Paul to say
it, the spirit of God, and see what a powrefull comfort this may be, that
that Spirit should set it down, that where the graces of God and fruits of
righteousness once appear in truth, that is, without fayning in man or woman,
there is an immovable assurance of continuance in the same, the means being
used. Why should we rather then believe the father of lies, saying we shall
continue? Or why should we more be thrown down with the one than lifted up
with the other? Yet see more comfort. For what new thing is spoken here that
is not often beat upon elsewhere also. 1. Sam. 18.17.
When Saul told David he was but a boy and therefore not able, or meet to
join with that great Goliath so strong a giant, how did he overthrow this
bone cast against his faith, and establish his heart against that temptation:
was not his strength this? I have O King found God heretofore my deliverer,
when I was in danger, and therefore I doubt him not but he will even now also
be to me as he has been. And what if Satan should have whispered in his ear,
David thou deceiuest thy self by thinking that if God once do for thee, he will
ever do for thee, it is no good argument. Would David have believed him? 1.
Sam. 17.3^.
No out of doubt he would have bidden him, auant Satan, my argument is good.
For a very chief end of Gods benefits to man is to make him still in assured
trust to hang upon his government and providence. And therefore as I have
found him, so will I take him, my deliverer has he been from the Bear and
the Lion, and my deliverer will he be, I fear not, from this uncircumcised
Philistine. Again when the Apostles began to think that Christ was angry
because they had forgotten to bring bread with the^, Math. 16.
what says Christ. O ye of little faith do ye not remember the five loaves when
there were 5000. men, how many baskets full took ye up? teaching them and all the world that the consideration of Gods goodness already showed should
mightily assure us for the time to come ever. For as he has been, so will he
be, if we believe him. This was one cause also why he instituted the
Sacrament of his Supper to keep his former goodness in continual remembrance
with us, Because that such remembrance is and ought to be most effectual ever
to establish our faith as touching the continuance of his favor toward us
still. Mark therefore and meditate of this drift of the Lord often, and think
with your self yt if a mortal man look for his benefits, that I should
account him not my fickle, but my firm friend, that as he has been, so he will
be, O how much more may the God of heaven look for it at my hands, and if my
doubting of an earthly friends constancy, who has by many testimonies given
me notice of his love be in truth a foul fault in me, how infecteth it heaven
and earth with noisome savor to mistrust a mighty God, nay a merciful God, a
kind God, and dear and loving father, that with milions of mercies testified
his love and favor without desert in me, and to make him as a fickle and
changing man: far be it therefore from us ever, but let passed grace assure
our souls of future goodness, for so would he have it, and so in truth should
it. I cannot omit it, Psalm. 78.11.
and I pray you mark it with me: How when David shows yt the Israelites
forsook God and his ways, he adds for a reason as it were of such a fall,
They forgot his acts and his wonderful works that he had showed them. As if
he should have said, had they looked back still to received mercy, and kept
that diligently in mind they would never have fallen. Now this could be no
reason if this were not a certain course with our living God, that where he
begins there he continues, if the fault be not ours. Look therefore at
this thing, and be of good comfort, Ezekiel. 18.23. Ihon. 13.1. Romans 11.
your God has no joy in changing, he has sworn he would not our fall, his
word is past, that whom he loves to the end he loves them, that his gifts
and calling are without repentance, that is without change, David thus
reasoned, Paul thus reasoned, Christ thus reasoned, that passed mercy should
assure us future mercy ever, and therefore you shall continue if you continue to
pray, to believe, to obey and to serve him. Let all the feends in hell go
shake their ears. Humblings are good for the Lords chosen, and he knows what
is best for every son or daughter. Iam. 1.12.
Welcome his schoolings when he sends them, endure them patiently, tarry the
Lords leisure, for your lightning. Yet ever know his word what it assures:
He that comes unto me I never cast away, the Lord support our weakness. Thus
might I in this treatise of inward adversities, touches and trials run a great
course, for the field is wonderful wide, but I must content my self. These may
serve to show that the word is a salve for our grievous sores, and to lead
such as shall be desirous of further Phisike into the green pastures where is
plenty of help. See and gather, apply, and use, the Lord will bless his holy
ordinance ever as shall be best.

Your order leads you next to particular adversities outward. And if I or any
man should speak of them as we might, when or where should we find an end?
Psalm. 34.
For how many are the troubles of the righteous? Yet the Lord delivers them
out of all. For mine own part I have found in two righteous men so much as
justly makes me to think that the troubles of all Gods children be in deed
very many. I mean Job and David, whose troubles and trials if they be perused,
carefully observed, and often thought upon, they may strengthen and comfort
most men even in their particulars. For what might it be that the Lord lays
upon us which he laid not upon these his dear ones before, and may be found
in them, besides numbers mo, both in Scripture and other histories recorded to
us. Many will say, O my life is uncomfortable and full of sorrow and heaviness,
grief and vexation one after an other. When as others have their pleasures and
hearts ease and more joy in a day than I have in a year. And what if it
please God so, does he deal any otherwise with you than he does with those
whom he loves truly, Ioh. 30.16.
and even to the end? does not Job complain that his soul was even powered
out upon him, and the days of affliction had taken hold of him. That sorrow
pierced his very bones in the night, and his sinews took no rest, that for
the great vehemence his very garment was changed etc. verse. 31.
That his harp was turned to mourning, and his Organs into the voice of them
that wept. Yet I hope you know God hated not his servant Job for all this.
Psalm. 102.
I pray you also remember David with heavy heart and mournful voice making his
moan to his sweetest God in these words: O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry
come unto thee. Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble, incline
thine ears unto me when I call, make have to hear me. Why David, what is the
matter, or what does urge this woeful cry? O Lord my days are consumed like
smoke and my bones are burnt like an hearth. Mine heart is smitten and
withers like grass, because I forget to eat my bread, for the voice of my
groaning my bones do cleave to my skin. Surely I have eaten ashes as bread and
have mingled my drink with weeping. And so forth, verse. 9.
read more of the Psalm your self. And remember ever David was a man
according to Gods own heart, for all this humiliatio^ laid upon him at times.
Forget it not also when you sit, and say little, what was answered to that
pamperling of the world, when he was in it. Son remember that thou in thy
life time receyuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains, Luc. 16.25.
now therefore is he comforted and thou art tormented. It is not the best
meat ever that has so sour a sauce commonly. 2. Cor 4.17.
Neither that light affliction so greatly to be abhorred, which being but for a
moment in comparison, causes unto us far most excellent and an eternal
weight of glory. Luc. 6.25.
Woe be to you that now laugh says our Savior Christ, for ye shall wayle and
weep, and blessed are ye that weep now for you shall laugh, verse. 21.
what sweeter speech can my soul wish to be my comfort, if my life be not so
comfortable. Had I rather now laugh and hereafter weep, then now weep and
hereafter laugh, not for days or years, but for ever and ever. I will let the
Physician of my body a sinful man mingle my cup as best pleases him, Note.
for my health, and drink that sour sup in hope of ease thereafter, but my God
and father, my Christ and Sauiuiour, the life of my soul, shall not do so for
the good thereof, but full wantonly I will make my choice my self, and sweet,
sweet all must be, or else I will weep to drink it, Math. 20.22.
Alas this is not well. Be it unto us as he will. And great is his favor ever
when we drink of no worse cup than his own self has begun of to us. Job.
21.
If you read the 21. of Job you shall see yt this flourishing estate in this
world that so many wish, and some in weakness and ignorance wayle to want, is
not so comfortable to the conscience desiring hope of future good, as that we
should be so greedy of it. And therefore if the Lord deal otherwise with us,
rest upon his wisdom, upon his love, testified by the greatest gift that
ever was given, the death of his only and dear Son Christ Jesus, upon his
practice with his children ever, and be content. Christ dipped the soppe that
he gave to Judas, and did Revel. 3.
God give us dry bread with his favor, rather then dipped, and dainty soppes
with his ire. As many as he loves, he rebukes and chastises, and loved
Lazarus had never a sop at all, but would have been glad of the crummes that
fell from the rich man's table. Contempt a bitter temptation.
Some again are disdayned and contemned in their places where they live,
dwell, or serve, and they cannot bear it. Contempt is bitter, and soking
themselves in this sour meditation, they think, O Lord why should I be thus
used more than others? what do I, or say I, that ought not, or might not
receive as favorable face as other men find? surely the Lord loves me not etc.
But god forbid say I to this conclusion. For it follows not upon the
premises, and therefore the argument a subtle devils, and not a true Gods.
And I prove it to my comfort by these two servants of God again Job and
David. The first complaining that they that were younger than he mocked him,
Job. 30.1.9. Job. 19.18.
yea they whose fathers he refused to set with the dogs of his flocks, verse.
10. Job. 7.6.
that is to be his shepheardes, or to keep his dogs. They abhorred him,
fled far from him, and spared not to spit in his face. Yea says he I am their
byword, and as it were a Tabret before them. Surely a great contempt, and
greater I think than you can show me any, whosoever you are that compain of
contempt, and yet Job was Job still before his God for all these abuses in a
wretched world, that is, beloved, accepted, regarded, and in the end, when the
Lords good pleasure was finished, honored and exalted, that these mocking
mates couched and hid their foul faces for shame. And shall I not entreat you
to consider it? Again the other, what says he. I am a worm and no man, O
Lord, a shame of men, and the contempt of the people. Psalm. 22.6*
Al they that see me have me in derision, they make a mow at me and nod
their heads. What vile contempt is this. Yet must not David give up the joy of
his life for it. But pass on his course in his troublesome Sea, and sail
cheerfully toward the Haven where he would be, breaking these waves and
surges by a true faith and knowledge of the Lords dealings with his most dear
chosen. Imagine you see Herod, and that rushing route, Luc. 22.11.
hoysing their heads like forehorses over our dear Savior, when Pilate sent
him thither and looking over him, and under him, and on each side him, but not
upon him, for fear his baseness should hurt their silver sights. O dear
Savior, shall he be contemned, and disdayned, excepted, and rejected as a
seely man, a simple man, one that has no great stuff in him to win him grace
with the painted Peacocks of this world, and shall any man or woman take it to
heart to follow him with this cross (if it be a cross and not rather a true and
great blessing in some respects to us) upon his back? Fie, fie of this desire
to please men overmuch in this world, it is not good. Think again you see
through the casement of her window the pair of eyes that mocking Michol so
scornfully cast upon her own Lord and husband king David, when she saw him
come dau^cing before the ark of God. Remember her reproachful speech to him,
and what was David worse for all this? See and read again and again, verse.
21.22.
what courage he took to himself for all this contempt of so near a friend,
and how he answered her, and let it be your example and comfort ever. Michol
was the worse that disdained, David not a whit the worse that was disdained.
She plagued with barrenness for ever, David blessed for his true heart and
zeal to God. And it is enough.

Alteration of their minds whom we took for friends a sharp Temptation.
Others observe themselves forsaken daily of such as they took to be their
friends, and to have been faster knit in affection to them than as that they
would have so slunke away. They see a change in their faces that have
fawned, in their words, in their deeds, and in all circumstaunces. And this
grieueth them, they wonder at it, and think what have they done to deserve
this alteration. Forgetting quite that even this also is one of the Lords
exercises that he trayneth up his children in, till they grow to a true
knowledge, how fickle and tickle this world and all his shows be, and that it
has been laid upon his chosen in great measure. For what a pitiful
complaynt makes Job of this matter, Job. 19.13. etc
if you mark it. The Lord has removed (says he) my brethren far from me,
and also, mine acquaintance were strangers unto me. My neighbors have forsaken
me, and my familiars have forgotten me. They that dwell in my house, and my
maids took me for a stranger in their sight, I called my servant, but he
would not answer, though I prayed him with my mouth. Yea my breath was
strange, to mine own wife, though I prayed her for the childrens sake of mine
own body. All my secret friends abhorred me, verse. 19.
and they whom I loved are turned against me. Has any man tasted of a
greater change than this man did, Or may a man taste of a greater? Surely this
was a great one, and it should be a sure prop to hold up our sliding feet for
any alteration of men from us. David complained of the like, that the Lord had
hid his acquaintance out of his sight, Psalm. 31.11.
that they that did see him without in the streets conveyed themselves from
him. And what then? Such has been the world, such is it, and for such take it,
if you be wise. To day a friend, to morrow none, to day in my bosom with sugared
words, to morrow in my face with sharp arrows. Joseph's own brethren changed
upon him with a great change, when he least thought it, and less marvel if
his master so changed for no just cause, Putiphar I mean that made so much of
him. Moses and Aaron found great alterations of men's minds, Exodus 17.
if you mark the story, and O Lord, says Moses, they are ready to stone me,
that e^rst had bowed down and worshipped at their first coming. Exodus 41.31.
To cut down palms and strowe them in the way, and to cry Hosanna, blessed be
he that comes in the name of the Lord, Math. 27.
is an other note, than crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us and
our children. Of these experiences the world is full, and the word of God has
store: cast them together for your stay, when you read them, and take the
world, and all the faces and fawnes of the same as they are, and ever have
been, that is for fickle and most slippery. Your master Christ, and your fellow
servants have found it so, and for Gods sake seek not to be singular your
self, it is enough for the servant to be like his master, seek not to be
above him. If Job find his own wife changed, shall he wonder at others? No,
no* Use them, and take them as Subject to changes when GOD will. And his will
be done. Privy slander an other trial.
Many are bitten behind their backs, and privily slandered, yea gnawed to the
very bones with the teeth of the ungodly, and it grieueth them sore. But forget
they not then that this also is the lot of the righteous, of Joseph, of Job, of
David of thousands. Forget they not Paul approving himself by honor, and
dishonor, 2. Cor. 6.8.
by evil report, and good report, as a deceyuer, yet true. And in an other
place, We are euel spoken of, and yet we pray, 1. Cor. 4.13.
we are made as the filth of the world, the of ^kowring of all things unto
this time. There was never man could escape this yet, neither ever any shall,
if he please God. For even of Christ himself, some said he was a deceyuer,
and many prittle prattles had they of him in their meetings. Woe be to you
says the Lord himself when all men speak well of you, Luc. 6.26.
for so did their fathers to the false Prophets. And it is a speech of weight
against this temptation, if it be often thought of. Galat. 1.1^*
If I should yet please men says the Apostle, I were not the servant of
Christ. It is a dayntines unfit for a Christian, to be able to bear no
backbiters. Some will to the deuell, for their privy prattling to the hurt of
their neighbors, though we swear the contrary, and heartily wish the
contrary. There is no help for them. Only stand you out of their way, that
the faster they run, the sooner they may come thither, and the world be rid
of them, for surely they are in have a number, and they seem to fear nothing
more, than that hell gates should be shut, and the play begun before they
come. The Lord will be glorified by their death, and the Lord make us glorify
him by our patience, and by our careful shunning of all just cause of any
evil report. That suffering this bitter poison of Aspes that is under their
tongues, and upon their tongues, 1. Pet. 4.14. etc
and in their tongues, not for evil doing, but undeservedly, our joy may be
true, and our comfort breed a contented patience, ever. Amen.

Diverse complain they are rewarded with evil for good, To be rewarded evil
for good tempts many.
and they fret at it sore, to have true good will and many honest testimonies
of a friendly mind so badly, so unkindly, yea so vildly requited. And in deed
it is true that such undeserved unkindness pearceth deep, and has prevailed
with some, even to the breaking of their hearts, and the ending of their days.
But alas it should not be so hot in us, if God gave government over frail
flesh, according to true reason. For if false man turn his back upon GOD,
that has in such wonderful and unsearchable favor used him, Consider this
often.
and with such an incomprehensible and unmeasurable heap of mercies filled his
cup from his cradle, and before, what marvel though he turn upon one of
us (whose favors, though great, yet cannot be like these) both back, and
heart, and tongue, and teeth, and all the powers he has any way? Truly this
only should content us, when we find such measure in the world. But we have
beside, the company in this cross of such great and dear ones to the Lord,
that we should be even glad we may go along with them and partake with them in
no worse thing, than the Lord thought good to lay upon them. David complains:
they rewarded me evil for good, to the great discomfort of my soul,
nevertheless when they were sick, Psalm 35.13. Psalm. 38.69.109.
I put on sackeloth and humbled my soul with fasting, I behaved my self as
though it had been my friend or brother, I went heavily as one that mourns for
his mother. But in mine adversity (mark it) they rejoiced and gathered
themselves together, yea the very abiects came together against me unawares,
making mowes at me, and ceased not. We have Jacob a companion in this cross
with us, who was ill rewarded both by affection and action of Laban and his
children, we have Joseph with us, Moses and Aaron with us, all the Prophets and
Apostles with us, and Christ our master with us, whose love was lost to
thousa^ds, except a crucifige be a kind requital, and against whom he that
sat at his table lift up his heel and betrayed him. O weigh it not much, but
be content, and possess your soul in patience. For it is even one of the most
common sins of this world, 2. Tim. 3.2. etc.
in these latter days especially. Unthankful men, without natural affection,
trucebreakers, false accusers, no lovers at all of them that be good, Traitors,
and so forth, they are the flowers that flourish too fair in this end of the
world, says the Apostle. And what man or woman almost lives, that has not
drunk of this cup, to be unkindly requited for their true good will, and to
have the backs of them toward them, whose faces by good right they should
have, and their mouths filled with many loving thanks. If then company be
comfortable as the saying is, let us pluck up our hearts, and be content,
especially having such company in this cross as I have now named.

This course would be long if I should follow it fully you see by this, and I
purposed never treatises, but touches only of these matters. What should I
say? some the Lord exercises with diseases and sickness of themselves and their
own bodies, Sickness a trial.
and so did he David with chastising reins in the night season, the poor
woman with her paynefull issue by the space of twelve years, and many others
whom he dearly loved: of their children or family, and so did he that
faithful woman with her daughter, Math. 15.
that kind Father with his lunaticke son, the ruler with his daughter, Marc.
9.
the Centurion with his servant, Math. 8.
and numbers mo. Some with imprisonment wrongful and unjust, 1. King. ^2.
and so did he Joseph, Jeremy, Micheas and many mo. Some with their marriage and
match often bitter. So did he Job, Tobiah, Abigael and others. David had ill
children, and Jacob before him many a heavy heart by their behauiours. The good
Prophet had a bad servant, 1. Kings. 5.
a vild Gehazi, that practiced more than he ever learned of his master, and our
Savior Christ himself had a theeuish Judas, a full bad bird to come out of
such a nest as he had his time in. Some be rymed on by drunken tossepottes, and
so was David, though he little deserved it. And who can name the adversities of
the godly. Many, many, says the Prophet are the troubles of the righteous,
Psalm. 34*
but the Lord delivers them out of all. By this example whosoever reads
the scriptures may find out mo, observe and mark them, and gather comfort by
them, if the Lord shall please so to deal with them. And to that further
travel I refer us all, not following this course now any further, only
this I add that if you can find no example of your case fully in the
Scripture, and thereupon Satan would be busy and say, see, thou art an odd
person from all others, I warrant thee God never dealt so with any of his etc.
then believe Peter rather than him, and tell him he lies like a false devil.
For you are taught there, that the same afflictions are accomplished in your
brethren which are in the world, although you know them not. 1. Pet. 5.9. And
therefore you are no odd one, neither chastised any otherwise, than with the
rod of the righteous, whose salvation is sure, and they the Lords.

O, but you must needs give me leave to remember yet one thing ere you make
an end, and that is this. These examples are comfortable, I heartely confess,
and sweet when we find them in our several trials, but yet Satan has an
other trick to trouble many minds with all, and that is, with the measure of
our trouble. He will, till we find an example, say none are so dealt with all
that God loves, but when we have found one, then he shifteth his foot, and
suggesteth, not in that measure, and so grievously and greatly as we are. Now
what should we say to this? The measure of adversity a ^ub^ill temptation.
Truly even still search the scriptures. And as we have found there matter,
so shall we find measure, I warrant you, greater than we bear any. And to this
end mark what Job says in his 16. chapter. His archers compass me round
about, Job. 16.13.14.
he cutteth my reins, and does not spare, and powers my gaul upon the
ground. He has broken me with one breaking upon an other, and runs upon
me like a Giant. Here you see not only adversity and affliction, but even a
marvelous measure, and yet the man dear to the Lords heart that endured it.
Every word has a power to express a great temptation, if you mark them.
Compassed round about, his reins cut, not spared, his very gaull as it were
powered out, one breaking upon an other, and run upon with the Lord as with
a Giant. Are you able to say you have such measure of woe upon you? you cannot
if you will speak truth. And yet was Job for all this measure, as I say, the
Lords chosen. In the 19. chapter mark again his phrase: His armies says he
came together, Job. 19.12.
and made their way upon me, and camped about my tabernacle. Before he said,
the Lords archers, now he says, the Lords armies, still noting both great
number, and great strength. What can you or I say? Happily we may say the
Lord has shot one headless arrowe at us, to quicken us, and awake us out of
earthly and worldly security, happily an arrowe with a head, that has
somewhat pierced, let it be two or three, or twenty, alas this is not the
number of the Lords archers, this is not to feel the armies of the Lord and
his battles, even all his battles joined together against us. I pray you
therefore still mark Jobs measure, and your measure, and yet Job loved. In his
30. chapter. Thou turnest thy self cruelly against me, and art enemy unto me
with the strength of thy hand. Thou take me up and causest me to ride upon
the wind, and make my strength to fail. When he says cruelly, his meaning
is not to accuse God, but to declare the vehemence of his affliction, whereby he
was carried beside himself. And by the word, wind, he compares his afflictions
to a tempest or whirlewinde. Therefore still note the measure. We may safely
acknowledge the Lords rod upon us, but yet may we not say, it is all his rod,
when it is but a twigge. And I assure my self, if we look at Jobs measure,
ours is skarse a twigge. How then should Satan whisper any discomfort to us
for our measure, whatsoever it is, when it is not comparable to his, whom we
know notwithstanding loved. Was David lightly humbled when he said: there is
no whole part in my body by reason of my sin: when he cried, Why art thou so
sad my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? still trust in God
etc. Was it a little measure that Abraham and Isaac so wandered, tossed from
pillar to post (as we say) in perils and fears and many afflictions, and yet
contained not the promise? Was it a little measure that Jacob sustained, first
to have his own and only brother swear his death as it were, then to leave
Father and Mother, house and home, Country and friends, and to seek for a
world abroad, to serve paynefully his own uncle, and in the end to be
unkindly requited with an other than he wished: to begin other seven years
again, or else loose his desire: to be pinched in his wages, enuyed and
maliced by his own flesh, driven to depart without any farewell, pursued after,
vexed with wrongful accusations and charges, to have the wife whom he loved,
not altogether upright in judgment of religion, his bed defiled by his eldest
son, his daughter ravished and taken away, a horrible murder committed by
Simeon and Leui upon that quarrel, Joseph sold, but as he thought, murdered
by a wild beast, with many mo very bitter and smarting temptations, if you
mark the story? Thus may you then go over the Scriptures, and see the measure
of others many: compare it with yours and be truly comforted, if God so will.
For certainly we are not tried and humbled like these men, 1. Cor. 10.
your own conscience must acknowledge it, and reason will euict it, whether
you will or no. For if God lay no more upon any, than according to his ability
to bear: and our faith, when the greatest, yet is inferior to those, then
assuredly our trials are inferior also. And so their examples our true comfort
against this assault drawn from the measure that we endure. Follow then this
course, and as you read, mark not only matter of affliction, but measure, and
I warrant you this lying devil will hide his head, convinced with a truth.

Your order now leads you to reuewe how man tempts or tries man. But that
having in my opinion sufficiently been touched before, it will not be amiss
if you go to the last point, namely how Satan tempts us. The same
temptation may come from God Satan in diverse respects.
And I altogether put my self upon your direction, yet with this note by the
way, that the self same temptations may be said to proceed from Satan, that
otherwise have been said to come from God. From Satan in malice, from God in
mercy. From Satan, as they urge and persuade us to any evil contrary to the
word. From the Lord as they open to us our weakness in faith, and sundry
corruptions, driving us to his self, as to our true strength and support in
all our weakness. Which being remembered, then say we concerning this division,
that the temptations of Satan are infinite, and cannot be named of any man,
albeit felt of all men, as the Lord will give him leave to show his malice, of
some more, of some less, and of every one somewhat. Temptations in iudgem^t.
Life.

He tempts in judgment to error and heresy, he tempts in life to sin
and impiety, and what infinite branches have these two heads? The errors and
heresies that have been of old, what an heap are they, if I should take this
course, or who can tell what even yet daily he works in this behalf
throughout the world, stuffing men's heads, and filling their hearts with
great untruths.

Some he has persuaded heretofore and still no doubt will persuade, The first
temptation concerning the Church.
if God permit him, that an estate of the true Church here on earth is to be
expected more perfect and holy than in deed is true. And he tells them, that
if any Church be so separated from the world, that therein in deed and truth
all men's lives be framed according to the word of God, that is a true Church,
and if any Church be not so separated from the world, but that in it are found
some without repentance which live not according to the word of God, but have
their blots and spots, both in faith to God, and love to man, that is a false
church, from which the children of God must separate themselves, least they
should be partakers of other men's sins. So that the imperfections of a
Church, and the faults of some in the Church, not removed by and by from the
same, shall utterly take away both name and nature of a Church from that place.
A great and grievous untruth surely, and such as we may say of with S.
Hilarie: Archangeli nesciunt, angeli non audiuerunt, prophaeta non sensit,
filius ipse non edidit. The Archangels know it not, the Angels have not heard
it, the prophet has not felt it, the son of God himself has reueiled no
such thing to us. For was not Judas a wicked thief in the company of the
Apostles, and yet they for all that the flock of Christ? Has not the Lord
described the estate of this true Church militant here on earth by the
similitudes of a draw net cast into the sea, Matt 13.47.
that incloseth and compasses fish of al sorts, yea sticks and stones, slime
and mudde, without any separation till it come to the shore? Of a field, wherein
with the good wheat sown by the husbandman come up tares sown by the envious
man, and so intermingled that no clear separation can be made, but with
danger of plucking up the wheat also, till the harvest come? Of a floor
whereon lies much good wheat, Math. 3.12.
but covered almost and hid in an heap of chafe intermingled with it, till
the fanner come with his fan in his hand to purge the same, and make clean
his flower? Of a great wedding, Math. 22.1.
whereunto as good and bad are bidden; so come there some and take their
places, that yet have no wedding garments, sitting with the best till the King
come in to see the guestes, and displace them? And are not these plain proofs
what manner of Church we must content our selves withal here on earth, till the
day of perfection come, namely, even with such an one, as though considered in
Christ, Ephe. 5.26.
it be clean and without spot and wrincle: yet considered in it self it is
not so, before it come to the mark it shoots at, but in this life runs in
a race, and after two sorts is stained and impure. First, with the manifold
imperfections, frailties and wants which her very best children are burdened
withal ever, feeling with the Apostle that in their flesh dwells no good
thing, that they are yoked as he was and far worse that when they would do
good, Romans 7.18.21
evil is present with them: and secondly with a grievous mixture of many false
hipocrites and counterfeit pratlers amongst her true children, whom though she
sigh to be delivered of, and do by her authority, as she may, disburden her
self of them, yet can she never do it so clean, but that many vilde weeds
will remain till the harvest, to be then plucked up, and till then in patience
to be endured.

Let us consider the Church from her very cradle, and we shall find the state
of it after this sort. Adam in his family had Caine, with his wicked
behavior, and yet a Church. Noah had Cham, and yet a Church. Gala. 4.29.
Abraham had Ismael, a mocker and derider of Gods promises, a man borne after
the flesh, that is, after the common course of nature, and persecuting him that
was borne after the Spirit, that is, by the virtue of Gods promise, and after a
spiritual manner, and yet a Church. Isaac had Esau, Genesis 49.
and yet a Church. Jacob had great misdemeanors committed still in his
fa^milie, by all his sons envying and malicing, and most unbrotherly using
Joseph: By Ruben defiling his bed, by Simeon and Leui brethren in evil,
instruments of cruelty, and in their wrath staying so many, by Dinah his
daughter, by Rachel his wife stealing her fathers Idols, Calu. upon the place.
and but over much deceived with them, and by many other means, if we fully
peruse the story, and yet a Church. Neither did ever either Adam or Noah, or
Abraham or the rest forsake these Churches in their several families, or
refuse to pray, and to do all other duties enjoined the^ of the Lord, for any
unworthy ones among them. The^ when it came into Egypt, was it without
wrincles? When it was delivered therehence, remember we not, what falls and
faults, what blots and blemishes still still and ever appeared in that chosen
company out of all the Nations of the world? Need I to repeat their
murmurings, their reuilings, their faintings, their many and great impieties
mentioned in the story under Moses, under Joshua, and under Judges? Step to the
Kings and to the Prophets, what a state is mentioned of this Church militant
under them also ever? Were all things holy and perfect then? Let Esaias, Jeremy,
Joel, Abacuc and the rest speak. In the Priests, in the Magistrates, in the
people al things were then so corrupt, that the Prophet Esaias is not afraid to
compare Jerusalem to Sodom and Gomorrha. Religion was the^ partly contemned,
partly defiled, Esaias. 1.2. read the Chapter.
and many grievous enormities in manners abounded, so that from the sole of the
foot to the top of the head there was nothing whole, but wounds, and
swellings, and sores, full of corruptions, says the Prophet. Yet for all this
never did the Prophets, all, or any of them, erect new Churches for
themselves, wherein they might have their separated sacrifices from the rest,
offered upon any new Altars, builded to that end as more holy. But what manner
of men soever they were, In m^dio imp^orum coetu puras manus extendebant, and
cum populo iniquo and peruerso conueniebant Calu.
because the word was there, and a course of service warranted in the thick of
the wicked and in the midst of misdoers, they lifted up pure hands to the
Lord, and came together even with the wicked to pray, to sacrifice, to hear
the word, and to do their duties in the place appointed. Truly we must
think this of those holy Prophets, that if they had judged other men's sins
could have defiled their holy duties, or that any infection and contagion
might have come to the^ by meeting in those places of Gods service with the
wicked, they would have dyed an hundred times, rather than have suffered
themselves to be drawn thither. But they knew it could not, and having a
singular care of peace and unity in the Church, they therefore abhorred to
make any schism in the same, by seperating them selves from the Church. Now,
if those worthies of the Lord, for so many and so great euilles, not of one or
two men, but even almost of the whole people made a conscience yet not to
estraunge themselves from the Church, shall not you and I arrogate too much to
our selves, if we presume to do it in these days? Will not that saying of S.
Austen be laid upon us, spoken to the Donatistes upon like occasion: Finxerunt
se nimis iustos, cum totum vellent perturbare. They made themselves too holy,
when they would thus trouble all? Therefore a sweeee moderation of all good
desires according to these true presidents and holy examples assuredly would
be most acceptable to the Lord himself, as it was in these.

Come we from the Prophets to our Savior Christ himself, that if any man
make less account of the former than he should, this later may move him and
satisfy him further. What manner of Church was then, the Gospel teaches at
large, and we are not ignorant, when Christ lived and preached among the
Jews. A most corrupt estate it was and full of sores, that Christ sharply
reproved in his times. Yet neither that desperate impiety of the Pharisees,
nor that loose liberty that ouerflowed as it were the Church then, could
hinder Christ either from using the same form of serving God with the people,
or from coming into the same temple with the multitude to the public
exercises of Religion there appointed. But he would be circumcised with the
rest and presented in the temple as others were when the time came, Luc.
1.21.22.
and do all things with them appointed by the law for him to do. If any man
doubt of it, let him consider the Scripture well that says: Galat. 4.4.
When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
and made under the law, that he might redeem the^ which were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. He speaks of the Ceremonial
law by name, and therefore no question but he performed whatsoever therein was
commanded, and of man, whom he was to redeem, ought to be performed. Let him
consider also Christ's own words when he said, We worship what we know,
joining himself not with a few picked and choice Christians, but with the
whole multitude of the people of the Jews, and adding a reason that proves so
much, for salvation comes from the Jews. Which is as much, as if he should
have said, for the Religion (not of some certain) but of the whole people or
body of the Jews is a service that pleases God for his own appointment of
it, and therefore I communicate with them therein my self, and we worship what
we know together. Musc. in John page 102.
Musculus considering as much, therefore notes by our Saviors example what
care and conscience ought to be in every Christian to observe the form of his
own nation in serving God, if it may be warranted. And it is not unnoted of
many others, He entered still into their Synagogue^ and preached and prayed,
etc. on the Saboth days.
that our Savior notwithstanding the great corruptions of that Church,
communicated with it in all holy exercises, and made not an other Church by
himself of some certain better people, and yet there wanted not such even in
those evil days, diverse, as Zachary, Elizabeth, Mary, Simeon and others
besides his disciples. So that our Saviors example is plain against this
deceiving error that we speak of, namely, that any man communicating in the
public exercises of religion according to the word of God appointed, with the
wicked, should by their company there be polluted, he himself having a good
conscience, and doing his duty as he ought.

From our Savior Christ let us next come to his disciples time, and see if
they followed not the very same course, and trod not in the very same steps of
their masters practice. Let us remember the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 1.2.
which the Apostle in the Spirit of truth calls the Church of God,
sanctified, beloved, and abounding with the gifts of God. And yet in it were
many imperfections and sundry great and foul enormities. There was envying,
Chap. 3.3.
and strife and divisions, one holding of Paul, an other of Apollos, an other
of Cephas, in so much that the Apostle tells them they are carnal, and he
could not speak unto them as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal. There
was puffing, and swelling, 1. Cor. 4.18. and chap. 5.2.21.
and pride in such order, that the Apostle asks, shall I come unto you with a
rod, or in love. There was fornication, 1. Cor. 5.1.
and even such as is not named among the Gentiles, one had his Fathers wife,
and they that saw it and knew it were puffed up, and sorowed not, neither
punished as they ought so foul a wickedness. Chap. 6.
There was quarelling and brabling, and busy going to law one with an other,
and that under infidels. Men and women that were married together made
separations and diuorses of themselves one from an other, of their own
authorities; 7.5.13.
and when themselves listed, without word and warrant, without right and
conscience which the Apostle rebukes and tells them might not be so. 1. Cor.
6. 1. Cor. 10.
There was going to the profane bankets of the Gentiles, and eating of things
sacrificed to Idols, 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 12.
with great offense to the weak. The v^ry Sacrament of the Lords Supper was
greatly profaned, Those Spiritual gifts which the Lord gave them they
abused, bragging ambitiously of them, and so robbing God of his praise for
them, having no consideration of their brethren to edify the^ by an humble
mind submitting it self to the capacity of the weakest. On the other side
they that were inferiors in gifts enuyed the superiors and went about to make a
departure, so that all that body was as it were skattered and rent in pieces.
Chap. 14.
That notable gift of tongues and languages they greatly abused neglecting
prophecy. And what should I say, the very resurrection, that great Article of
a christians faith was called in question in that Church, and yet for all that
and al these that I have thus named, 1. Cor. 15.
it ceased not to be a Church, and the Church of God, and Sanctified and
beloved and blessed, and made rich with many graces, neither for these blots
might any man have been justified then to have given it the black stone of
condemnation, and to have separated himself from it as from no Church. Let us
remember the Galathia^s, Galat. 1.6.
of whom the Apostle complains, 3.1.
that they were so soon removed away unto an other Gospel, 4.9.
from him that had called them in the grace of Christ, that they were
bewitched, not to obey the truth, but to turn again unto impotent and
beggarly rudiments, seeking to be in bondage to them again as at the
beginning, that they observed days, months, times, and years and so forth,
every of which was a great blot and spot, and all together a very great
declyning from a right course, yet nevertheless does the Apostle in the Spirit
of truth salute them as the Church of God, and so names them, Chap. 1.2.
and so takes them. To the plain proving of this truth, that imperfections in
a Church, where the word is preached truly, and the Sacraments administered
according to the institution of Christ, takes not away the name of a Church.
And mark it in Paul, because we seek not now other examples, how
notwithstanding these great blemishes in Corinth, Galatia, and other places
that he came to, yet he ever without any scruple ^ntered into their Churches,
into ye Jews Synagogues, and into all places, to pray, and to interpret the
Scriptures. Yea he made no doubt to exhibit himself in the Temple to call
upon God, and to use other lawful ceremonies, together with others that used
them, although the wickedness and impiety of the Scribes and Pharisees which
were there then, was exceeding foul and great. Neither does he ever persuade
any of the better sort, when he speaks of the faults either in Corinth or
Galatia, or other Churches, to forbear all communion with those Churches till
things were better reformed, but only exhorts them to beware the vices and
evils he speaks of, and never mencioneth any separation. Which assuredly he
would have done, if it had been, as satan by this temptation that now we handle
seeks to persuade. Therefore I pray you let us all note it and think of it.
And as he did not forbid others such communion, so himself did not break that
fellowship, as already has appeared and more may if we mark his practice. For
he says to the Philippians, Philip. 2.21.
that he had no body like Timotheus, but al did seek their own and not that
which is Jesus Christ's* Yet never do we find that he separated him self from
their company for fear of partaking with their sins. And diverse such other
places there are. What might be added of those famous Churches in the
Revelation, Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira, and others? Does not the Spirit of God
lay down their blemishes, and shows what he had against them, and those no
little things some of them, and yet yeldeth them the names and titles of
Churches and calls their ministers angels. What then if a man in those days
should have taken offense at these wants of these Churches, and weaknesses of
men, and have said they have preaching, Preaching without reformation.
but they are not reformed as they should be, and therefore I will cut my self
from them, and communicate no longer with them? would it have been allowed?
Consider the Lord Jesus his preaching, with more holiness and power than ever
any else could or shall. Mar. 9.9.
Were all reformed that heard him, nay were his own disciples reformed wholly?
How then were they so often rebuked of the Lord and that justly. Esai. 6.9.
Ezekiel. 3.7.
Consider the Prophets that were hidden prophecy, and did it carefully, and
yet were told that the people would not obey them. Consider the Apostle that
says we are a sweet savor to God in some that perish. Consider that he
which wills Paul to plant, and Apollo to water, reserueth the gift of
increase to himself, and gives it, where, when, and so far as he pleases.
So that if the Lords ministers in very great heaviness and continual sorrow of
heart would wish themselves even separated from Christ for their brethrens
winning, yet shall no more come to the father than Christ will draw, and this
happy change must be at his good pleasure, not at their desire. How then may
we safely fall out with the preaching, and preacher, and with the Church and
her children for want of that which only GOD must give, and the best preachers
have failed to obtain, though faithfully doing their duties, namely a full
reformation as we would. Shall that holy word not reform me because it
reformeth not others? shall it not be a savor to me of life, to life because
to others it is a savor of death to death? If he offer me a penny shall I
bid him keep it, except he will give others as much at my direction? May not
the Lord do with his own as it pleases him for me? or shall I grudge to
the Spirit his blowing where he lists? O fearful falling out with the Lord
and his offered goodness, if it be considered earnestly. We should remember
again when we look so after the fruits of amendment in a Church, Note.
and stumble so dangerously for want of what we wish, that Pharisees make
greater shows to some men's eyes than poor Publicanes do, and yet the one
justified more than the other with a righteous God. We should remember that
Elias was deceived when he thought that there were no mo that were reformed
but himself. Our eyes cannot see all men, neither can we ever know the work
of the word preached. Inward graces are often where we thought not, and
outward carry, more then we know. Some judged lead proves fined gold, and
glistring gold that seemed to be, proves drossie lead. A tender conscience,
sweet, feeling an hope in Christ and his promises, inward cryings by faithful
prayer, holy thoughts and meditations, sweet pricks and melting motions,
remorse for sin, and spiritual fights, humility of heart, and peace of
mind, patience, joy, and a number such, they be secret graces not always
known and discerned of every man where in truth they are, at least not in such
measure as in deed they are. And therefore since we cannot know all, either
people, or graces, wrought by the word preached, and there may be a want
as well in our not seeing all with Elias, as in men's misdoings, greatly should
we fear to condemn and judge the Churches of GOD, for not answering their
teaching with any reformation. It is an earnest charge, Matthew. 18.9.
and of a mighty God. See that ye despise not one of these little ones. For I
say unto you that in heaven their Angels always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven. What greater contempt, than to think that Publicane is not
like me. I am reformed, I am sanctified, I have received the holy Ghost, others
have not, and these by name have not so. O take heed. Judge not thus rashly an
other man's servant. All is not gold that glistereth, neither all bowers of
their knees to Baal that are yet so thought to be, even of a Prophet. Lastly
we should lift up our heads and open our eyes in a loving heart a little
wider, that we may see the profits of the word, and the gracious mercies of
the Lord to any Church ever, and with as hungry a heart delight to discern
the graces of men, as the faults of men. Yea much more. The reformation of many
Churches, ye^ judged not reformed at all.
And if we see many superstitions banished, many abuses amended, many snared
consciences and fettered souls enlarged, true love of diverse good things, and
true hatred of diverse evil things wrought: Ougly and often oaths in many
decayed, knowledge both in youth and age increased, the hearing of the word
with Prayers and Sacraments diligently frequented, private regard of families
in the governors of them greatly amended, diet and apparel tempred, the poor
relieved, Princes obeyed, peace maintained, etc. to confess then to the due
glory of a gracious God that this is something, and this measure some,
although not all. Love spieth any good where it loves, and love covers many
things that are not well. Surely it does not for wants deny the good, neither
for some, condemn all. And thus if we would look at Churches and children of
the Churches, no doubt, no doubt Satan's comb would be cut touching this
temptation. If any man will say, show me these reformed ones and good ones in
a Church: what answers a learned father. Quid hac re opus est? Annon satis
est eos in ecclesia esse. Qua^obrem cum ipsa communionem habetote, manete in
ecclesia, and ad sacros coetus and sacramenta, quemadmodum oportet, accedite.
Etiamsi enim multi impuri and publici peccatores non mundati in ea sint, tamen
vos ab illis non polluemini, non magis quam Apostolos Iudaei polluerunt. Quin
potius videte ne a vobis ipsis polluamini, propterea quod multum vobis
tribuitis, iudicatis omnes, and plurimum vobis placetis. Itaque spiritualis
superbia and contemptus nimium vestris animis insidet. That is: What needs
this? Suffices it not yt they are in the Church? Wherefore with the Church do
you communicate, abide ye in her, and come ye as you ought unto the assemblies
and Sacraments. For although there be many impure ones, and public offenders
not reformed in the same, yet shall not you be defiled by them, no more than
the Apostles were defiled of the Jews. Rather take you heed that ye be not
defiled of your selves, because ye attribut so much to your selves: ye judge
all men, and very much please your selves. Therefore spiritual pride and
contempt overmuch rests in your minds. Thus do we see the word of God
against this temptation teaching strength. If I should adioyne the witnesses of
this truth from time to time, I might be long. A little let me do it, though
not much, because I have been so long already. Cyprian spoke thus in his time
full earnestly. Et si videntur in ecclesia zizania. etc. Lib. 3. Epist. 5.
Although there be tares seen in the Church, and impure vessels of dishonor:
yet is there no cause why we should depart from the Church: only let us
endeavor that we may be wheat our selves, and vessels of gold or silver unto
honor. And as for the earthen vessels, it is the Lords proper office and
prerogative to break them, that has only the non bar, neither may any man
challenge to himself that which is peculiar to the Son only, namely to be
able to make clean the floor, and to purge away the chafe, and all tares by
man's judgment. For proud is this obstinacy, and sacrilegious is this
presumption, which wicked madness takes to it self. Parmen.
Austen in his time thus. There were many good men in the old Church before
Christ. Dic mihi, quis tunc iustorum separauit sibi altar? Tell me, what one
of all these just men in those days made a separated Altar for himself from
the rest. Yet, multa scelera admittebat iniquus populus ille. Many wicked
things committed then that wicked people. They sacrificed to Idols, they killed
the Prophets, and nemo tamen iustorum recessit ab vnitate, and yet none of the
godly departed from the unity. Vno templo miscebantur, sed mixti non erant
cord. They were mingled or joined together in one temple, but they were not of
one mind: meaning, they approved not any evil that was done. Si hoc est
consentire malefacientibus, esse cum eis in ecclesia, consentiebat etiam ipse,
etc. If this be to consent to evil, to be with evil men in the Church, 2.
Cor. 11.26.
then consented he to false brethren, that says, he was with them in peril of
them, Philip. 1.16.
and that suffered those impure preachers amongst the Philippians. Zizania ergo
vel paleam Catholicae segetis nobiscum copiosissime accusent, sed nobiscum
far patientissime non recusent. Wherefore let them with us find fault with the
tares and chafe, as they please, freely, but the^ let them with us again
endure them patiently. Et propter malos filios non separemur a matre. And for
other evil sons let us not shake of and say farewell to our mother. For we
do not for the chafe forsake the Lords floor, Epist. 48.
we do not break out of the Lords Net for any bad fish enclosed therein
with us, we do not run away from the Lords flock, for the Gotes that are
there to be separated in the end: finally we do not go out of ye house of
God for the vessels therein made unto dishonor. And a number such like sayings
has Austen in these books, and diverse other places of his works, if this
were my purposed course: but they need not. Consider what Master Calvin
says, and let both you and me mark his judgment. Let us learn, says he, to
give this honor to the word of God and his holy Sacraments, that wheresoever
we see the^, there we acknowledge a Church. And let both these points remain
established as most certain truths: Calvin aduersus Anabap.
first that he is without all just excuse that willingly forsakes the outward
Communion of the Church where the word of God is preached, and the Sacraments
administered. Secondly, Institut. 4.1.19.
that the faults neither of few, nor many, can any whit hinder us from
testifying our faith rightly by use of such ceremonies as God has ordained.
Because that by no other man's unworthiness, whether he be Pastor or private
man, a godly conscience can be hurt, neither are the holy mysteries less pure
or profitable to a godly man, because together with him the wicked also handle
them. Finally, if all things in the Church be not so well as they should be
concerning correction of faults, 4. Book. 12.11
yet let neither private men therefore depart by and by from the Church, nor
the Pastors themselves, if they cannot according to their hearts desire purge al
things that need amendment, therefore throw away their ministry, or with
unwonted rigorousnes trouble the whole Church. Many other places has this man
to this end very worthy reading, if I might both note all and be brief too.
But it cannot be, and therefore I follow him no further. Only I request that
we may diligently observe it, how Satan has ever tempted the children of God
to receive this error, and how faithful teachers withstood it still. And if
ever he deceive any, what holds them in, and hinders their reformation?
Surely, quia vanam gloriam hominum attendunt, and insensatorum non contemnunt
opprobrium, Aug. epist. 40. etc.
qui dicturi sunt, quare modo. Because they regard the vain praise of men,
and do not contemn the speech of the foolish, which will say: Why now? or is
he now come home, etc. Hebr. 10.22. and read all.
And with that heavenly counsel of the spirit of God I conclude this matter:
Let us not forsake that fellowship that we have one with an other, as the manner
of some is. The Lord make it sink in eiery man's heart to his good.

The second temptation concerning the Ministers.
OThers he persuades that the whole matter of the word and Sacraments
depends upon the ^olynes and goodness of the minister, so yt if he have any
spot or crime, the^ may there be no receiving of these things at his hands. A
most poisoned dart also of a destroying devil, whersoeuer he throws it, and
worthy to be carefully known of us al, how hurtful and prejudicial to the
glory of God it is. Not that ministers should not be good (for the word is
plain, and there is no heart seasoned with one corn of the Spirit of God, but
it wishes that all offenses were drowned in the depth of the Sea that come
this way, and that ministers, as they are called in the word Angels, so even
with Angels purity, if it were possible, they might walk in this world before
all men) but that Gods mysteries man not fall by man's miseries, and his holy
ordinances cease to be holy, for unholy disp^sers. Know we therefore,
touching this temptation, that whosoever hears the word preached, and
receives the Sacraments in their times administered, he must ever regard and
carry his mind to the Lord himself and his institution, and not to the
minister. Which Lord secretly works in the hearts of his chosen, what
man^er of men soever the ministers be. For who is Paul, says ye Apostle, 1.
Cor. 3.5.
or who is Apollos, but the ministers by whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave
to every man. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. The
minist^r is not any thing, mark (...)*
So the^, neither is he that pla^teth any thing neither he that waters, but
God that gives the increase. If the minister be good, it is best for
himself, and it is thus far good to the people, that they have a good
example, who for their weakness are very hardly drawn without it, as Austen
says, but the Lords ordinance receives no increase of goodness from him, if
he be good, neither yet decrease of holiness, i^ he be bad? for it is true, even
in this case also, that the Apostle said: What though some did not believe? To.
3.3.
shall their unbelief make the faith of GOD of no effect? God forbid. Yea, let
God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might be
justified in thy ^ayings, and clear when thou art iud^ed. The ministers badnes
may not mak^ the Lord untrue in his promises, neither ^ans corruption, most
holy things of none e^fect. The Lords is all, honor, virtue, power, grace,
and salvation: the ministers is only the outward action and ministry. In
which respect they are called the disposers of Gods mysteries. If the disposer
be evil, God is good that so vouchsafes, man is not worse that so receives.
They are the Lords messengers, and the truth of the message never hangs upon
the bearers quality. Men's personages differ that carry messages, and yet the
message for all that is the same. Our fathers before us in this case considered
the similitudes of wax and water. Of wax that takes his print as well of a
leaden Seal as a golden, of water that is the same whether the conduite pi^e
be wood or copper. And thereby they considered that Gods holy mysteries much
m^re are the same to the faithful, by whom soever delivered. For it is possible
yt liquor man be changed by a vessel, but never the^e things by a minister.
The Scribes and Pharisees that sit in Moses seat, says our Savior, whatsoever
they bid you do^, Math. 23.1.
do. But after their works do not. For they say and do not. Which words ou^
Savior would never have spoken, if eit^er the minister might have defiled the
word, or any man be allowed for the faults of the minister to have rejected and
refused the Lords mysteries. There reigned at this present amongst this order
many grievous iniquities, as insatiable avarice, turning al Religion to lucre
and gain, intolerable ambition and pride, shameless hypocrisy, gross
interpretations of the word of God, and what not? They said and did not: Romans
7.18. Iam. 3.2. 1. John. 1.8. Math. 6.12. Psalm. 143.2.
a most grievous thing in a minister, further than humane frayltie forces,
whereof all are full, and the very greatest have complained: yet would not the
Lord have the offense of all these to make vile his holy word, that is ever
precious, or to hinder the hearing of it even at their mouths. Let us take
heed then how we stubbur^ly cross the Lord Jesus. He says, recei^e their
words, refrain their deeds, let not us say, we will none of their words,
for their deeds. He says you may receive their words and be clear of their
deeds, let us not say, we cannot receive their words except we approve their
evil, and be partakers of their sins. This is not reverence to God, nor
obedience to his truth. Were it not gross madness, if traueling on the way,
Note.
and showed by some that we went the very right way to our iourneies end, yet
we would go out of the same, because he that showed us, goes not with us, but
goes an other way? No earthly journey may be matched with our spiritual
journey to heaven. For the places we go to, the good we get, if we keep the
way, the dangers if we do not, do all greatly differ. And therefore if his
example that has truly told us a way on earth to an earthly good, should not
carry us out of the same, much less should his that has told us the way to
heaven an everlasting good, do the same. Let him go his own course at his
own peril, if he have truly to^d us our right way, we should take it
constantly, not only without company, but even against all example whatsoever
to the contrary, being private men. The Magistrate has a further authority in
his hand, even sharply to punish such offense given by them that say and do
not. Again were it not as gross to reject the food of our bodies, and to dye
for hunger, because he that sets good meat before us, will eat none with
us himself? To refuse good gold because the ground is bad wherhence it was
dug? Judge then what madness for the wants of man, to refuse far greater
matters than all these? Remember furthermore what our Savior Christ says in
the 6. of John. Have not I chosen you twelve, John 6.64.70.
and one of you is a deuell? And there are some among you that believe not. And
yet even then, when Christ thus called him a devil, was Judas an Apostle, and
preached, and baptized as the rest did, and neither word nor Sacrament lost
their dignity to the true rece^uers, for his great indignity that deliuer^d
them. Malus seruus praedicabat, sed Christis erat in fide. An evil servant
preached, says Austen, but Christ was in the faith. The Apostle to the
Philippians we know a^^o has this testimony. Some preach Christ, says he,
Philip. 1.1 etc.
even through envy and strife and some also of good will. The one p^rt
preaches Christ of contention, and ^ot purely (that is not with pure mind,
for otherwise their doctrine was pure) Supposing to add more affliction to my
ban^s. But the other of love knowing, that I am set for the defense of the
Gosp^ll. What then? Yet Christ is preached all manner of ways, whether it be
under a pretense, or sincerely, and I therein joy and will joy. What playner
proof could we have if we would wish one, that for the faults of the
minister the word and ministry may not be rejected. It was Austens true
judgment many a year ago. Omnia sacramenta, cum obsint indigne tractantibus,
prosunt tamen per eos digne sumentib^s, sicut verbu^ testatur: Quae dicunt
facit^, quae autem faciunt facere nolite. All Sac^aments though they hurt them
that han^^e them unworthily, yet profit they them that by such receive them
worthily, even ^s the word proves, that says: all things ^hey bid you do,
do: but do not as themselves ^o, Math. 23.
And a little after that again: Although ^he Spirit of God be wanting to the
salua^ion of the minister, ministerium tamen e^^s non deserit, quo per eum
salutem opere^^r aliorum. Yet is he not wanting to his ^inisterie, thereby to
work the salvation ^^others. The Apostle himself confirming a much, when he
says: If I preach the Gospel willingly, Cor. 9.17.
I have a reward, but if I do it against my will, notwithstanding the
dispensation is committed unto me. That is, Aliis prodest quibus hoc dispenso,
non mihi, qui fictu^ sum: Augustine Contrae Parmen.
my office and calling urges me to do it, and it shall profit others that I
do so unwillingly, but not my self. Again the same father speaking of
Christ's being baptized by John: says thus: Voluit Dominus a seruo, and ille
per quem facta sunt omnia ab illo qui factus est inter omnia, baptizari, vt
doceret humilitatem, and ostenderet, non interesse, quis a quo baptizetur, dum
eo baptismo, quo baptizandus est, baptizetur. The master would be baptized of
his servant, and he that made al, of him that was made amongst all, to teach
humility* and to show, that it preiudiceth not what manner of minister
baptizeth, so that the baptism ^e as it ought to be, that he baptizeth with.
Neither would Christ (says he) have refused to be baptized of the Pharisees,
if they had used to baptize: for when he was cirumcised, John was not sought
for, neither refused he that temple that was a d^nne of thieves. Quapropter
sieve a fideli, sieve a perfido dispensatore sacramentu^ baptismi quisque
percipiat, spes ei omnis in Christo sit, ne sit maledictus qui spem ponit in
homine. Wherefore whether of a faithful, or unfaithful, or unfaithful
steward, a man receive the sacrament of baptism, let his hope be steadfastly
fixed upon Christ, least it be said: Cursed be he that trusts in man. If
he depend upon the goodness of the minister, against Cresconius thus.
Baptizant, quantum attinet ad visibile ministerium, and boni, and mali.
Inuisibiliter autem per eos baptizat, cuius est visibile captisma, and
inuisibilis gratia. Here baptize, in respect of the visible ministry, both
good and bad. But inuisibly by them baptiseth he, whose is both the visible
baptism and the invisible grace. Afterward again in the third book: but thou will ask me, says he, whether is better, a good minister, or a bad. And I
must needs answer thee, that in respect of example to the people, that depend
so much thereon, that without it they think every thing painful and hard that
God commands, a good minister is best. But in respect of the baptism and
sacrament it self: Si tanto est melius quod accipitur, quanto est melior per
quem traditur: tanta est in accipientibus baptismorum varietas, qua^ta in
ministris diuersitas meritorum: If that should be so much better by how much he
was better that ministered it, then must there be as great differences betwixt
men's baptismes as betwixt their gifts, graces, and qualities that did baptize,
which were horrible to affirm. Paul was better than Apollos in respect of grace
given. Was therefore his baptism better? God forbid. Per ministros enim
dispares, dei munus aequale est, quia non illorum, sed Dei est. For by
ministers far unlike, the given gift of God is like, because it is his, not
theirs, concludes Austen truly. Else woe was to them that Judas baptized. And
they had need to lament such baptism.

Remember master Caluins judgment and similitude. As it is (says he) amongst
men, if a letter be sent, so the hand and seal be known, it skilleth not what
qualities he was of that brought it: so must it suffice us in the sacraments,
to acknowledge the hand and seal of our God, what manner of man soever the
bearer be that delivers them. For it hurt the Jews nothing that they were
circumcised of those impure Priests and Apostataes, that then were, neither
needed they to be circumcised again. For indeed (says an other) the
Sacraments take not their excellency and worthiness of him yt ministers
them, though he be never so holy, neither be they disgraced or weakened, though
the minister be wicked and evil. The hand of the receiver being without faith,
makes the Sacraments, that of themselves be good, to be unto him of no force,
because of his unbelief, but a wicked minister cannot in any wise make
frustrate, or deceive the faith of the ungodly receiver. Our Savior Christ
baptized none whilste he was upon earth, but only preached and his disciples
baptized, John. 4.2.
says the Gospel. And S. Paul continuing in Corinth a year and six months,
where God said unto him in the night by a vision he had much people, Act. 18.11.
taught the word of God among them, and preached, but baptized none, saving
Crispus, and Gaius, and the householde of Stephanus, and thanketh God that he
had not when he saw what division fell out, 1. Cor. 1.14.
one saying I am Paul's, another, I am Apollos etc. And Musculus with others
agree with Ambrose that Peter baptized not Cornelius and his company, Petrus
cornelij domum, non ipse, baptizauit, cum coram esset, sed iusse^ baptizari.
Musc. in John. 4.2.
but commanded them to be baptized. Now none of all these would have thus
done, we must needs think, if better ministers had made better Sacraments to
the receivers. But even the contrary, with all endeavor and pain, in a zeal
to the Lords people, that they might have that holy ordinance with greatest
good. How should Paul have thanked God with a conscience that he baptized no
mo, Aug. Epist. 48. page 188.
when it should have bin a very grievous sin in him not to have done it, if his
excellency above other ministers could have given grace to the Lords
sacrament? Therefore this very one thing if there were no mo, setleth us fully
and firmly touching this point. Yet in deed it is a great deal more, that our
Savior baptized never an one, who was of all ministers the best without
comparison, and most kindly and carefully addicted to man's good every way. For
why was it, may we with most great probability think, but least his most
excellent dignity above all men should work in the receivers of that
baptism, some conceit of their baptism above others baptized by far
inferior ministers, and so cause dissension in the Church among them.
Wherefore we see even in this omissio^ of our savior Christ, his divine
wisdom foreseeing the venom of this error, to measure the word and sacraments
by the worthiness of the minister, and carefully cutting the throat of it in
his time. It was truly ever a wrong to the Lord, and his holy mysteries, ever
condemned of the Church of God, and we must abhor it. Si malus sacerdos,
deponendus erat, si no^ possit deponi, tolerandus intra rete. If the minister
be naught, says S. Austen, he should be displaced, if he cannot be displaced,
he must be endured within the not. For upon our dislikings of men, to refuse
the Lord and the means of our salvation, it is a more fearful impiety, than
yt it needs amplification. The very thought of it strikes a terror into my
soul, that I dust and worms should except against the graces of my creator,
unless the officer of them to me from him be qualified to my liking. For, as
we live, the Lord will be a swift judge, and even a very consuming fire one
day against this hainouse contempt of himself and his mercies, and the having
of them in respect of persons. O beloved our time is now to be wise and
learned, and to kiss the Son in his graces, least he be angry, and we
perish off from the earth. If we do not, mercy passes, judgment comes,
and warned people must both dye in their sin and carry their blood themselves
for ever.

The third temptation concerning Communicants.
SOme again are tempted and troubled with scruples and doubts, concerning
such as are admitted to the Lords table, and whom satan cannot otherwise win
to despise that holy Sacrament, by this means he most mightily undermines
and causes them to forbear, both their great comfort and bounden duty. For
whersoeuer says he to them the unclean are not put apart, and the evil
separated from the good by ecclesiastical censure, there if a Christian
communicate, he is defiled with other men's sins. And therefore to the end
ye may not be polluted with the company of such, you must forbear, nay refuse
and utterly abhor al receiving of the Supper of the Lord but with a choice
company of select and holy ones. But is this true now that other men's sins
never consented to by me do defile me, if I receive with them? God forbid. The
flat contrary is a ruled case in divinity and was ere we were borne amongst
the learned and godly of al times. And as it were with one voice they have
affirmed it in this and such like sort: That a Christian man should be sorry and
grieved if he see that most holy Sacrament abused of any wicked and bad ones
which are admitted unto it, and endeavor as much as in him lies, yt if may not
be so, but yet may he not himself deprive himself of the Sacrament, nor
withdraw himself from the Church, but both take it for a true Church
notwithstanding this blemish, and continue in her society and fellowship so
long as the word is preached, and the Sacraments administered therein, without
any separation from it for this cause. And the proofs hereof have partly been
aledged before in the examples of the godly Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and Christ himself. In the Church of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus and others,
wherein though there were great blemishes, as has been showed, yet were they
never commanded one to avoid an others company at those exercises that the
Lord in common enjoined all, and left not to their liberty to use or not use:
They separated themselves carefully from those crimes and faults that they
rebuked and disliked in others, but from their Churches and holy exercises,
they separated not themselves, but entered into their Synagogues at al times,
wheresoever they came, and when they were at prayers, prayed with them,
preached to them, and partaked with them in commanded duties, neither were
they once hurt by their so doing. Then further may we add in this matter of
communicants that which truly we should not lightly weigh or consider, but very
earnestly think of. Namely that we are bidden to examine our selves when we
come to that table. If the Lord had pleased, 1. Cor. 11.
he could as easily have bidden us examine one on other, or every man the whole
Church. And certainly he would have done it, if other men's sins might have
defiled us, and the company of the unworthy ones have polluted them that come
with the very best preparation of themselves unto it. Yea and with what
diligence in deed ought we all to do it, if this doctrine were true. Surely
my conscience could never receive that Sacrament in peace except I knew all
men as well as my self, since their evil may as well hurt me as mine own.
Calvin institut. 4. book 1.15. read it all.
But now that he requires only of every man the proof of themselves, he
teaches thereby plainly that it nothing hurts us if any unworthy do thrust
themselves in amongst us, so that we be prepared, the same do these other
words also. Sibi iudicium manducat. Aug. tract in Ihon. 50.
He eats and drinks his own damnation. Sibi non tibi. His own damnation,
not thine, says Austen. Ergo tolera malos bonus, vt venias ad praemia bonorum,
ne mittaris in penam malorum. Therefore thou being good, endure the evil, that
thou may come to the rewards of the good, and not be sent unto the
punishment of the evil. ^d^ersus Anabap. artic. 2. page 579.
Calvin thought this a strong place against this temptation, therefore he
urges both these members against it fully. In these words of Saint Paul,
says he, two things are to be noted. First that to eat the bread of the Lord
unworthily, is not to communicate in their company that are unworthy, but not
rightly to prepare our selves, and to weigh our own faith and repentance.
Secondly that when we will receive this Sacrament we begin not with others,
and fall in examining them, but that we try our selves, and set our eyes that
way. For truly if all things be considered well, they that have so much
leisure to examine others, in them selves they are most negligent and
forgetful. For upon mine own experience, says he, I know one yet alive,
that carried headlong with this nicenes that he would not receive with us for
some men's faults that pleased him not, he separated himself quite from our
company. And yet in the mean time had them in his own house of most lewd
behavior. When I knew it, I got one to admonish him (for of my self says
Master Calvin he would take nothing) and to ask what he meant to be so
strict in the Church, a house not in his government, and so faulty in his
own house where he had government. Must he needs be defiled in the Church
by unworthy communicants, and clear at home from so near evil. And it
pleased God to work with him, says he, that he saw his folly, and afterward
reconciled himself both to the Church and me, confessing at last, that our
chief and first care must be of our selves and our family, next and secondly
of others. And how? Not for dislike of the^, or hatred, because they do not so
well as they ought, to separate our selves from the Church, but to correct them
and amend them, and to bring them into the way, or according to our places to
procure their removing if they will not. Or if we cannot effect that, then to
leave all to the Lord to perform and make better. Thus far Master Calvin,
not unworthy our earnest noting, though it be very long. And truly mark it
again, that in saying his own damnation, he tyeth the harm that comes by
his unworthy receiving to himself, and stretches it not to others, which yet
needs he must have done, if the company of any at that table did defile the
godly. He must have said, he eats and drinks to his own damnation, and
all others that receive with him and know him. But God forbid. Then, was ever
the Sacrament more holy and purely administered, than Christ Jesus himself did
with his disciples? Yet even there and then, Bullingers reasons of his
presence. co^trae Anabap. page 230.
says Ambrose, Chrysostom, Austen and others was wicked Judas. For the
Evangelists say, he sat down with the twelve, and Luke makes mention that
Christ admonished him partly before, and partly after Supper, which the Lord
Jesus would never have suffered, if his company might have defiled the other
worthy receyuers there present. And concerning Judas, I pray you consider what
the scripture says. First it was said of him before the Supper, that he was a
thief and carried the bag, and for that cause grudged the expense of the
ointment, John. 1^.
and said it might have been sold and given to the poor, not in deed and
truth caring for the poor. In regard whereof Austen says, Aug in John tract.
50.
Judas was not then first evil when he made his match to betray him for so
much money, but before even from the first beginning, never following Christ
cord, sed corpore, with heart, but with body.

Secondly, it is testified in Luke, that before the Supper the Devil was
entered into him, Luc. 22.3.
and that he had been with the high Priests and Captains, and made his
match with them, communing with them how he might betray Christ unto them.
Math. 26.23. etc.
Thirdly, even to the Disciples themselves openly at table was manifested by
giving of a soppe that he was a Traitor, and should show it upon his own
master. Therefore it was not altogether hid what manner of man Judas was. Yet
(says S. Austen) Talis Judas cu^ sanctis discipulis vndecim intrabat, and
exibat: ad ipsam dominica^ coena^ pariter accessit: de vno pane and Petrus and
Judas accepit. Such a Judas went in and came out with the eleven, came to the
same supper of the Lord with them, and of the one bread received both Peter
and Judas. Quid ergo voluit Dominus noster Jesus Christus (fratres mei)
admonere ecclesiam suam, quando vnum perditum inter duodecim habere voluit,
nisi vt malos toleremus, ne corpus Christi diuidamus. What therefore would the
Lord Jesus Christ (my Brethren) admonish and teach his Church, when amongst his
twelve he would have one lost and bad one, but that in the Church militant
here we must endure some evil ones, least in not doing it, we should rent
asunder and divide the body of Christ. Conuersari enim cum eis potuit Judas,
eos inquinare non potuit: For, be in their company Judas might, but defile them
he could not. We see therefore this fathers judgment touching this matter
plainly, and to it may be added this question, 1. Cor. 7.13.
how the faithful wife may abide with an unfaithful husband all the days of
her life, and not be the worse: and we may not come to Gods table, or to
prayers for an hour, in ye company of unreformed ones, but their sins shall
cleave to us. The companyings together differs most greatly, if we mark the
several circumstances, of a wife with her husband, and of two men in the
church together. How then may we be warranted to refrain that most holy and
comfortable sacrament, for their sakes, who though they be trespassers, yet ask
they mercy at Gods hands, Et hoc testantur, eo ipso quod accedunt ad coena^.
And testify as much even by their very coming and offering themselves to the
Lords table. To judge rightly of our Brethren, our corruption assuredly is
great, and we should often think of it, and fear it greatly. By nature we are
full of suspicion, and as well where no cause in truth is, as where cause is.
We believe evil too fast, and good too slowly. We amplify things, and make
small matters great matters, judging men many times worse through our
corruption, than indeed they are before God by their transgression. And how
dangerous a rule then is this, to measure them by, that must be allowed to the
Lords table, if we receive with them. When this temptation was strong in the
minds of the Anabaptists, remember how crookedly this line guided them in the
choice of worthy receivers. If any man (says Bullinger) hang down his head,
Lib. 6. cap. 9. Anabap.
and counterfeit humility, although in mind he be most polluted, filthy, and
foul, and despise the word, yet shall he be accounted a most holy and good
one, and worthy to receive the sacrament. But if he be more open and merry, and
subject to the common faults of humane frayltie, yet far from any
dissimulation, trusting in his heart and soul firmly to the Lords mercy,
single and sincere toward God, that that he is, confessing his sins: such
an one, forasmuch as he has not yet satisfied the Anabaptists for his
faults, neither is allowed of them, and thought as yet worthy enough, shall be
separated from the Lords table. And yet the sinful publican smiting his breast,
Luc. 18.
was better allowed of the Lord Jesus, than the just Pharisie with all his
righteousness. When many unclean did eat of the passover which Ezekias the
king caused to be kept, 2. Chron. 30.
did their Brethren refuse to eat because they did eat also, or did their
company pollute them that were clean any thing? Consider it well, and see if you
can find either: yet the parties themselves that were not sanctified and
cleansed, faulted, and were prayed for. Wherefore we may say with Saint Austen,
Non propter malos bonos deseramus, sed propter bonos malos sufferamus. Let us
not forsake the good for the evil, but let us endure the evil for the good.
Yet must we think Saint Austen and all good men wishes their separation as
far as may be without plucking up the wheat also, and renting a sunder the
body of Christ. And so plainly show those words. Si non possunt excludi,
excludantur vel de cord. If they cannot be excluded, exclude them at least in
thy heart: that is, approve not in heart and judgment their fault. Cyprianus
and alia frumenta dominica cum auaris and rapacibus, cum his qui regnu^ Dei non
possidebunt, non laicis, vel quibuscunque clericis, sed and ipsis episcopis
panem Domini manducabant. Cyprian and others of the Lords wheat did eat the
bread of the Lord, and drink his cup with the covetous and raueners, with
them that shall not possess Gods kingdom, not lay men, or common Clergy men,
but even with the Bishops themselves. And it sufficed them to be separated
from such in heart, in life, and manners, in a great regard to keep peace and
unity for the good of the weak, least they should tear the members of the
body of Christ by sacrilegious schisms. Calvin writes to Farellus in an
Epistle, that being asked this question whether it was lawful to receive the
communion at a bad ministers hands, and with bad company admitted thereunto,
he answered to both in effect as follows. Tantum debere inter Christianos
esse odium schismatis, vt semper, quoad licet, refugiant. Tantam ministerij ac
sacramentorum reuerentiam esse oportere, vt vbicunque extare haec cernant,
ecclesiam esse censeant, etc. That there ought to be in Christians such a
detestation of Schism, that as near as they may, they ever fly it. Again,
that there ought to be such a reverence of the ministry and of the
sacraments, that where so ever they see these extant, there they acknowledge
the Church to be. For as much therefore as by Gods permission the Church is
governed by these men, what manner of persons soever they be, if they see the
notes of the Church there, it shall be better not to separate themselves from
the communion. Neither hurts it, that some untrue doctrine is there
delivered. For there is hardly any Church that has not some relics of
ignorance. It suffices us if the doctrine whereon the Church is founded have
his place, and be kept. Neither stop we at this, that he cannot be
accounted a lawefull Pastor, which has not only crept, but most wickedly
broken into the place of a true minister. For it is not fit that every private
man should trouble himself with these scruples. Sacramenta cum ecclesia
communicant. The Sacraments they receive with the Church. Per eorum manus sibi
dispensari sustinent. Only by their hands they endure them to be delivered.
For, who^ they see to have the places, whether lawfully or unlawfully they have
them (although the matter somewhat appertain to them) yet may they suspend
their judgment thereof till a full knowledge be had. Note.
Therefore if they use their ministry, yet is there no danger, least they
should seem either to acknowledge or allow, or confirm the same for good.
But by this means they give a testimony of their patience, whilst they are
content to endure those, whom they judge worthy of condemnation even by a
solemn judgment. Thus far master Calvin. Somewhat long, but truly very
material to the point we now speak of, if humility work a reverence of
other men's judgments, especially that have abounded with the great graces of
God, to the profiting of the Church, and puffing pride does not dangerously
persuade us that no man sees the truth of GOD but our selves, which God
forbid. Bullinger again delivered it boldly to the people of God in his time,
and after that, qui saepe admonitus dolo vtitur, non ecclesiam, Dominum, aut
ministrum decipit, sed se ipsum, and ipsi iudicium manducat. Whosoever
admonished often, yet dissembleth and uses guile, he deceyueth not the
Church, he deceyueth not the Lord, nor the minister, but he deceyueth
himself, and to his own damnation he eats. Meaning that none could be
hurt by the company of any that communicate with them, themselves being right.
And therefore meaning to prosecute this question no further, in a comfortable
hope I need not. I conclude both with the judgment and very words of Master
Calvin in his institutions remembered before. Fixum igitur vtrumque istorum
maneat: Calu. institut. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 19.
Therefore let both these things remain firmly fixed: first, that he has no
excuse, that of his own will forsakes the outward communion of the Church,
where the word of God is preached and the Sacraments administered: then, that
the faults of a few or many, are no hinderance, but that we may therein
rightly profess our faith by the ceremonies instituted by God. Because a godly
conscience is not hurt by the unworthiness of any other, either Pastor or private
man, and the mysteries are to a holy and upright man, nevertheless pure and
wholesome, though they be together handled of unclean men.

The fourth temptation concerning compulsion to good.
LAstly, there have bin, and to this day are, that think men should not be
compelled to faith and religion. The Donatistes, Pelagians, and Anabaptists in
their several times, the Papists still daily in their printed pamphlets. But
as the rest, so is this also, a subtle sleight of a tempting devil, to
animate men unto evil boldly. An untruth, in the word plainly refelled, and
of the Church and Children of God truly instructed, 2. Chro. 14.4. chap.
15.13.34.32.
ever abhorred. The noble kings Asa and Iosia did constrayne and compel the
people by severity of their Laws and punishments to serve the Lord. For,
whosoever will not seek the God of Israel shall be slain, whether he be small
or great, man or woman, says the text. Nebuchadnezzar made a decree that every
people, Dan. 3.29.
nation and language, which spoke any blasphemy against the God of Sydrach,
Mysach and Abednago, should be drawn in pieces, and their houses put to the
most base use that might be. A very sharp law, I trow, we will confess to
compel men to a duty just and godly. And if this heathen king, moved by Gods
spirit did this, and might do it, may not they that profess religion do it?
Nay, shall they not, as their knowledge and charge is greater, so suffer double
punishment, if they do it not? Surely the truth is plain, they shall. King
Darius did the like in the same Prophet. Dan. 6.26.
And I make a decree (says he) that in all the dominion of my kingdom, men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. For he is the living God, and
remains for ever, and his kingdom shall not perish etc. The King of Nineveh
again forced by his authority all men in the City to humble them selves
before God: yea, Jonas. 3.7.8.
(says he) Let man and beast put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God.
Which example Austen urged in his time against the Donatists, Epist. 48.
and says, the King of Niniuie did God good service by compelling the whole
City to serve God. In the Gospel the master said to the servant: Luke 14.23.
Go out into the high ways and hedges, and compel the^ to come in, that my
house may be filled: Neque absque causa sic loquitur Dominus. Quia enim diuersi
hominum mores, ingenia item diuersa sunt, non eadem docendi aut praedicandi
ratio omnibus conuenit, Sunt enim quibus simplicem institutionem and doctrinam
adhibuisse sufficit, aliis admonitione seueriore, multis adhortatione, imo
correptione and obiurgatione acriore opus est. Et ideo supra, verbi ministros
exactorum similes dixit. Neither did the Lord without good cause (says a
learned interpreter) speak after this sort. Master Gualter in Math. 22.
For diverse men being of diverse manners and dispositions, one and the same way
of preaching agreeeth not to them all. Some it suffices to have doctrine
plainly delivered to them, others must have earnest admonition also, and many
must have exhortation, yea, sharp rebukes and chidinges, or else they profit
not. And therefore the Ministers of God were compared before to Stewardes or
Baylifes, that sharply and roughly require their masters rent for his
Vineyarde, if it be wanting. Fit etiam saepenumero vt magistratus suam
authoritatem interponere oporteat, quando multorum peruicacia tanta est, vt
aliter vinci non possit. And many times it comes to pass that the Magistrate
must put in his authority, Compulsion.
many men's stubbernnes being such, and so great, that it cannot otherwise be
overcome. See then how even this place afordeth the doctrine which we speak of
most truly, namely, that the Magistrate may compel, whom the Preacher can not
persuade to serve God. What thought S. Austen of this place? Hear and you
shall see. Epist. 48.
Putas neminem debere cogi ad iusticiam, cum legas patrem familias dixisse
seruis, Quoscunque inueneritis, cogite intrare? Do thou think says he,
(Vincentius) that no man may be compelled to goodness, when as thou hear
the master saying to his servant, go forth, and compel them to come in,
whersoeuer ye find? Again, in his 50 Epistle, 204 epistle, and in diverse
other places he gathers out of this text this doctrine. Al other interpreters
do the like, old and new, as occasion serves them. But faith, you will say,
cannot be forced. For it is the gift of God, Ihon. 6.
and no man comes to Christ except the father draw him. And what then?
Therefore no man may be compelled to come to the preaching of the word, and to
frequent commanded exercises? Let Scholars make that argument to their
master, and say learning is the gift of God, and cannot be had except he give
it, therefore they may not be beaten, if they learn not. Let servants allege,
that ability to do their duties comes from God, and therefore they may not be
looked to. Let the thief say, to be a true man is a gift that God gives,
therefore he may not be hanged, if he steal. Shall they escape by these
reasons? I trow not. Therefore we answer, it follows not. For although
faith be the gift of God, yet does the Lord use means. And although the will
can not be forced, yet may it be contained within duty, that it do not any
thing with offense contrary to religion. And as we see in other things, that
they that are given to theft, drunkenness, and other filthy pollutions of the
body or soul, cannot be compelled by man's power to change their inward
minds, and to esteem of those things according to their nature, and yet many
by laws be restreyned from outward facts: so though by man's might no mind can
be indewed with faith, yet may open behavior be restrained, amended, and
reformed, and wicked contemners be compelled to hear sermons, to come to
prayers, and to frequent ye public asse^blies at times appointed. Which
outward forced obedience, may, (God please,) work inward willing obedience in
time. For it has done it often, as thousands of experiences prove. But if it
do not, through the incurable obstinacy of some, which say as Austen notes:
sic volo errare, sic volo perire, Epist. 204.
yet may not so sovereign a salve be omitted, by them that ought to apply it,
Epist. 48.
as ye same father also notes. It was said to Peter, Whether I go thou can
not follow me now, but thou shall follow me afterward. Ihon. 13.36.
And so may it be with others, by the Lords blessing of means, that what
could not be in one time, may be in other to the good and comfort of many.
For as the light of doctrine avails to rid away error from judgment, so does
fear of punishment, in many, help to reform the practice of life against
good order. Epist 48. page 174.
Mea primitus sententia erat etc. My self was once of this mind (says S.
Austen) that I thought no man ought to be forced to Christian unity, but that
we should deal by persuasion, strive by disputing, conquer by reasoning,
least they proved dissembling Catholics, whom we know professed heretics.
But this opinion of mine was overthrown not with words of gainesaying, but
with examples of evident proof. And first mine own City was objected against
me, which being wholly overrun with the heresy of Donatisme, was reclaymed
and brought again to the truth with the fear of good imperial laws in that
case provided. etc. Many others also were laid before me in like sort reformed
by good laws. So that I saw it true, that by fear of that which he would be
loath to suffer, a man may be brought either to relinquish that former
stiffness that hindered him, or to acknowledge an unknown truth before, etc.
Terror enim temporalium potestatum, quando veritatem oppugnat, justice fortibus
gloriosa probatio est, infirmis periculosa tentatio: quando autem veritatem
praedicat errantibus and discordantibus, cordatis vtilis admonitio est, and
insensatis inutilis afflictio. The fear of temporal power when it oppugneth
truth, is to the just that are strong a glorious trial, and to the weak a
dangerous temptation: but when it preaches truth to them that are in error
and do disagree, to the wise it is a profitable admonition, and to the foolish
an unprofitable affliction. Yet is there no power but of God, and he that
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Whilst men be mad in the
strength of their ungodly humor, they rail of al compulsion to the contrary,
but having got understanding, and seeing from what euilles they are delivered
by the^ that first forced them, they rejoice that ever so well to their great
good they were chastised, and that wholesome vyolence that before with bitter
words they inueighed against, they then commend and praise unfeignedly. Foris
igitur inueniatur necessitas, nascitur intus voluntas. Without therefore let
there be compulsion, willingness grows within. That is, spare not hardly
sometimes to compel men to do unwillingly, what by such force they shall
happily better look into, and then perform with all willingness. If no man
may be compelled to goodness, why does the wiseman so often speak of
correction, saying: he that spares the rod hates his child, and he that
beats him saves his soul.

The second objection.
Yea, but whom compelled Christ ever, say they. He preached and taught, and went
no further. Did he so, says Austen. Have they not Paul an example of the
contrary? Agnoscant in eo prius cogentem Christum, and postea docentem, prius
ferientem, and postea consolantem. Let them there see Christ, first compelling,
and afterward teaching, first striking and then comforting. And he that entered
into the Gospel constrained with bodily punishment, labored more than al those
that were called only by mouth.

But men may not be compelled against their conscience. The third objection.
A pretty ground of all Libertinisme, and an high way to overthrow all estates
under heaven. For what good can be commanded or what evil forbidden, that
this excuse may not be laid against. The Apostle says, the Magistrate bears
not the sword for naught: but sure if an erroneous and deceived conscience,
liking or disliking may be a just warrant to do or not do, the Magistrate
may put up his sword, and let it there continue, for any use he shall have of
it, every thing being avoided with this, my conscience is so, and I may not be
forced against my conscience. But let us not be deceived. The Lord will surely
smite every servant that does not his will, whether he know or know not, Luc.
12.
because his ignorance is not of creation, but from Adam by fall, neither
shall any good meaning erroniously had, excuse any man, more than it did the
Jews, which ignorantly crucifying Christ, and persecuting the Apostles, were
persuaded they did God great service. And as God does thus, so does he require
of the Magistrates hand, to whom in deed he has committed the sword not in
vain, that (after the procuring of such means for their instruction by
public preaching and private persuasions, as our Savior has appointed for
the calling of men from their errors to the knowledge of his truth) they
forbear not, either to require godly duty, or to punish the want, as the
offense shall deserve, not fearing the speeches of men, for the glory of God,
neither displeasing him to please them. If they cry, as they do, it is
cruelty, cruelty, and enough to drive men to despair. We can but wish them
the best, still houlding a truth our selves, and doing in moderation and mercy
what shall make us despair if we do not: God requiring it of us at our
peril. And at their own peril must it be if they take darkness for light, and
light for darkness. Surely their blood is upon themselves, because they have bin
warned and had the means. S. Austen will tell them, the Donatistes slew
themselves rather then they would change their heresy: yet did not such their
fearful madness terrify godly Princes from condign chastisements of so
great impiety. And thus much may suffice of this temptation. If any list to be
further satis^ied by English treatises hereof, let him peruse the godly answers
of diverse to the Papists. Master Doctor Bilson, M. Trauers, and others.

But this lawful, moderate and profitable correction will be called cruel and
merciless persecution. No news if it be. For so did these seduced creatures
in their times, and the Papists even still, exclayme, when their heresy and
obstinacy is punished. Whereupon both Austen, in his time and others in these
days are driven to follow their cries, and to purge away this unjust
s^aunder, which in deed would never be so untruly made if men would not
foolishly think, pro ecclesia Dei facere quicquid inquieta temeritate faciu^t,
that every thing is done in the cause of the Church that is done by their own
unquiet rashness and headiness. For the matter it self it has been
answered, and it truly may be answered, that every one that spares is not a
friend, neither every one that beats a foe. But better are the wounds of a
friend than the voluntary kisses of an enemy. Melius est cum seueritate
diligere, quam cum lenitate decipere. Better it is with severity to love, than
with lenity to deceive. Can man love man more than God loves him? Yet in the
love of GOD there is often correction, and often chastisement, and the same,
though never joyous for the present, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous, yet after brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them
which are thereby exercised, and they say with the Prophet: It is good for them
that they have been chastised. Why then must man's compulsion ever be
persecution? Cum boni and mali eadem faciunt, eademque patiuntur, non factis
and poenis, sed causis vtique discernendi sunt. When the good and evil either
do, or suffer the same things, they must be discerned and distinguished, not
by punishments, but by causes. Pharoh was sharp in sundry actions to the
Israelites, and what was Moses when he made them drink up the ashes of their
golden calfe, Exodus 32.
and three thousand of them to be slain with the sword speedely: When his
anger seemed fearce against Aaron himself, and the people quaked as it were
under him. Similia fecerunt, sed non similiter prodesse voluerunt. The things
they did after a sort were like, for they were both sharp, but their minds
were not alike to profit. And therefore what Pharoh did was tyrannical
persecution, what Moses did lawful, and liked punishment of a grievous fault.
Iesabel slew some Prophets, and Eliah slew some Prophets. Sed diuersa merita
facientium, diuersa passorum. But diverse was the merit both of the doers and
sufferers. Iesabel slew true Prophets, and it was a bloody persecution. Eliah
slew false Prophets, and it was no persecution, as we speak of the word in
evil part. In the death of Christ God had his work, and man had his work. Yet
was God pure, and man guilty. How? Nisi quia in re vna quam fecerunt, causa
no^ erat vna ob quam fecerunt. But because in one thing which they did, there
was not one cause for which they did it. There were three crosses at our
Saviors death: upon one the thief to be saved, upon an other the thief to
be damned, in the middle Christ. Quid similius istis crucibus, quid
dissimilius istis pendentibus? Quos passio iungebant, causa separabat. What
more like than these crosses? What more unlike than these that hanged upon
them. Whom a like punishment conjoined, a far unlike cause disioyned. Paul
was delivered to the Iayler, to be imprisoned: Act. 16.
1. Cor. 5.
Paul him self would the incestuous to be delivered to Satan to be
reformed. The one is a greater matter than the other, and yet the lesser a
wicked persecution, the greater none. Discamus igitur, frater. Let us therefore
learn brother, says S. Austen, in like doings to discern unlike minds of
the doers, neither let us with closed eyes sclaunder, and accuse well willers,
as evil hurters of us. If it were ever so glorious as some would make it, to be
punished, and to sustain correction, the Lord might have said, blessed are
they that are so used, and never have added propter iustitiam, for
righteousness sake. Wherefore an evident truth it is, that they are not
Martyrs that suffer punishment for evil doing, and propter Christianae
vtilitatis impiam diuisionem, and for a wicked division of Christian unity,
but they yt suffer for well doing, and for righteousness sake. Agar was
punished of Sara, yet she that punished was blameless, and she that was
punished blameworthie. Therefore does the Prophet say, Iudica me Deus, and
discern causam: non dixit poenam, sed causam. Judge me, O Lord, Psalm. 4.3.
and discern my cause. He does not say, my punishment, but my cause. Again,
they persecuted me without a cause, but the Lord was my helper. His comfort and
glory is not that he was persecuted, but that in deed and truth it was
without a a cause. David himself pursued his enemies, took them, and consumed
them. Psalm. 18.37. Psalm. 101.
And said he would cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the
Lord. Yet no persecutor more than all other Kings and Princes, both in the
word, and out, renowned for due and zealous punishing of offenses. In his enim
omnibus quid attenditur, nisi quis eorum pro veritate, quis pro iniquitate,
quis nocendi causa, quis emendandi. For in all men that punish and execute
laws upon any, what is to be considered, but which of them does it for the
maintenance of truth, which of them for the maintenance of evil, which of them
with a mind to hurt, which of them with a mind to refourme. Vides itaque non
esse considerandu^ quod quisque cogitur, sed quale sit illud quo cogitur, vtrum
bonum, an malu^. You see therefore, that this must not only be marked, that a
man is compelled, but the thing also must be looked, whereunto he is compelled,
whether it be good or bad. And if it be good, it will ever justify the actio^,
howsoever ye suffrer be offended. The Physician offends many times his patie^t,
ye scholemaster his scholar, and the father his wild and wanton child. But
this offense shall have a just warrant, if it be co^playned of, the careful
heart of each one to do good, in their places. If horses and mules must be ruled
with bits and bridles to take a liked course, we should make less account of
our selves than of these beasts, if we should seek both immunitie and
impunitie whatsoever we do. And let this suffice for some satisfaction to a
causeless cry and most unworthy complaint, when so ever it is made.

I very well see, these temptations in judgment are many, and therefore your
speech might be long, if you would follow them, but these may suffice for a
taste of Satan's malice in respect, and you may now, if your self will proceed
to his temptations in life and behavior. They also, as has been said, are in
number more, and in nature more unknown, than that of any one man, they may be
either named, or understood. For there is no commandment, the breaches whereof
in every branch he tempts not some unto, and what a field were this to run
a very long course in? He tempts to adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath,
contentions, seditions, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and ten thousand
such like. So that to follow the temptations in life and behavior, and to lay
down what might be said, either in description of their manner, or as help
against their strength and venom, were to take in hand to write many volumes.
This is certain, he is our enemy, 1. Pet. 5.
and so firm a friend as he is a fo, were worth much gold, even of the gold of
Ophir. In which enmity, and immortal malice of his, verse. 9.
he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. But if we
resist him steadfast in faith, he flies from us. With which shield of faith
together with the sword of the spirit, the word of God, Ephesians. 6.
we shall quench al his fiery darts, and become conquerors. And the best means
to help us in these many thousand spiritual onsettes, and to strengthen body
and soul against the killing poison of them, after avoiding of all occasions,
so much as ever we may, still truly discharging our several places, both
toward God and man, is to print in our hearts, and sink into our souls, a
true, an often, and earnest meditation of the end of the thing or things,
whatsoever that we shall in this respect be tempted and solicited unto. For the
wise Syrach upon deep experience has said it. Whatsoever thou take in hand,
Eccles. 7.36.
remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. The end of sin is death, the
reward of sin is death, death of body many a time by a shameful end in this
world, and death of both body and soul in a bottomless pit for ever, where
is weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth. Sweet meat will have a sower
sawse said the proverb then, and sweet sin brings smarting pain, says
the truth now. What woe to themselves, and to their seed for ever brought that
fair fruit with pleasure eaten, when time was, of our first parents. Would
God, no posterity might rue the falls of them whom they loved. Surely if the
end prevailed in the thought, before sin prevailed in act, they should rue
them less. O deed done, how bitterly biteth it when it is done, that was
thought full sweet before it was done, and now sore lamented that ever done,
or that again it cannot be undone. But had I known comes ever behind, too
late to comfort, too soon to wring, and ever sin rubbeth upon the raw.
Before these our parents should sin, honor, preferment, glory and joy were
brought by a hellish serpent to muster themselves before their eyes: and Gods
shall you be, if you will do this. But O woeful Gods, when the deed was done.
Then mustred as fast before their mind, death, hell, damnation, the wrath of
God, and all terror and torture. And so is it ever: that devil that pleads
all mercy and goodness, patience, and long suffering in the Lord toward
sinners before they offend, upon boldness thereof, to make them offend, that
devil as fast thundreth damnation and death, justice and wrath in the same
Lord, when once we have offended. Especially if we begin to slack our
diligent serving of his filthy humor. O David speak and instruct a little. 2.
Sam. 24.2.
What thoughtest thou when Ioab must go number all Israel and Judah? Of
wisdom and policy to know my power. What feltest thou when the deed was
done? Security for a time, and all was well. But when God awaked, what? O ask
me not that: For the remembrance of it as yet is grievous unto me. But if you
will needs know. I was smitten, verse. 10.
I was bitte^, I was wounded and wroung with the very furies of hell. My flesh
quaked, my heart aked, and my soul admitted fears upon fears. My conscience
cried, my Spirit groned, and the world knew not what I felt within. Were mine
eyes open, or were they shut, the eyes of my mind still saw my sin, and the
face of Justice in a mighty God against it. The rest I found was to accuse my
self, and with sobbing sighs, and brinish tears, to utter my fall as I could
for woe in words, of grief to a gracious God, I have sinned, verse. 10.
I have sinned, O my God and dear, in that I have done, exceedingly, now
Lord I beseech thee take away the trespass of thy servant, for I have done
very foolishly. And what should I say? the end was mercy, yet mingled with
Justice, I was brought into a wonderful streyt, by an offer that was made. And
whosoever sins, streyt in the end, either less or more, as God appoynteth,
is the flower that blows upon such a stalk, and so I leave you. Well then
we hear, what we were better to hear, then ever to feel as he felt it. For
his heart smote him, verse. 10.
smote him, says the text, and the word imports a twitching smart. David
felt the fruits of other falls also, if we remember them, and preaches unto
us to take heed of the pleasures of sin for a season. But I speak not of
all. And what least is spoken, yet let it not least be thought of. For who so
is wise will consider these things, it is a saying often repeated in
Scripture. Do we think Manasses felt when he was first moved to sin, what
he felt in a strength when God reclaimed? Peruse his repentance and prayer, and
judge your self, if he had found sin first, as he found it last, whether
ever he would so greatly have followed the cause of his woe. Did that
thriftlesse youth find all as fair when his bag was spent, and a lewd course
run, as when he first received it, and began to sin. No, no, his pleasure
had pain both without, and within, and a short vagare beyond the lists of the
Lords good liking, laid a grinding, a grief upon his conscience during life.
Peter felt not when he denied, what he felt when he wept for woe, and that
most bitterly, that ever he had denied. The Jews felt not when they crucified
Christ, what they felt full sharp when they were pricked in their hearts. Act.
2.37.
Never, never, shall we be without smart in the end, be the beginning or
process never so sweet. And the Lord knows the measure. For circumstances
of action may pull greater and greater measure of plagues from a just God, that
hates impuritie. Happy is the soul that sins least, next, that returns
soonest, and most dreadful is the estate of them that both for quality and
time are left to the devils malice and their own corruption. One drop of
water to cool my tongue, was a woeful cry, and beware the like. All
temptations of this kind, bring us most readily to this perplexity. Think
not you shall when you will, if you will not when you may. Herod and Pilate had
their warnings with many mo. Herod and Pilate would not be warned with many
more. Therefore Herod and Pilate were truly plagued with many more. The longer
you let your ship leake, when once she leaketh, the greater danger, and the
hardlier emptied. The ruinous house does show the like. The further the nail
of sin, and some vile delight is driven in with the devils hammer, the
hardlier got out with ye Lords advise, which yet not profiting, kills,
because it was not suffered to pluck it out. The Poet also said it well. If
thou be sick, prevent the worst, and seek for remedy at the first, for
when a sickness has taken root, if thou take physic, it will not boot. Thus
think you then of all temptations in life together, and their end considered
they shall be weak, through God that helps.

Now I pray you, what mean these words, But deliver us from evil? It is an
explication, as has bin said of the former, and the first word (Deliver)
teaches us plainly that we are the servants of sin, and even sold under
sin, as the Apostle says. The fall of our first parents has so made us, Rom
7.14.
and humility of heart ever so confesses it. Secondly that our deliverance
therehence comes not from our self, or the power of any will or might in us,
but only and ever from this God, that we pray to, from his power, from his
goodness and mercy, that has no measure. Ephesians. 2.1.
We are dead in trespasses and sins of our selves, and we can no more help
our selves from sin, than from death. If that son shall make you free
(says the Gospel) then shall you be free indeed. John. 8.36.
By the second word (Evil) some understand Satan, some sin, some death, but
the best is to comprehend in it all euilles, both of crime and pain, whether
they be present or to come. Cyprian so expounds it in these words: In the
last place we put, but deliver us from evil, comprehending all kinds of
adversities, which the enemy works against us in this world. Augustine so
expounds it saying: Aug. ad Proba^ ^iduam.
When we say Deliver us from evil, we admonish to consider that we are not as
yet in that good case where we shall suffer no evil, and this which is last
placed in the Lords Prayer, is extended so far, and so plainly, that a
Christian man moved with any kind of tribulation, With any kind of
tribulation mark it.
may in this petition sigh, in this shed his tears, begin herein, continue
herein, and end his prayer herein. Bucer, Musculus, Vrsinus and many mo thus
expound it. If any man will understand in it, cheefely, or by a principality,
as it were the devil, let him so do. (...)
For in deed he is the greatest evil, and most pestilent evil that we need
to pray to be delivered from. Therefore say some, when we desire yt God will
deliver us from evil, we desire that he will send no evil on us, but deliver
us from all evils, present and to come, both of crime and pain. Secondly, that
if he send on us any eulles, yet that he would mitigate them in this life, and
turn them unto our salvation, that they may be good and profitable unto us.
Thirdly, that he will at length in the life to come, fully and perfectly
deliver us, and wipe away every tear from our eyes. Others say, we beg of
the Lord, that he would in mercy renew us daily, that is, power into our
hearts more and more, a most true liking and longing after all righteousness,
and a most unfeigned hatred of all evil, by what name soever it may be termed.
And in the same uphold us still, that we may increase, and never go backwarde.
Sweet therefore every way is this, as all else that has been said before,
and beseeming well the mouth, heart, and soul of every man and woman desirouse
to please God. Deliver us, O blessed God, from all evil. For if thou turn thy
face away, Psalm. 30.
we shall be troubled, yea, sore troubled, dismayde, and feared, though but
even now we said, tush, this wealth shall never decay.

The Lord stand with us, and give us faith in our several dangers to cleave
unto him. For what he bids ask, we may well assure our selves we shall
receive, if we ask, and that is a great comfort. Thus much contenteth me now
of this prayer. The Conclusion only remains, which if you will a little
open, your labor is ended to my good, and the Lord repay it. The conclusion is
this, For thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory for ever and ever. Which
being expressed of Matthew, though of others it be omitted, yet must it carry
his place with us, as many mo things do, which one Evangelist notes, and not
another. The thing it self yields very great strength to our faith, as
touching the receiving of that we ask, containing in it three notable reasons
to that effect. The first is drawn from the duty of a King, which is, to
hear his subjects, to defend and preserve them. And therefore, thine is the
kindome, is as much as if we should say, O Lord, grant our petitions, since
thou art King, and have all things under thy rule, even all evil, to
suppress it, and all good, to give it, so far as with thy good liking it may
be for our good: and since we are thy subjects, who^ it has pleased thee to
take care of, even since we hanged upon our mothers breasts. The second reason
is drawn from his power, which as it is infinite, so is it able to give us
whatsoever we want. There is nothing too hard, nothing to great, which he
cannot give. Thine is the power, even all power, might, and strength, joined
with goodness, and therefore I faint not. The third reason is taken from the
end or final cause. For thine is the glory: that is, we desire these things
for thy glory. Vrsinus.
Of thee alone, the true God and sovereign King, we desire and expect all good
things, and so we yield unto thee this thy glory, and this thine honor, and
profess thee to be the honor and fountain of al good things. And verily,
because this glory is due unto thee, therefore do we desire them of thee.
Hear us therefore, for thy glory, and especially because thou will also for
thy glory sake, give those things which we desire. For what things serve for
thy glory, the same will thou perform and do, but those things which we
desire, serve for thy glory, therefore thou will give them us. Give us
therefore these things that we desire, and the glory shall return and
redounde unto thee, if thou deliver us. For so shall thy kingdom, and power,
and glory be manifested. See then beloved a sweet comfort. If your request
that you make to your God may be good for you to receive, Note i^.
as well may the Lord loose his kingdom, loose his power, and loose his glory,
as you fail of your fruit and hearts desire. For so teaches this conclusion
as you see. And if it be not good for you to have, in the wisdom of a
mighty God, so known, who can better tell than you your self what is fit for
you, would you have it? God forbid. Strengthen your hearts then in your prayers
always with this. There is no King can be like minded to his subject as the
Lord is to you: there is no power like the Lords, and his glory ever was and
ever shall be dear unto him. And therefore what may be his glory to give and
your good to receive, his power can reach it, his love shall grant it, and you
shall never want it. For no good thing shall he withhold from his Children,
says the Prophet David. Psalm. 84.
Stocks and stones cannot do this, Idols and Images cannot do this: no, the
Angels of heaven cannot do this: much less inferior creatures, and therefore
know what it is to leave the right and to take the wrong, to dishonor your GOD,
and to hurt your selves by praying to these things. The word Amen is added, not
as a part of the Prayer, but as a particle noting our wish of heart, to be heard
and to obtain. As if we should say, O Lord thus be it unto me, what my tongue
or soul has begged: so be it, Amen, Amen, so Lord, so Lord, and then even in
a sweet rest of heart and content of mind that I have uttered my self to my
God, I rise up and go my way, leaving all to him. And thus much of this
heavenly Prayer, the pattern of all Prayers, according as the Lord has
enabled me. Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth for evermore.
Amen.

A Prayer.
O Most tender GOD, and dear father, look upon us, hear us, and hearken to
us, in that mercy of thine that has no measure, and when ever it shall please
thine own self to try us by any temptation, do it in mercy according to
our strength and for our good. And suffer us never to be tempted above our
power, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but give the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it. Let
it open unto us our want and weakness, to reform us, but never cause fear
above faith to overcome us. Come well, come woe, either outward or inward,
make us contented, and strengthen our steps in both estates to thy blessed
liking, that prosperity puff not up, nor adversity pluck us down above
that is fit for thy true children. If men assault us and tempt us unto evil, O
Lord give wisdom to discern them, fear to follow them, and zeal to defy
them. And let not the pleasures of sin for a season prevail above thy
favor, and our eternal good. That hellish feend so raging and roaring, and
ever so greedy to devour us, dear father, let him want his will, and all his
temptations come to naught. Increase our knowledge to bewray his sleights, and
support our faith to quench his darts. Let sin appear sin, and ever
damnable: let it never seem good and very tolerable. But pluck off those
maskes, O heavenly God, that it often comes disguised withal, and let our
eyes through thy mercy bewray both nature and end of such delicates as thy
servant David prayed he might never taste of. Psalm. 141.4.
O blessed father help us against our own corruption, our own concupiscence
and sin. Our flesh, our flesh, O Lord let it not prevail to the working of
our woe, and everlasting fall. The Spirit is willing but the flesh is frail,
full of gaynsayings, striuings, and struglings against thy will. And we know
with thine Apostle that in us, that is, in our flesh dwells no good thing. So
that unless thou help, most dear father, it will rebel, and we shall dye.
Deliver us from evil, even from all evil, eternal God, as if we should name
them one by one, so far as may stand with thy blessed pleasure, and our
obedience to thee. And finally, dear God, though we be unworthy to go upon
this ground, because it is thy obedient creature more than we, much less to
lift up our eyes to heaven where thou dwell, and to receive any comfort that
we ask: yet for that red^bloud, and hart^bloud of Jesus Christ that never
sinned against thee, but obeyed thee fully for us, and in whom thou art
perfitly pleased, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, pardon and deliver
us from all our sins, and so guide the course of this earthly pilgrimage here
amongst men, that we may spend it, and end it in thy fear, and in thy favor:
afflicted howsoever according to thy will, yet not in distress: 2. Cor. 4.8.
in doubt (if so thou will have it) yet not dispayring: persecuted, but not
forsaken: cast down at thy pleasure, but not perishing: through good report
and ill report with thy holy Apostle, passing our days, and doing our duties
with singlenes and simplicity of heart. Those infinite temptations that abound
in this life (there being no calling so holy, nor place so solitary, but that
men shall find both troubles to try them, and adversity to disquiet them) so
rule and govern, so moderate and temper with thy hand of mercy, that we may
ever conquer, and never be conquered to our final hurt. But as birds limed,
and yet not ouerlimed, escape those twigges that would have caught us, and
serve thee here whilst life indureth, fast cleave unto thee when life
departs, and ever live with thee when once it is ended, for that sweet and
dear Christ Jesus sake, that with thee, O Father, and the holy Ghost we
bless and praise, honor and magnify for ever and ever one GOD and Lord world
without end. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
AFfection required in prayer. 20 Affection how helped. 22 Atheists. 137
Apostles powrefull ministry 162 Al may read the scriptures, 179 All sorts
bound to serve God as well as Monks, Friars or Nuns or such like. 259 All men
bound to pray, forgive us our trespasses. 373 Adversity a sour te^ptatio^. 426
Adversity often misconstred. 431 Afflictions inward or outward 433 Alteration
of friends. 480 Affliction without an example in scripture may not discomfort
us. 488
B
BVllingers judgment of the ministers reading. 173 Bad Books. 238 Bread has
Diverse significatio^s in the word 279 Bread in this Petition what. 280
C
CAuses of prayer. 46 Church abuses. 108 Creation how. 151 Corruption or fall.
15^ Corrupted in us what. 154 Contraries to Gods kingdom prayed against. 208
Communion of good by prayer. 211 Crosses to be endured. 241 Cause of evil,
what. 260 Contents though many overthrown with one discontent. 265 Covetous
men what they may consider. 329 Confession of sin to God. 321 Comfort against
fear of punishment when sin is pardoned. 348 Conditions to be observed in
going to Law. 367 Crosses not ever tokens of anger. 432 Conditions of true
sanctification. 444 Cheerfulness and mirth required. 459 Contempt a bitter
temptation. 477 Change of friends another. 480 Children a Cross. 488 Crosses
with example in the Scripture may not discomfort us. 488 Church militant of
what sort ever in this world. 495 Communicating in Prayer. etc with the wicked.
500 Communion may be received with bad company. 533 Compulsion to good lawful.
548 Correction called persecution. 559
D
DEad not to be prayed for. 73 Discontents dash contents 265 Duke of Saxony
made his train see the benefit of bread. 282 Daily bread why said. 297
Dulnes in Gods children now and then, yet fear not. 451.
E
EDessa professors how zealous. 163 Exceptions against hearing some Ministers.
189 Evil of two sorts. 225 Examination of our selves profitable. 257 Exchange
of our freight with Satan a rouer. 337 Exceptions made against our forgiving of
our Brethren. 262 Effect of Prosperity. 417 Election how known. 434 Evil
children to Godly parents. 488 Evil servants also. 488 Evil in the last
petition what it means. 611
F
FOr what we may pray. 68 Form of prayer a great good to be taught us. 84 Form
used of Heathens. 85 Father a sweet word and how. 87. Fatum. 148 Fearful
exceptions against hearing the word. 189 Free Will confuted. 219 Flesh
pampered. 237 Forgiveness of others by us. 335.355. Forgiveness with God,
both of the crime and punishment. 345 Forgiveness feigned. 355 Friends to alter
a sharp temptation. 480
G
GOD, what he would, he ever could. 104 God, how absent. 116 God near or a
far how. 117 God, how more in one place then in another. 118 God, how said
to go and come. 118 Gods glory how dear. 123 God no author of evil. 224.396
Good things of three sorts. 225 Give. What it teaches in this petition. 303
God gives, and not any industry of man. 325 God gives the use also. 326 Gods
mercy and long suffering. 326 Grace proved, and satisfaction improued. 329
Good fellowship of the world. 335 Gods rods are sometimes punishments,
sometimes but chastisements. 350 Greatness of man's corruption. 382 God leads
into temptation, yet no author of sin. 396 Greatness of sin a grievous
temptation, and how helped. 460 Godly ones rimed upon by drunkards. 488
H
Helps of affection in prayer. 20 Humility taught. 99 Heaven, what it
signifies. 102 Halowing of Gods name, what it is. 131 Hypocritical
forgiveness. 355 Half forgiveness. 557 How Christians may go to Law. 366
How man is said to forgive sin. 370 How man tempts man. 406 How we pray
against temptations. 410 Heaviness of heart a temptation. 459
I
IRreligious men and women prayed against through all Churches. 137 James
expounded. 399 Judgments rash upon adversities of men. 431 Imperfection of
our obedience takes not away our comfort. 447 Imprisonment wrongful a trial
of the Godly. 488
K
Kingdom of God of three sorts. 148 Kingdom of God, how erected in us. 16^
Kingdom come, what i^ is. 160 Kingdom, what it is in the conclusion of the L.
prayer. 615
L
LIbertines. 137 Laughing at other men's faults, how sinful. 268 Laying up,
how it is lawful. 301 Love to our Brethren described. 332 Law may be taken
against offenders. 365 Life uncomfortable. 474
M
MEdiator, who and how many of our prayers. 51 Mass, how wicked. 95 Means to
erect Gods Kingdom in men. 161 Ministers reading, not contemned. 173 Ministers
of meaner gifts. 175 Magistrates great means to build or pluck down Gods
Kingdom. 204 Malum culpae and poenae. 225 Merit overthrown. 258 Magistracy
not taken away by the petition of forgiveness of trespasses. 363 Man tempts
man. 406 M^th required of the Godly. 459 Marriage and match often bitter. 488
Measure of adversity a subtle temptation to the godly. 490 Ministers cannot
hurt the Lords Sacraments. 519
N
NAme of God, what it is. 129 Nature of a true child of God* 268 Nouatians
confuted. 376 Necessity of prayer against temptation. 392
O
Objections against Prayer. 13 Our Father, not my Father, why. 96 Obedience in
heaven to Gods will. 249 Outward things may be prayed for. 292 Our, what it
teaches. 295 Obedience, though but little, yet accepted of God. 454 Objections
against compelling to religion. 552
P
PRayer natural. 2 Prayer necessary, and how. 4 Prayer how profitable. 7
Prayer objected against. 13 Praying in Latin. 39 Persons to be prayed unto. 47
Prayer by whom heard. 51 Place of prayer. 69 Prayer for the dead. 73 Parts of
the Lords prayer. 86 Petitions how many. 121 Preaching above reading. 185
Pampering of the flesh. 237 Panis whence derived. 280 Peace to be prayed for.
291 Popish shrift. 323 Presumption fearful. 228 Popes pardons. 371
Prosperity one of Gods trials. 412 Prosperity i^ of God. ibid. Prosperity
what it should work in the godly. 417 Prayer not ever heard by and by, and yet
fear not. 458 Perseverance feared sometimes of the godly, and how comforted.
467 Privy slander a great trial of the godly, how helped. 483 Preaching
without reformation. 509
R
REdemption perfect by Christ. 94 Regeneration. 158 Reading the word how
profitable. 171 Reading allowed to all. 179 Religion is no cause of scarsity,
but sin. 339 Remitting fault makes man like God. 360 Rash judgment upon
men's adversity often. 432 Reward of evil for good tempts sore, and how
h^^ped. 484 Rimes a trial of the g^dly. 488 Reformation, how it fo^oweth
preaching, and how no 509
S
Schism how dangerous* ^8. Sanctification of God (...) us. 14 Sa^ctificatio^
of us by God. ibid. Scriptures to be read of all. 179 Similitudes expressing
the profit of preaching. 187 Spirit, what it works in us. 195 Some may pray
for more then others. 285 Shrift where found and where lost. 323 Sufferance in
God how great. 325. Satisfaction to God for sin confuted. 32^.331 Sins,
why called deb^s. 339 Sins all mortal. 341 Sins greater and less. 343
Shifts to mock our selves. 358 Socrates teaches Christians patience, and to
forgive. 361 Sins after baptism pardoned. 376 Sanctification proves
election. 435 Sanctificat^on must be true and not in ^^ew only. ibid.
Sanctifi^^tio^ true, how known 442 Slaun^er a great temptation, how helped. 483
Si^^nesse a trial. 487 S^ruants evil to good Master. 488 Sacraments depend
not of the Ministers holiness. 519
T
THree good Mothers bring three bad children. 289 Thanks for our meat. 303
Temptation, what it is. 401 Temptations of two sorts. ibid. Temptations of
three sorts. 402 To tempt what it signifies, when it is attributed to God. 402
Tempting by men, how. 406 Temptation from God and Satan (...) the matter, one,
yet diverse in a diverse respect 494 Temptation touching the Church militant
here. ibid. The Godly communicate in prayer with the wicked. 500 Temptation
touching bad ministers. 519 Temptation touching Communicants admitted to the
Lords Table. 533 Temptations in life and behavior, as well as in judgment. 564
V
Unity taught. 98 Vbiquitie. 114 Use of things from God only. 326 Venial
sins. 341
W
WHat w^e may pray for. 68 Will of God carefully done of all his children. 217
Will of God hidden and reueiled. 220 Will has two objects. 225 Will of God in
this prayer, what it compriseth. 233 Works of supererogation. 259 World, how
worthy to be loathed. 262 Wealth dangerous. 286 Wrongful imprisonment a trial
of the Godly. 488
FINIS.
Corrections of the faults escaped.
PAgina. 2. line. 13. Read due. 17. l. 5. craving. 25. l. last lading. 32. l.
14. should. 41. l. last loaue^. 45. l. 18. looked of. 47. l. 9. two. 73. l. 3.
is not. 76. l. 6. and contract, any. 88 l. 18. his. 91. l. 11. unto. 105. l.
16. we pray for. 126. l. 14 even. l. 17. thereby 134. l. 3. this. 137. l 5.
dishonor. l. 8. affirm. 152. l. 13. was. 160. l. 2. see. 176. l. 23. in a.
178. l. 18. Harding 181. l. 19. the one to. 187. l. 10. beginning. 189. l. 22.
for. 195. l. 2. is this. 208. l. 23 anarchie. 214. l. 2. have the. l. 12 not
the. l. 14. cheerfully. 216. l. 23. wrestling. 221. l. 5. he snubbed them.
227. l. 8. punishes. 230. l. 8. them. l. 9. because he. 231. l. 7. is it. 246.
l. 1. and you here. 253. l. 10. yet. 266. l. 15 ouerflowe. 267. l. 21. multis.
295. l. 21. God in deed. 296. l. 19. considered. 297. l. 1. propriety. 303. l.
4. yet. 321. l. 27. that notable. 324. l. 2. of a. 325. l. 12. sore ones. 336.
l. 15. trafiqued. 342. l. 14. can not purge. 352. l. 22. condemned with. 361.
l. 22. either wisdom. 378. l. 9. first we. 383. l. 25. how the. 385. l. 24.
both shake. 387. l. 27. our lode. 389. l. 7. so grown up even. 391. l. 16.
careful not. 400. l. 16. heartily. 415. l. 27. heap of. 435. l. 3. if l. 437. l.
27. premises. 439. l. 27. hampered. 445. l. 22. stones. 468. l. 6. against it.
469. l. 2. shall not. 492. l. 18. obtained. 531. l. 9. a good. 553. l. 15. if
god 576. l. 5. author. 602. l. 17. vnitatis.

IF thou find any other faults either in words or distinctions troubling a
perfect sense, (Gentle Reader) help them by thine own judgment, and excuse
the press by the Authors absence, who best was acquainted to read his own
hand.


