CERTAIN PLAIN, brief, and comfortable Notes upon every Chapter of Genesis.
GATHERED AND LAID DOWN for the good of them that are not able to use better
helps, and yet careful to read the word, and right heartily desirous to
taste the sweet of it.

By the Reverend Father Geruase Babington, Bishop of Landaph.

PSALM. 119.103. O how sweet is thy word unto my mouth? sweeter then honey
unto my throat.

EZEKIEL. 3. verse 3. Then did I eat the roll, and fill my bowels with it, and
it was in my mouth as sweet as honey.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Charde. 1592.

To the godly disposed Reader.
I Have often desired to have some good occasion offered me, whereby I might at
the least in word s^ God knows in deed I am (...) to testify my unfeigned
zeal and goodwill to the Author of this book, for the comforts and sweet
instructions I have received by his most holy labors. And alth^ugh my judgment
be but slender, and therefore my sentence little worth, yet under the Authors
correction, with whom I am unacquainted, and without whose knowledge I am ^^ld
thus far to presume, I dare give this testimony of all his works, and so of
this amongst the re^t, that he does therein utter as great love to the Church
of God and as fervent zeal unto the truth, as ever did any Engli^^ man that
has written. I humbly beseech God that his faithful trauaile^ may prou^ke
others of his calling to follow his steps in the like care of gods people
committed to their change. One thing is necessary, all the rest are but
accidents and ^^taine^s, the Lord make us more careful to the attaining
thereof, and increase in this Reverend Author zeal and heavenly strength, to
proceed as he has begun to help forward the Lords harvest, which lies
withering upon the ground in many places for want of workmen. The Lord for his
elects sake, hasten the coming of his son Jesus Christ to judgment, confound
all his obstinate enemies, and until then grant us his peace, with Christian
constancy and obedience to his truth* Amen.

Thine in the Lord, Edm. (...) student in divinity.

The Preface to the Christian Reader, showing amongst other things the most
necessary use of such easy commentaries, and the intendment of the Author.
ALthough (gentle Reader) God and man both may look for at our hands that al of
us should be able to prophecy (as Moses speaks, Heb. 5.
and al of us have our wits so exercised in ye word, that we could even without
a guide, wade in the deep places thereof, now, I s^y, that the light of the
Gospel has been set on a candlestick so long, and not only Moses and the
Prophets, but also the Apostles and Evangelists have in every city almost,
Act. 15.21.
such as preach them upon the Sabboths and festival days: yet for all that, to
true it is* and with grief of heart be it spoken, as well as to their shame
that are faulty, the greatest part have no knowledge in the scriptures, to
account of, and the vision, I mean the doctrine of the old and new testament,
is a book that is sealed, Esaias. 29.^1.
as the Prophet speaks. The causes whereof as they are common and not
unknown: first our own natural corruption, whereby we love darkness more then
light, and ease more then pains taking, next the malice of our ancient enemy,
who because he could not hinder the winds from blowing, and the seed from
being sown upon the earth (which he principally aimed at) therefore he
bestirreth himself so much the more egerly to take that which is sown, out of
men's hearts, and to make it unprofitable: so are the remedies as easy to be
discerned, I pray God they may be at length as well thought upon, and attained
And what be they* The first and chiefest is the holy spirit of God, who being
given to a man, searches all things even the deep things of God. 1. Cor. 2.
But until he be given there remains a veil over the heart untaken away in
the reading of Gods book, and so that which should have been for our light,
2* ^er. 3.
is made unto us an occasion of falling. What shall we say then? Is the letter
dark, or does it turn any out of the way? No, our minds are dark, even
darkness it self. John 1.5. And though there appear unto us a great light, as
there did unto Saul, at noone day, yet until by the finger of the holy ghost,
as it were by the hands of Ananias, the scales of natural ignorance be taken
away from our eyes, well we may suffer our selves to be led by others, but we
shall not be able to see our way our selves. For this cause S Paul prayed for
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.
that the spirit of wisdom and revelation might be given the^, and that the
eyes of their understanding might be lightened, etc. And for this cause are we
to pray with all manner of prayer and supplication, and with all earnestnes, that
this key of David, of ye true David Jesus Christ might be given us. For if the
spirit once open no man shuts, but if he shut, and so long as he shuts no
man can oopen; nay as Austen says, though god himself should appear unto us
in some likeness of man, and speak unto us, yet if he do not move us, and direct
us by his inward grace (the grace of his spirit) he should do us no good at al
with all his preaching. August. 15. de (...). dei. cap. 6.
Therefore I say (dear brother) begin here, make prayer for Gods enlightening
spirit the first staff of thy ladder, and the first stone of thy building.
Pray for the same early and late, and doubt not but it shall be given the. For if
we that be evil can give good gifts unto our children, how much more shall our
heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Luc. 11.13.
This promise is made by Christ himself, and by no worse person, and therefore
as he that believes it, has sealed that God is true* Ioh. 3.33. so he that
believes it not, yea or doubts of it, saying, who shall ascend into heaven
and fetch me the spirit, the same man makes Christ a liar, and so dishonoreth
the son, and the father to. This may suffice concerning the principal help
for the understanding of the Scriptures. Now besides this there are certain
inferior helps and means, which though they be not as effectual as the former,
for God forbid we should make any comparison between the power of God and the
weakness of man, yet they be most necessary and no way to be neglected. Nay
this is true, that if we should do nothing but pray, as did the Messalians of
old, or hold open our mouths (as it were) and gape after extraordinary
inspirations as certain Enthusiasts do to this day, we should do no less then
tempt God (like to them that will take no pains with their ground, and yet
look for a good crop) and so in stead of blessing, we should reap a curse.
Therefore though we must begin with prayer, yet we may not be content with
prayer, but we must join to it, first a diligent harkening to our pastors and
teachers, like as the Israelites hearkened to the Levites when they read Gods
word unto them, and gave the sense. Nehe. 8. Secondly a diligent reading of
the scriptures b^ our selves like the men of Berea. Act. 17. and like Timothy.
2. Tim. 3. who knew them of a child: thirdly diligent questioning and
conferring with them that have more skill then our selves, Hieron in pro^m.
epist. ad Galat.
in which respect Marcella is highly commended by Hieronym, because as often as
she came in his sight, she moved him some doubt or other out of the scripture:
lastly, a diligent searching and perusing of the expositions of the learned set
forth in writing, as Ambrosius, Paula, Eustochium and others in the primative
Church (that I mention none of ye latter times) have been so forward this way,
that they procured the godly learned, (as Origin, Hieronym and others) to
comment and write upon diverse parts of the Scripture for their edifying, which
they did not of any persuasion like to that of the Papists, that ye scriptures
for hardness are like to the same cities of the Anakims. Number. 13. which were so
strong and so walled that they made the children of Israel quake to think of
them, and for danger as perilous in a manner to be meddled with as the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, which brought present death to the^ that
touched it: No, for then they would not have turned and tossed the bible so as
they did, but they would have been as soon weary of it, 1. Sam. 5.
as the men of Ekron were of the Ark of god. 1. Sam. 5. But partly in respect
of their duty, whereby they were bound not only not to despise, but even to use
the gift that was in others; knowing that whether it were Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
or Apollos, or Cephas, (...) this minister, or that minister, or whosoever,
all were theirs, and that all might receive profit: partly also for their
ease that they might be led forward unto perfection, the next way by them that
by all likelihood knew it better then they, their vocation leading them
especially to trauers the ground. These and the like reasons moved them (to
have a respect to the direction of those writers, but not to captiuate their
senses to it) which because they still do remain, yea and will to the end of
the world, therefore the commentaries of the learned for the more easy
understanding of the scripture are always necessary. Now for them that
understand the tongues, there are so many extant already (the lords name be
blessed) and so many come forth (...), that a man may say of them as Moses said
of those that offered for the furnishing of the Tabernacle, Exodus 36.
Exodus 36. The people bring too much and more then enough for the use of the
work that the Lord has commanded to be made. Indeed uneath a man's life will
suffice to read the books that are written already upon the scriptures in
the three chief tongues, but yet for them that are ignorant of the tongues,
there is not as yet (to borrow a few of Moses words) an helper found out meet
for them. I grant the notes that we have upon our English bibles are most sound
and profitable; but they want application for the most part, (how could it be
chosen? except the volume should have been made not portable) the commentaries
also upon diverse parts of the Scripture translated into our mother tongue (for
I have not seen many of our men's making; others have labored for us, and we
have entered into their labors) they are right worthy and most worth the
reading, but yet for the more learned and zealous sort of the common people,
John 4.38.
not for them that were lately weaned from the breast, and must be tolled on by
a little at once, and by a small price also. Therefore when I understood that
God had put into the heart of this Reverend and excellent builder (the Author
of these notes) to employ his talent this way also, namely by writing upon the
Scripture to profit the common people, I rejoiced greatly and was full of
comfort, not only because of his learning and sufficiency (being known to
be a workman that needs not to be ashamed) but also for his wise
discretions sake, for that he knows how to abound, and how to be sparing,
and so to handle the matter, that they for whom it was provided might be most
benefited. For this I say, I rejoiced (like as the Israelites when they found
the well Number. 21. they made a song in the praise of it) yea I confess I
exhorted him to go forward with this intendment of his, Number. 21.17.
though he should omit many of his sermons and lectures. For I considered
that though a man's lively voice moves more, yet a man's writing teaches more:
more thoroughly, because it gives a man leave to consider of it, and does not
strike his ears only, and then away, (for which cause words are said by the
wise Poet to have Winige^) more generally, because it reaches not only to
them that are near, but also to them that are far off, not only to them
that are alive, but also to them that are yet unborn. In deed so it is, he
that speaks profits his own congregation, but he that writes profits
all: he that speaks profits for an hour; and he that writes profits for
ever. Therefore I say, I persuaded him to redeem this power of doing more
good, whatsoever it should cost him, or rather whatsoever it should cost us
by wanting his reading. But now when I perceived for all this talk, and the
like, he was always the same man for assiduitie in preaching, even as the
children of Israel shronke not down under their labor, howsoever it were
increased, then I gave glory unto God, saying, Exodus 1.
Surely the Lord has done great things for him, yea the Lord does great
things for the people over whom he places him. For who is able to speak
oftener? who is able to do more good? Of such as are painful, being most
ready, of such as are ready being most painful, of such as are pithie being
most familiar, of such as are familiar being most pithie: learned without
ostentation, sweet without glosing, zealous without newfangling, beloved and
loving again, moving and moved himself, comfortable and comforted himself. I
do not give him half his dew, as they know that know him, and yet happily more
then every one that knows us both does think fit to proceed out of my
mouth, I being so linked to him as I am. But truth is truth who soever is the
speaker, and of the abundance of the heart, John. 1.
the mouth will utter, and the pen will write howsoever it be taken. And yet
when Christ himself refused not the testimony of John for all he was his
kinsman, because though he had known Christ after the flesh, yet he knew him
so no more, I trust the like respect need not make me seem absurd all the
while I yield nothing to flesh and blood, and do not stretch my self beyond
his measure (as the Apostle speaks.) Well, 2. Cor. 5.
this Reverend and Honorable man is now removed from us, being called to a
greater charge of government and oversight, but so that first he left his own
tears behind him; which showed how he loved us, and from us for the most part
he carried away our very hearts, not only our tears, so dear he was unto us.
We pray therefore for him that God would bless him, and his labors every
way, as he did among us, and that he may be among his flock with joy, and not
with grief: also to him we are s^ters that he would not forget us being
absent, but seek to do us good (among others) by publishing his godly
labors. Truly (gentle Reader) though I cannot do thee good by my self, yet
whatsoever favor or credit I may seem to be in with him, the same I will
gladly employ for thy sake unto that end; namely I will be to him (as Socrates
says he was to the Athenians) a spur or a stinger to prick him forward, or
rather (to speak as Isay speaks) I will be his remembrancer, and give him no
rest until he have gone through the books of Moses, at the least. This, if
God give him life so long, and if in the mean time some come not in to his
help, as Aaron and Hur helped Moses when he was weary with holding up his
hands, or as Peter's partners helped him, Luke 6. when his net was torn.
Farewell (good Reader) and do thou also bless and love this man, who for thy
sake does thus debase himself (because he would not exceed thy capacity be
thou never so simple) whereas he could otherwise get himself a great name like
the great men of the earth, by writing for the reach of the better learned:
again farewell. Hereford 1. April. 1592.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Miles Smith.

Certain plain, brief, and comfortable Notes upon every chapter of Genesis,
gathered and laid down for the good of them that are not able to use better
helps, and yet are careful to read the word, and right heartily desirous to
taste the sweet of it.
Genesis, Chap. 1.
The whole Chapter entreats of the Creation of the World, and particularly
delivers unto us, these points to be considered of: Who Created. What was
Created. When. How. Whereof. To what end. In what space.


TOuching the first, it says God created, Verse. 1.
therein implying the whole Trinity, The Trinity creates.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: for so we learn by
conference of other Scriptures with this. Acts. 4.24.
Of the Father give those Apostls witness When they lift up their voices to God
with one accord, and said O Lord thou art the God which have made the Heaven
and the Earth, the Sea and all things that are therein, against thy holy Son
Jesus, etc. Also (...) he said to Job, Where wast thou All things that were
made (...) of the earth, etc. Job. 38.4
Of the Son and without him was made ^^mselfe what the Psalm says: Hebr.
1.10. Psa. 102.25
Thou Lord in the beginning haste established the Earth, and the Heavens are
the works of thy hands. Also that in the Evangelist, all things were made by
it, (to wit, by the word Christ) and without it was made nothing that was
made. Of the Holy Ghost witnesses Job when he says, John. 1.3.
his Spirit has garnished the heavens, Job.. 26.13.
and again: The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the almighty
has given me life. 33.4.
And in this place by the judgment of very learned, Zanch. de tribus Elo*
him. 14. page 1. par. Metandis.
The Spirit of God moved upon the waters: by consequence, those words of
Jeremy: The gods that have not made Heaven and Earth, shall perish from the
Earth, and from under heaven If then the Holy Ghost should not create, Iere.
10.11
he should be no God: yea of all the three persons conclude thus, and so this
Prophets testimony shall infer the creation of each person. Austen says,
Sicut personae sunt inseperabiles, In Genes.
ita inseperabiliter agunt: as the persons are inseparable among themselves so
do they work inseperablye. Again, (...). Basil.
Opera Trinitatis quoad extra sunt indiuisa and communia, with many such
testimonies. In this very place that we now look upon, the Hebrew word for God
is of the plural number, to note (as some think) the plurality of persons,
and the verb created, of the singular number, to note the unity of deity in
them all. And verse. 26. it is said, Come let us make man, noting the three
persons all joint creators together, and cannot be understood of Angels, as
spoken to them, because man was not created according to the Image of Angels,
but of God. Now if any should doubt how the first article of our belief
agrees with this which attributes the creation to God the Father, it may be
answered that it is not so done there, to the end to exclude either Son or
Holy Ghost, but only to show the order and manner of the creation, and other
works of God: for as the father is the fountain of the Godhead, and yet not
therefore either Son or Holy Ghost excluded from the same, but each of them
God, and equal with the Father as touching the Godhead: so rightly is the
Father made author of creation, and yet neither Son nor Holy Ghost idle in
the same. But (...) that by a certain order the (...) first in order, wills
it as it was, the whole fabric and course of things created. Then he
expresses this will by his Son, in whom as the Image of his Father, the
decree and order of all ^he work shined: Colo. 1.15.
he spoke and they were made and distinguished in their orders. Thirdly the
Holy Ghost together with them both, works also immediately, cherishing and
nourishing what was created, and giving motion unto them. Thus was there an
order in the work, and yet all three persons jointly creators of all together.
This marked and remembered, both answers the doubt now in speech touching our
belief, and many other places of Scripture also, wherein the creation is
ascribed in show of words but to one person. John says, All things were made
by the son. Paul says, Yet unto us there is but one God, 1. Cor. ^.6.
which is the Father of whom are all things. And in the same verse he says of
Christ, that By him are all things, and such like Austen says Filius non agit
a se, sed per se. The Son does not of himself, but by himself. All which
speeches and their like either in Scripture or Fathers, note an order among the
persons in their work, but exclude none from the same. Note.
For as we say the Fire shyneth by the light which comes from the same, and
yet we make not that light any servile instrument off or to the same fire, but
even his natural force and power: So is the Father said to do whatsoever he
does by the Son, and yet not as by any under instrument and inferior
means, as wickedlye the Arians would conclude, but as by his substantial
power and virtue. And again, as we say the fire shyneth, and the light of
the fire also shyneth: so all which the Father does, the Son also does.
Thus much of this point.

2 What was created. Heaven and earth, Verse. 1.
say these words of Moses here: And Heaven and Earth and Sea, and all things
that are in them, say the Apostles in an other place. Acts. 4.24.
But that the generality be not mistaken, you must remember that needful
limitation which the Apostle adds when he says, All things that were made.
By him all things were made, and without him was made nothing, That was made,
John. 1.3.
By which clause is made a plain distinction of things created, from things
uncreated. Nazianzene and Epiphanius, with other of the old writers, rightly
concluded upon it against the Arians, that as the Father was not made nor
created, so neither Son nor holy Ghost were. But especially this clause
discerns and distinguishes the works of God and good creatures, from sin
and death, and such like, which were not things made, but came otherwise, not
things positiuely, as I may speak of themselves, but a privation, destruction,
and horrible deprauation of the order first made by God. John. 8.
Thus teaches John when he makes Satan the author of lies, and says then he
speaks of his own. Again when he says, 1. Epist. 2.
the concupiscence of the flesh is not of the Father, but of the world: 3.8.
and in the next Chapter, He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the
Devil sins from the beginning. And as for death, By sin came death, says
the Apostle, and the reward of sin is death, etc. When it is said therefore
that God made all things, remember to add this, all things that were made, as
S. John does, and so shall you exclude from the work of God, all sin,
death, deformity, confusion, tyranny, calamity, and such like, which being
never made by God, are crept in by Satan's malice and man's corruption, as
breaches and blots of Gods order.

3 When? In the beginning says Moses here, and much a do have curious heads
made about these words. But if we have that reverent fear in us, that all men
ought to have toward the word of God, they are plain enough: for if he had
said in the end, God created heaven and earth, would we not straight have
conceived, that he created them last, to wit, in the work of the sixte day?
And why should we not as easily conceive him, when he says in the beginning to
mean nothing, but first of all, to wit, the first day, and so leave all
ungodly quirkes to a vain heart, that shall weep for such wickedness one day?
In principio, say the best interpreters, that is, Certo ac definito tempore,
atque adeo in principio temporum, non ab aeterno. In the beginning, that is in
a certain and definite time, and even in the beginning of time not from
everlasting. In principio, scilicet creandi. In the beginning, to wit, of
creating ^aith very rightly: Abben Hezra, God created heaven and earth. And let
these grave lights of grave and learned men sway more with us then a thousand
subtilties, which as Syrach speaks, are fine subtilties, but unrighteous.
This creation of it in the beginning, Syra. 19.24
conuinceth the falsehood that it is eternal. So do many things mo beside this,
and namely that computation which is generally received of all men of the
years which it has endured, and which be now past since the creation. But
nevertheless on go some with their blind concepts, and would prove the
contrary. For first say they, The 1. are* against the creation of the world.
if we grant the world had a beginning, then was God idle ever before, but that
is absurd, therefore it was not created, but was eternal. We may answer them
first, that the rule which they harp upon in this argument, namely that
Perfectissima causa non est otiosa: the most perfect cause is not idle, Non est
vera dea gentibus voluntariis, is not true of such things as work by will, or
willingly, as the most excellent Carpenter may forbear his work and action a
time. If they think that God was alone, therein they show themselves carnal
and speak carnally. For how should he be alone more then, then now, unto whom
all things are present, though they be future, and things that are not as if
they were. Hierom upon this occasion cites that saying of Scipio. Nunquam
minus solus quam cum maxim solus. Never less alone then when I am most alone.
And cannot this be true much more of God, that he is not alone without these
creatures which he made. Could he say it when his country was lost, his wife
and children, friends and lovers, that yet all his good was with him, and
cannot the Lord say it much more, that his good stands not in the presence of
creatures, but before ever they were, and now that they are, yet all his is
with him without them? Christ says, he is not alone, John. 8.29.
not in respect of any company of man or creature, but in respect of his Father
whom he says to be with him. Now shall Christ not be alone in respect of
his divine conjunction with his Father, and shall it not be alike with the
Father in regard of his son, and with the holy Ghost in regard of them both,
and with each of them in respect of others. Surely that inseparable unity of
the Trinity denies to every person a possibility to be alone. And that
insearchable mystery of the fruition of his own glory, is other manner of
company (if I may so speak) then all the creatures of this world can yield him.

O but yet say they, what did God ever before. Verily says Austen, he made
Hell for such busy brains and unreformed hearts and toongs, that will so
curiously enter into Gods secrets. How much better would the words of the
modest and godly Apostle become them. Romans 11.34
O the deepenes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out, who has known
the mind of the Lord, or who was his counsell^r, etc.

Secondly they reason thus. The moouer and the thing moved, be relatiues, and
the one supposes the other. But God the moouer was ever, therefore the thing
moved, to wit the world. But we answer them to this also truly, that if there
be a moouer actually, then there must needs also be a thing moved. But God
though he were from everlasting himself, yet did he not actually move in
respect of these outward creatures, which are without his essence, but only
was Mouens potentia. It is far differing therefore to speak of one as was
said before, that works by will and freely, and to speak of a thing that
works naturally, and it is no absurdity to say, yt the relation betwixt the
first cause and the world made, began in time, since the creation of the world
is an outward action of God, and voluntary. The very same answer may be made
unto the rule, when the cause is, the effect is, the cause eternal, therefore
the effect, to wit, ye world. For this holds in natural things also, that
work naturally and necessarily, but not in things ye work freely and
willingly, as God did in creating. Otherwise every house must be as ancient as
the Carpenter that made it. No the relation there betwixt ye cause and the
effect, begins in time after, because he is a voluntary cause, and so is it
with God. Silly then and slack are these conclusions you evidently see, and far
from demonstrations.

Thirdly they reason thus. That which has no alteration, is not subject to
generation or corruption: The heaven has no alterations for thus many thousand
years none have been observed. Therefore it is not subject to generation to
be made, or corruption, to cease to be. Therefore it is eternal. We answer,
that all though it might be truly said, that many parts of the world are
subject to alteratio^s, as the air, the water, the earth, etc, and
consequently the whole not perpetual, whose parts be alterable. Yet with
divinity we rather say, that Generatio physica, natural generation and
creation be two things, and differ much: so do Corruption physica, natural
corruption and violent destruction, which a renewing shall follow. Therefore
although neither generation nor corruption can be without alteration, yet
things may be created that have no alterations, as Angels, stars, souls. And
by divine power celestial bodies may be destroyed, or at least changed and
renewed according to the saying: Heaven and earth shall pass, and again: They
all shall wax old as does a garment, etc. Behold I create a new heaven, and
new earth, and with such like. For the argument then it may be granted, that
albeit the world was not Genitus, generated, as I may say, yet it was created
by God of nothing, and so their purpose fails for all this cavil also.

Fourthly they say, Time is eternal, therefore motus, moving: for time is the
measure of moving: and if motion, then a thing moved, to wit, the world, etc.
For answer whereunto, first the consequence may be denied: for time is not
only taken as philosophy takes it, for measure of moving, according to first
and later. But sometime it is put simply and absolutely for the continuance of
a thing, though it be not the measure of the motion of the same. So may we call
eternity, and that infinite continuance, that I may so speak of God, who has
bin from everlasting. But this is improperly, for indeed the manner that has
taken place in schools, is to call time the measure of moving. Now Aristotle
not able by natural wit, to see rightly what difference was betwixt time and
eternity, or what manner of continuance eternity was, judged time to be
eternal, because he saw an eternity of a moouer: which is not so, for there
may be a mouer eternal, to wit, God, albeit no motus corporis mobilis: for God
is not corpus mobile, as the parts of the world are, and as philosophy
means. Now Tempus est mensura motus corporis mobilis non dei, according to
Philosophy. Secondly touching the antecedent, that time is eternal, it may
truly also be denied. And for that which is usually brought to prove it, that
it began with the first moouer in some moment or point of time, which point
being a conjunction of passed and future, presupposes a point passed, and so
an other infinitely: it may be answered that every point of time is not a
continuer and ioiner of passed and future, but it is also sometime (...),
amending of time, whether it be at the beginning or ending, for as for example,
the point in the line is not ever a continuer of the same line, joining that
which follows after, to that which went before, but also a certain thing
both beginning and ending the line: So in time, there is Nunc initians, a
beginning, and an instant, or a present that begins with the thing, as when
the world took his beginning, then began also such an instant or present,
there is also Nunc continuans, a continuing point, which is properly called
time, because Tempus est fluxio a priori ad posterius, a going from the first
to the later, and at last there shall be Nunc terminans, an ending point, to
wit, the end of the world now thus created, moving and b^ing. Nothing
therefore helps this argument, to prove an eternity of the world, more then
the rest did. Many mo might be alleged to this purpose, but no better then
these, and I judge neither these nor them very pleasant to such as I specially
labor to profit, because they conceive not such consequences. Wherefore I cut
them off, and this only I commend unto you to be thought of. It is impossible
even by the Philosophers own rules that there should be mo infinites then one.
Now God is one infinite, therefore nothing else in heaven or earth beside. But
whatsoever is else it had a beginning, and many things shall have an ending
also. The rest by his power shall have an eternity given them to continue not
of themselves.

4 How did God create all things? Not by or with any labor, Psalm. 33. Romans
4.17.
but by his word: for He spoke the word (says the Psalm) and they were made,
he commanded and they were created. Liberrime sine vlla coactione, no^
necessitate absoluta, sed necessitate co^sequentiae, nempe suae volu^tatis.
Freely without any co^straint, not by an absolute necessity, but by a
necessity of consequence, to wit, of his own good will. Solo nutu sine vlla
mutatione aut fatigatione. Only with his beck without any change or wearines
in h^mselfe, which is the highest and excellentest kind of working.

5 Whereof? Not of his essence, neither of any former matter coeternall with
himself, but of nothing: for if by him all things were made, surely beside him
nothing is excepted from making, no not that first matter whereupon all things
were made. But you will say man was made of the dust of the earth, fishes and
fowls of the water, woman of man, and then how were all things made of
nothing? Damascene answers, Deus fecit omnia ex nihilo, alia quidem
immediate, alia mediate. Lib. 2. ca. 5.
God made all things of nothing, but some immediately, others mediatly. His
meaning is, that God made first of nothing a matter, a first matter whereof he
made all other things. Now that first matter is made of nothing immediately, but
the rest that were formed of that matter were formed of nothing mediatly,
because they were made of that which was made of nothing, and so secondarily or
mediatly as I say then of nothing. But then you will say again, Ex nihilo
nihil fit, Of nothing nothing is made. And I answer you, that so it is in the
order of nature, now set and established of God, but in God himself this
principle holds not. Or if you will thus. By man this is impossible, to wit,
to make any thing of nothing, but with God all things are possible, and want of
matter lets not him. It is our comfort that he could and can so do: for
thereby we know his great ability to preserve what so wonderfully he has
made, as also to confound and turn to nothing all subtle and malicious
practices against his children.

6 To what end? To the praise of his glory, says the Apostle, for in him, and
by him, and for him are all things, Prou. 16.1. Psa. 103.22 Romans 11.36
and this is the general end. Beside which there be also special ends and
subordinate ends under them again, as the manifestation, the acknowledging and
contemplation of his heavenly and divine wisdom and goodness which appears
in the Creation. For if the Lord would be celebrated, then must he create
things to acknowledge him, and to celebrate and praise his name being known
and manifested. Therefore he created things reasonable and unreasonable, that
they might praise him, and be matter of his glory. The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the fyrmament shows his handy work. Again, Psalm. 19.1.
the government of the world a subordinate end to that again. For therefore
created he the world, that he might govern it with his providence, and
preserve it, and so might ever declare his wonderful works which he has done
from the beginning of the world, or now does, or yet shall do, especially that
he might govern his Church of elect angels and men. Esai. 40.26.
Lift up your eyes (says the Prophet therefore) and see who has created
these things. Thirdly and lastly, Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.7. 1. Cor. 3.22
that all other things might serve to the health of body and soul, to the
life, pleasure, and necessity of man, and especially to the good of his
chosen, being unto them as it were means and ministers whereby God doing them
good, might be honored and praised of them. Only man he created for himself,
and all the rest for man.

Now if any with the Manichees enquire wherefore many things were made whereof
they know no use to man, either of things in the sea or land, let them
consider what S. Austen answers: namely, that herein they should rather
adore the riches of Gods power and goodness, not only in creating, but also in
preserving such a multitude of things as he has created, and say with ye
prophet David, O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made
them all, Psalm. 104.24.31.
the earth is full of his goodness. Glory be to the Lord for ever: let the Lord
rejoice in his works. Though we know not the use of them, yet his wisdom
does, and that should content us. Sure we ought to be that he made nothing in
vain, and it is said of them all that they were good.

Hurtful beasts and such like why created.
Yea but what may be said for so many hurtful beasts and creatures as be in
the world upon land, or in Sea? Why did God create them? Surely it was
enough for answer hereunto that was said before, that though we know not
by and by the good of a creature, yet therefore God may not be condemned for
creating them, for he may do with his own as pleases him. Yet nevertheless
we may further say as some do, that if man had not sinned, no creature had been
hurtful to him, and therefore now his fault to be blamed, not Gods creation.
Lactantius answers, that in great wisdom God has made as well hurtful
things as others, De ira dei. cap. 13.
that by contraryes, a fuller knowledge might grow in man to the praise of God
that has done all so well. And this true answer dasheth that great
thunderbolt as he thinks, of the Epicure, made to overthrow Gods providence
and care to govern the world, and makes it seem more foolish then
fearful. God (says he) either will take away all hurtful things and can
not, or can and will not, or neither can nor will, or both can and will. If he
would and can not, then wants he power, and is not God: if he can and will
not, then is he enuiouse, and is not God: if he neither can nor will, then
both enuiouse and weak, and so no God: if he both can and will, then how do
they yet remain. This goodly argument is easily answered, by saying, he can
and will not, and yet not enuiouse therein, but good and careful for man, that
he might by sight of contrary evil better discern the good, and so profit
thereby both in wisdom and thankfulness to the Lord. Lactantius whose
Chapter is very worthy reading.

7 And lastly, in what time, or how many days did God create all things, in
six days says the Scripture, and every day some thing says this place, till
the seventh day, wherein he rested. Non vno momento, sed sex dierum spatio,
not in one moment, but in six days space. If you happily think or meet with
Syrach his words, who says, He that lives made all things together, the
Lord who only is just etc. You must consider, that he speaks not of the time,
but of the multitude of creatures. Meaning that God made them all together
before he rested, and gave over creating, but not meaning that he made them
all in one moment of time, or in one day, for we see both this place and others
against it: the Lords own commandment written with his own finger gives
testimony, that in six days the whole was made. Thus are we instructed in
all these seven points that I named in the beginning: to wit, who created, what
was created, when, how, whereof, to what end, and in how many days, or what
time.

Now touching the use, this further. How the creation profits us to the
knowing of God.
What may be known of God says the Apostle, is manifest in these creatures,
for God has showed it unto them: for ye invisible things of him, that is, his
eternal power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world, etc. The
quantity, qualities, course, and perpetuities of things created, how do they
show God, surely says the Prophet the heavens declare the glory of God, and
the fyrmament shows his handy work. Psalm. 19.
Again the same Prophet teaches the like, when he goes from this creation to
the view and thought of Gods wonderful and great love to mankind, saying:
When I behold thy heavens, even the work of thy fyngers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained, Psalm. 8.3.
O what is man Lord think I then, etc. Read the whole Psalm.

Concerning other things to be observed in this Chapter, some say, how could
Moses write of these things that were done so long before he was borne? How
Moses could write of these so long before him done.
surely not by any wisdom and learning of Egypt wherein yet he was most
excellent, but by that holy spirit of God, whereby he had received to be a
faithful Minister in the house of God, being in this above all Prophets, that
he was enabled not only to govern things present, and foretell things future,
but thus notably to lay down things passed from the beginning of the world.
Act. 7.22.


Touching those waters above the fyrmament, well said Beda in his time, Verse.
7.
what manner of waters they be, and for what purpose ordained, Waters above the
fyrmament to what use.
he knows that made them: thereby giving us to learn, what modesty
becomes us in speaking of the secrets of God. The same power that is able to
uphold all the frame of this world without any earthy prop, is able to hold
those waters there in their place, to that end that his wisdom has ordained
them for, and this should content us.

Because it is said, Let the lights be for signs etc. therefore Astrologers
catch as though their unlawful dealings should therein be warranted. Verse. 14.
Astrology not warranted.
But let them confer Esaias 44. verse. 22. and Ierem. 10. verse. 2. with this,
and then it will appear that herein the Lord meant not to warrant what there
he misliketh. Esaias 47.12 Eccles. 7.2.8. Chap. Esai. 41.22. Psa. 104.19
But that these words are to be taken in things natural and political, as
signs of day and night, Summer, and Winter, etc. For if the Stars inclined
men unto evil, how should it be said, that God saw them to be good when he had
made the^, nay, how should it not redound even to the touch of the creator thus
far that he is author of evil. But that be far from us to say and
therefore, let God be good, and his stars good, and their art wicked and
naught, Let Austen speak for all that I could name unto you. A^g. in quest. De
ciuit. Dei confess. in Psalmos contra Academ.
Fugiendum omnibus modis ab hac art monemus. Curio^i etenim eius, inimici sunt
dei et sine solitudine nunquam sunt. Semper enim suspensi expectant quod minime
certum sciunt. We exhort all men says he to fly from this art: for they that
are curious thereof, are the enemies of God, and are never without fearful
cares, ever expecting what they know not to be certain. Again, nothing so
contrary to Christianity as this art, for it is against the law of God:
with a number such like speeches, he himself in his youth having been
delighted with it, as he confesses.

What it is for man to be created according to the Image and similitude of God.
The Apostle Paul teaches, Gods Image what it is.
Ephesians. 4.24. and also Coloss. 3.10. Read Iunius for more.

Man is appointed here his food of God that he should eat, and some move
the question how that shall be. How does God appoint man food before his fall.
For if man were created immortal if he sinned not, what needed he any meat
to be appointed for him, since yet he had not sinned. Answer is made by some,
that there be two kinds of Immortal, one that cannot die but ever live, an
other that may live for ever, a condition being observed, and die also if that
condition be broken. One immortal after the first sort needs no meat, but
he that is immortal after the second sort does need, and such was Adam: if
he had not sinned he had not dyed, but sinning he was so made. that he might
die, and therefore his flesh and nature not such that could live without meat.
Others answer that this appointment of meat was made by God in respect of
their fall, which he knew would be. Howsoever it was, curiosity becomes us
not: but this comfort we may rightly take by it, that what the Lord has made,
he will maintain and nourish, and casts for them his providence ever to that
end, even as the Prophet says, Cast thy care upon the Lord and he shall
nourish thee up. He is our father and knows what we have need of. He cares
for us, as says S. Peter. Again in that he says, Ego ded^, I have given,
ever may we be put in mind by it, when we sit down to eat from whence those
gifts and blessings come, surely even from hence, I have given them, and
therefore thankefulnes due, and most due to so good a God and careful Father.

That it is said, when all was made the Lord saw, and all was good, Verse. 31.
yea, exceeding good, the like having been testified also particularly, it may
admonish us as near as ever we shall obtain strength, Follow God in doing all
well.
to endeavor to be like our heavenly Father, in doing nothing but what may
receive in his mercy such testimony that it is good, for great is the comfort
of that, and more then great the discomfort of the contrary.

The making of all things before man, shows Gods wonderful mercy and love
to man, Gods love provides all ready for man before he is made.
who would as it were prepare every thing for his use and comfort before he
would have him be in the world. Not unlike to a man here amongst us, that
loving the friend whom he intends to have with him, and to come unto him,
ere ever he will have him come, makes all things ready that may be either for
pleasure or necessity to him, and then sends for him to come, all things
being ready. O what is man, frail man, wretched and miserable man, that God
should thus regard him, may we well say with the Prophet, yet thus it was. And
shall that God that thus prepared for man ere ever he was, now forsake man when
he is, if he be not most unkindly and too unkindly forsaken of man? it cannot
be, it cannot be, and therefore in all distresses cast your eyes upon him, and
think of such testimonies of his love as this was, and be sure that he knowing
what you have need of, will never forsake you.

When the Angels were created, it is not precisely named, but that they were
created, Creation of Angels.
both by this place it is known, and Coloss. 1.16. by Jude also and Peter: the
usual opinion is, the first day, read Iunius. And this of this Chapter
briefly.

Chap. 2.
The general heads of this Chapter are three. The institution of the Sabbath.
A repetition of some things concerning Creation. The institution of Marriage.


COncerning the first, it is said, Verse. 2.
GOD rested the seventh day, and thereupon consecrated it holy to his Church
for ever: which rest of the Lord must be understood from creating, How God
rests.
not from preserving, and from creating, to weet, of any new kind, for
otherwise daily he creates the souls of men, and disposes them to their
bodies. How the Father yet works etc.
If any question be made of briers, brembles, and such like, not created at
first, but springing up since, answer may be made, that these, and many other
things appertain to corruption, and here mention is made only of perfection.
These things have proceeded from God punishing, and the six days works from
God not offended.

2 This Sabbath begun thus by the Lords own example, after it pleased him by a
law to ratify, Exodus 20. it was called The Sabbath of days, because it was
every seventh day. Beside which, Diverse Sabboths.
the Jews had a Sabbath of years every seventh year, Exodus 23. Leuit. 25.
and seven times seven years made 49. the next year after being ever the
Iubile, to weet, every 50. year: Then was the Sabbatum magnum, the great
Sabbath, when the Passover fell upon the Sabbath, as it did that year that
Christ suffered, John 19.

3 That most strict and precise rest specified in the law from all work, from
rosting of meat, gathering of sticks, Exodus 16.29.35.3. and Number. 15. from
any long journey, and such like, were Ceremonial, and therefore with other the
Ceremonies of the law are abrogated by Christ, there remaining to man now a
further freedom, and yet without breach of the Sabbath, as I pray you read in
my treatise upon that commandment at large. The day also of the Jews
Sabbath was changed from the Saturday to the Sunday by the Apostles themselves,
Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2.

4 The end and uses of this Sabbath also you may there more at large see, Ends
of the Sabbath.
to wit: For order in the Church of God, that we might meet together, and none
be freed from serving God at least one day in seven. For the relief of
servants and brute beasts, which by pitilesse worldlings might else be abused.
And lastly to resemble, and still to remember us of our eternal rest in
heaven, to be cared for now, and enjoyed then when this life is ended, Esaias
58.13.


The exercises also of this Sabbath you may there read, to weet, Exercises.
preaching, praying, reading, singing, conferring, mutual admonishing,
visiting the sick, poor, prisoners, with many such like.

Touching the repetion of things concerning creation, verse. 4. and 5. it is
said, that God had not yet caused it to rain: therein ascribing it to the Lord
as his peculiar power to open and shut the heavens, Rain, the gift of God.
and to send drought or rain, according to his good pleasure. And in deed so
it is very often repeated in the Scriptures, that we might duly confess it,
and thankfully ever consider it. I will send you rain (says the Lord) in due
season* and the earth shall yield her increase, Leu. 26.4. Deu. 11.14
yea, I will give the first rain and the later, that thou may gather thy
wheat, thy wine, and thy oil. The use of this knowledge we learn by the
Prophet, even to say in our hearts. Come, let us now fear the Lord our God
that gives rain both early and late in due season, Iere. 5.24.
and which reserueth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest. That a mist
supplied the place of the rain, God will never want means.
and watered all the earth, we learn the great power of our God to furnish and
steed himself ever with means to effect his will. If he have not one thing,
he can take an other, and never will he want convenient instruments of mercy
for his children.

2 Man was created of the duste of the earth, that so base a matter might ever
work humility of mind, Verse. 7.
cut the cords of swelling conceits (for wherefore should dust and claye be
lifted up) and cause a true remembrance of assured end, Man's base matter should
humble him.
that earth we were, earth we are, and to earth again we shall return: he,
not we can tell how soon.

3 But ere ever he made Man, All made ready to man.
he made all things for man, as was noted before. The earth to go upon, the
heavens to cover him, the Sea for walls, Fishes and Fowls, Herbs and Trees,
to feed and comfort him, to delight and accompanye him, light by day, and
the like by night, many a green and pleasant thing, and what wanted of such
creatures for man before he was. Is this God a changeling? was his care for
man then so great, and is it now nothing. No, no, he is the same, and though
we have sinned, yet he is entreated, and for Christ, as he was he will be,
careful and good for man and to man evermore. Yet this is not all, but
consider we further of this thus. God no les careful of us then of Adam.
That if this dealing showed love and care to Adam, then how is it not each
one of our cases at this day, in some respect. For before ever he would have
any of us to live and breathe in this world, we see, had he not provided
Parents and Friends, houses and comfortes, and whatsoever might be needful
for us? O love then to us also most kind, and a care that may assure us he
will ever care for us. Love him and fear him, honor him and serve him, he is
your GOD, who provided for you before you were borne, things needful for
you, against you should be borne, and will he ever forsake you, now when you
are borne? O faith increase, grow and be s^rong. help Lord, help, for
flesh is full frail, and faynter then I would.

Verse. 7.
4 God breathed in his face the breath of life, and man was made a living
soul: God both giver and taker of life.
God gave life then, and who can take it away without his leave? Can raging
tyrants, bluddy persecuters, fly Iudases? No, no, till he will, you cannot
dye, thunder they and threaten they never so much, and breathe out slaughter
every hour against you. God gave life, and God must take it away, it is one
prerogative of his, you need not fear. Again, who can preserve life but he
that first gave it? No man, no means. And therefore using as you are
occasioned, No physic without God, can profit.
what God has appointed of any helps, yet cast your eye ever upon the
Fountain from whom life came at the first. It is an other prerogative again
of his, to preserve life also, and to give his blessing for that purpose to his
creatures, Herbs or Plants, meats, or drinks, men and their counsels
whatsoever.

Again, life is the gift of God, therefore abuse not what God has given you.
Life must be accomted for.
It was not of your self, but it was given you* you must account for it, how
you have used it to the giuers praise* and your own discharge.

Verse. 8.
5 God made a Paradise, a Garden most pleasant as ever was, Paradise made for
a figure of Heaven.
that it might be for ever to posterity after, a figure of a celestial
place, abounding with innumerable comfortes, for the godly prepared in Heaven.
He made not man in Paradise, but translated him and put him in it after he
was created, that it might resemble, that we also shall be removed from the
place where we first took our being, to a place with our GOD, where we
shall never take ending. God set in this Paradise things not only profitable
for use, but pleasant also for sight, Verse. 9.
thereby assuring us, that he disliketh not our pleasures any more then our
necessaries, Some pleasures allowed.
but most graciously ^^oweth, that we should have both, so that we will let
the Tree of life alone, that is, so that we do not swell above that which is
allowed unto us, but be obedient to God, and with praise and thanks use his
creatures.

6 God set man in this Garden, to dress and keep it, Verse. 15.
not allowing Man in his most innocencye to be idle: no, Idleness hated of
God from the beginning.
he would not his Angels to want what to do, but made them ministering
Spirits. How then should he now, when corruption has caused a curse, and
that curse given cause of force to labor, allow loathsome idleness? Be sure
he does not, be sure he will not. And therefore all honest minds will not
look for now, what was not lawful then. Yet differed that labor then, much
from our labor now, for that was an iniunction inferring no grief, and this
is a pain deserved by sin.

7 God allowed them not to eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
Verse. 17.
Man scholed to obey even in Paradise.
that they might be acquainted even from their beginning, with obedience and
subjection to their maker: which as it was first and before all sin, so
should it be ever of more account to a godly mind, then all the pleasures of
sin under Heaven. If not, we see the curse upon the contrary, it shall
cause us dye the death, that is, eternal damnation is the due reward of the
contempt of Gods commandment by disobedience. Me think we may profitte
thus by it also: to see how God took his course to bring up these new
created Servants of his, and so we to do to such as God send us. He would
invre them with obedience even from the first, Learn of God how to bring up
youth.
and have them know what awe was to their superior: so let us do to our
Children and charge, and we shall follow a good pattern. Bow their backs,
even from their Cradle, that is, ever as years permit, let them learn to
obey, and it shall be well: for he well rules that has well obeyed, and he
comes the rather to bear that credit, when other cockered wantons have the
wrath of GOD, and the dislike of men against them. This is enough though I say
no more, yet think you much more of it, whom you follow, when you invre with
obedience, and whom you refuse to follow, when you make over boulde whom you
should keep under. Wanton darlings have made many weeping Parents, and drunk
to their woe of the Cup of shame, when they might have been honored if they
had learned subjection. They break rather then bow, when once time is past.

Marriage, the third point of the division, is also laid down to us in this
Chapter, and in this sort.

1 Who ordained it, even the Lord: for the Lord said, It is not good for man
to be alone: Verse. 18
let us make him an helper. 2 For what cause? to be a help a comfort and good
unto Man. 3 When? in Paradise, when man was yet in his innocence. Verse. 21.
4 Whereof the Woman was made? of the ribbe of man's side, thereby becoming
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.
The holiness of marriage.
All which are great testimonies, proofs and arguments, of the holiness and
goodness of this divine institution of marriage, whereunto may be added the words
of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel. Whom God has joined together, Math. 19.
let no man put a sunder. Gods conjunctions be ever holy and good, therefore
marriage most commendable and honorable. The words of the Apostle, Every one
has his proper gift, 1. Corin. 7.
but all the gifts of God be holy and good, therefore marriage honorable.
Again, The unbelieving husband is sanctified by his believing wife, verse. 14.
and the unbelieving wife by the believing husband. Therefore marriage most
holy and good. For how could an impure thing sanctify and make holy the
users. It would pollute them and not sanctify them if it were such. Again,
possess your vessels in holiness, meaning of married people: 1. These. 4.
therefore m^riage holy. Finally the prohibition dislike or contempt of it, is
called a doctrine and concept of the devil: 1. Tim. 4.
therefore most holy and honorable is marriage, and ever was since it was
ordained.

The ^ethings thus note we against all heretics or Popes and Papists
whatsoever, (...)
that impeache the dignity of th^^ the Lords ordinance, first in P^radice,
even in man's innocence. If any ignorantly think yet happily, it is not so unto
all men, let him truly think of the words of the Holy Ghost to the contrary,
Marriage is honorable among all men, all men I say again, and ma^ke it,
Marriage holy in all men, not only in some.
and the bed undefiled, when whoremongers and adulterers the Lord shall judge.
When God says all, dare you say not all? Let him also view with conscience,
not to cavil against a truth, the generality of the speech. For avoiding of
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own
husband. Every man Every woman.
Every man, every woman, without exception, Prophets were married, Priests were
married, Apostles were married, Evangelists were married, and what calling wholly
was ever excepted by God?

This breefely thus noted of this holy institution, for fuller profit, yet by
the text consider it further, and mark.

1 How it is not said by God that it was not good for Adam to be alone, but
for Man to be alone, Verse. 18.
thereby in wisdom enlarging the good of Marriage to man in general, that is
to some of all sorts, and not tying i^ to Adam alone, See by god what to shoot
at in your actions.
or to any sort only. Again, in saying it is not good, you see what the
Lord regards in his actions and works, to wit, goodness and profit to the
users, how good it may be, how comfortable, how profitable, which is a good
lesson for all such as regard in their deeds their wills, their pleasures. Sic
volo, sic iubeo. So will I, so command I, not respecting at all the good of
any other. Abuse of authority.
Shall sinful ffeshe disdain to do what the Lord of Lords does. He,
though he have all power and authority, yet will not do only according to
that, but he looks how good it may be that he does, and shall sinful
flesh, duste, and earth, upon a little authority be so proud, that their
will must rule all actions? O carrye we then this testimonye of our
consciences with us evermore, that in our doings we regard how good it may
be unto others, not to our selves only, and that is to be like God.

2 Mark it with all your heart, how God does consider before ever man see the
want himself, God considers man's want before himself.
what may be good for man, and enters into purpose to make for him, and
prepare for him what yet he wanted, and had need of saying, Let us make man a
helper like himself. O how may we clea^e and clinge to the providence of
this GOD in all comfort of our minds, Note.
that thus thinks of what may be good for us before ever we think of it
our selves, and not only thinks of it, but provides it, and prepares it
for us, saying in all matters, as in this, yet my Servant such an one wants
such a help, it is not good for him to be without it, come therefore let us
prepare it for him, etc. How have you your self that read this, ^a^^ed of
this goodness of God ere this in many several things that were in his purpose
prepared for you, before you knew your want your self, and given to you in
time, you even now at this instance inioying diverse of them? Will you then
distrust his case ^eereafter, if any thing yet be wanting to you, having
found him so heretofore? GOD forbid, and follow this note in your meditation
long, for it is comfortable.

Verse. 18.
3 That Woman is honored with the title of a Helper, not only shows the
goodness of the institution, Woman a helper.
as was noted before, but teaches also how dear and beloved she should be
to her Husband, for whose good she was ordained and given. Who will not
cherishe, foster and love what is given him for a help, not by Man, but by GOD
himself? Her help consists cheefely in three things, in bearing him
Children, the comfortes of his life, and s^ayes of his age, Wherein (...).
which he cannot have without her. In keeping his body holy to the Lord,
from filthye pollution which the Lord abhors. The Apostle so teaching when
he speaks thus: For the avoiding of Fornication, 1. Cor. 7.
let every man have his own Wife: and thirdlye, in governing his house,
Children, and Familye, and many ways ^ending his own person, both in
sickness and health. These all and every one, are great helps, and therefore
the Woman iustlye to be regarded for them. In this last, Man also has his
care, to wit, The man ought to furnish the woman.
so to furnishe the Woman with direction, and ability, that she may do
within doors, what of her should be done. Whereupon the man is compared to
the Sun that gives light, and the Woman to the Moon, that receives light
from the Sun. The man as the sun. The woman as the Moon.
Mulier fulget radiis mariti, the Womam shines with the beams of her
Husband, is an old saying, because he should provide what she may dispose
and shine withal in her house, to both his and her comfort and credit. But it
is quite contrary with many idle Drones. that shine with the beams of their
Wives, Idle men spend what their wives get.
that is, idelye live by their Wives sore labor, and wickedlye spend what
they truly get by day and by night with any industrye.

4 But whereupon was Woman made. Verse. 21.
Surely not of an outward but of an inward part of Man, Why of the rib made.
that she might be most dear to him, even as his inwardes. Not of the head
of Man, least she should be proud and look for superiority. Not of the
foot of Man, least she should be contemned and used as far his inferior,
but of his side, that she might be used as his fellow, cleaving to his side
as an inseparable companion of all his happes, whylest they two live. And as
the ribbe receives strength from the breast of Man, so does Woman from her
Husband: his counsel is her strength, his breast should she accounte of to be
ruled and governed by in all her ways, and seek to please him and ease him,
from all greefes, as she any way can, knowing ever that she is most weak
without her husbands breast, from which comes all her strength and good
comfort at all times. Note.
No creature had his Make made of his own flesh but Man, and therefore no
creature under heaven should be like man in the love of his mate, but Man
above them all.

Verse. 22.
5 It is if you mark it, not only said, that God made Woman, What manner of
meeting is right marriage.
but that he brought her to Man, and thereby we are taught, that marriage is
not every meeting of man and woman together upon their own heads, but when
God brings them together, either to other: and God brings not together,
except in his fear they meet with consent of Parents, and such as are
interessed in them, and all due circumstances and order appointed by God, and
used by his Church wherein they live. Again it teaches his work and
providence, still to be to bring every man his mate. House and riches (says
Solomon) are the inheritance of the Fathers, Pro. 19.14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord. 19.22.
Again, He that finds a wife, finds a good thing, and receives favor of
the Lord The Lord therefore I say, It is Gods work still to bring every man
his mate.
did not only at the first bring the Woman to the Man, but even yet still* and
for ever, he is the bringer of every Woman to her Husband, and of every
Husband to his Wife, that meet as they ought in his fear. Pray therefore
ever to this Fountain of mercy, when these matters are in hand* that he^ in
his goodness would bring a good one, The pra^se of a good woman. Meekenes in a
wom^ a Jewel. Eccl. 36.24
etc. For He that has gotten a virtuous Woman, has begun to get a
possession, she is a help like unto himself, and a Pillar to rest upon. If
there be in her tongue, gentleness, meekness, and wholesome talk, then is
not her Husband like other men. Where no Hedge is, there the possession is
spoiled, and he that has no Wife, wandreth too and froe, mourning, etc.

6 That a man ought to forsake Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife:
Verse. ^4.
It declares again, what near and dear a conjunction is betwixt them two,
what unity and agreement ought ever to be, what monsters they be that seek to
separate their bodies or minds that are thus conjoined, with diverse such
points. And it is not to be understood as though marriage freed children from
the honor of their parents, How far Marriage may allow to forsake parents.
but only so far am I to forsake Father or Mother as the cleaving to them is
the forsaking of my wife: for if these two be repugnant one to the other, then
is the wife before the parent, but if both may stand together, then is the b^nd
to parents firm and fast still, and they to be cleaued unto also and not
forsaken.

7 The man and his wife were both naked, Verse. 25.
and not ashamed. That they were created naked, Three things to be learned by
our first nakedness.
does well declare how peaceable we should be amongst our selves, and how
contrary to our beginning these weapons and armor be that now we are forced to
use. Job, when upon his loss he said, Job. 1.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked must I return again, the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord eue^.

8 That they were placed in Paradise naked so to remain if they had not
fallen, Verse 25.
shows us how God would have us walk before him, verily naked, without
clokes and couers, We should walk before God without couers.
maskes and shadows of any colored craft. This nakedness and nuditie not of
body but of mind, of counsels, and actions, the Lord ever loved, and the
contrary cloking he as heartily hates. Woe be unto you that seek deep to hide
your counsels from God, says the Prophet Esaias, for your works are in
darkness, Esaias. 29.
and you say who sees us, and who knows us?

Verse 25.
9 That they were not for all that ashamed, favors nothing any fantastical
Anabaptists, Innocence makes bold, and giltines ashamed.
that will go naked, but declared the innocence that then was in them is now
lost by sin, yet regayned in measure by Christ, and shall perfitly be inioyed
in the life to come, when nakedness shall shame us no more then it did at the
first. Many and many are the things yet mo that might be noted out of this
Chapter, but these shall suffice till hereafter.

Chap. 3.
You have seen in the former Chapters the creation of our first Parents and
their innocence, now shall you see their sin, and their fall. And this whole
Chapter has these heads in it. The fall of Man. The manifestation of the same
by God, verse. 9. The punishment of it, verse. 14. The restitution by Christ,
verse. 15.


COncerning the first, it is said, That the Serpent was more subtle then any
beast of the feeld that God had made. Verse 1.
The best things Satan most desirous and busye to abuse.
Noting, an extraordinary thing in this beast above all others, which when we
see Satan to make choice of, to abuse to man's deceyuing and destruction, it may
truly yield us this note carefully to be observed, that if there be any thing
better then an other, any gift and grace more in one then an other, or any
thing extraordinary any way that may help him, that will Satan diligently by
all means assay, to make it an instrument to serve his most dangerous and
damnable purposes. Examples in the Scripture beside this place many, and
examples in experience every day: to note one or two. Satan knows that it is
a notable means to win many to the Lord, The greatness of men abused by Satan
to hurt.
to see great men and honorable personages to go before, as also most effectual
to the contrary, to see them draw back, therefore with might and main as the
Lord will suffer him, he labors to stop the one, and to further the other,
that is to hinder their zeal to go before Gods people in all godly duties, and
to increase their coldness and drawing back, that they being kept in the way of
death by him, together with them, by their example many may also dye and
perish, which otherwise would do well if they had good guides. He laboreth the
Rulers and the Pharisees even with all his power, that they may not believe in
Jesus Christ, to the end that if any begin to draw toward the kingdom of
life, and to say we never hard man speak as this man does, John. 7.46.
by and by they may be stopped with this objection, do any of the Rulers and
Pharisees believe in him, and so by the deadly power of their hurtful examples
be overthrown again, and that begun zeal utterly quenched. Another example
in the Acts of the Apostles. He might no doubt (Satan I mean) in those dark
days have stirred up many against the Apostles, but amongst all* he chose
certain honorable and devout women with the chief men of the City, that by
such outward credit of wealth and piety, honor and dignity, Act. 13.
he might give a greater blow to the cause of God, and more easily work the woe
of his true servants, keeping as you see this pestilent policy, if any man or
matter be of account, to seek to win that to serve his purpose. He had rather
tempt Demas that has once followed Paul, to forsake him again, then many
others: for daily experiences, I had rather you should think of them, then I
note them. Conclude we therefore ever to be circumspect and most careful by
this remembrance to prevent Satan, knowing that it is his manner, if God have
blessed us either with knowledge, birth, wealth, office, credit, or any thing
whereby our example may do more harm, if we take a bad course, to labor
mightily that he may for this cause the rather win us to serve his turn, and
so abuse that good thing in us, which should serve to Gods glory, to the quite
contrary, as here he did the wisdom of the Serpent.

2 Observe we here the means whereby as special helps our Mother Eve was
drawn to her destruction, The means of Eve her (...)
and all ours in her, and with her.

Verse 1.
Note.
or with Satan in the Serpent: whereas she should have suffered no such speech
against the rule and order that God had set down, when once she perceived it
tend that way, but with a zeal of defyance have flung away from all such
conference and persuasion. Let her experience teach us the danger of such
dealings ever. How to avoid evil motions.
And first for inward temptations, if any arise* as near as the Lord will
assist us: let us not debate the matter with them long, but even quickly reject
them, bend our minds some other way, and take in hand some thing, work, or
study, or such like, that we can be most earnest about, calling to the Lord
with hearty heat, that he will help us to quench and auert such fiery darts.
For truly if we reason with them, meditate of them, as many do, our fall in the
end is greatly to be feared. Then for outward assaults by wicked company and
lewd persons the messengers of Satan, Note.
How to avoid outward assaults.
take heed also by this example of Eve how you tattle with them. They be
Serpents as this was, yea subtle Serpents, that will deceive and destroy you,
as this did Eve. They speak not, but the Devil in them. Hear no such
charmers, charm they never so sweetly. The enchancers of Egypt never hurt
Pharaoh as they will hurt you. Away with your care betimes. Let dislike as a
fire kindle within you, and cause either your tongue very sharply to rebuke, or
your steps to turn speedely from such company. O the virtue that has bin lost
for want of this care. They that glistered as the Stars, and were for name as
the very Sun beams, spreading it self into all coasts, have become
darkness, and as vile as the dung to all goodness, by harkning over long to
the hissing of such Serpents. Be warned therefore, and beware betimes, for the
Lord has said it: we can not touch pitch without spot, and evil words corrupt
good manners. Experience teaches, if a man tarry long in the Sun, he will be
sunneburnt, and if he clap coals to his breast he will be singed. Unskillful
youth beware by Eve, and bid such Serpent^ leave their hissing.

least ye dye, when the Lord had said, ye shall dye, absolutely and flatly.
Beware therefore by her in this again, and what God has said believe ever,
diminish never. If he say we shall dye, we shall find him true, and if he
promise life, we may not doubt. Believe him steadfastly whatsoever he says,
and mince not his words with our Mother Eve, neither add any peraduentures,
for great vantage has Satan if we incline to a doubt, be it never so little.

They shall not dye. And why did he so? Because as long as she dreaded any
thing the Lords sentence, as a thing that might fall out if she did eat, she
could not be brought to disobey, therefore works he away from before her
eyes that dread I warrant you with all endeavor. The case is ours even at this
day. As long as the judgments of God are before our eyes against sin, we
fear to sin, and this fear is as a strong bank to keep out the waves of
wickedness from ouerflowing us. But if once the Devil shake from our hearts
this dread by any means, as by hope of secrecy, impunitie, mercy in God,
repentance in our selves, long life, good works, or what soever, (as he has
infinite means) then draw we with Eve to a deadly fall, and the will of
Satan is almost wrought. See examples of both. Joseph feared God, and this
fear most strongly beat back the wave that would have all to wet him, had he
yielded to his Mistress. The Midwyues the like, and many mo. But out of David's
mind he got this fear, and he had his will. From Cayne, from Absolon,
Achitophell, Judas, and thousands daily he does the same, and has his will.
Beware then of such bold lies, as tend to deprive us of this holy fear. Such
be these, do this, or that, consent to me, yield to me, we will save you
harmless, we will have a shift, etc.

She saw that it was good to eat, and fair to the eye: noting thereby a
lusting look, or a looking lust, with a delight in the thing that God had
forbidden, another mighty means to pull her to hell then, and us and all
flesh now and ever. For that looking eye of Putiphars Wife upon the beauty of
Joseph, made a lusting heart, and a sinful soul within her. So did it in
David when he saw Ber^abe. Heerevpon the eyes are said to be full of
adultery, and he that thus looks to have committed iniquity in his heart.
Eues fall then, and these helping means, beware the one, and escape the other.

How spoke the Serpent.
3 But how could the Serpent speak, since this power is not given to beasts,
but only to man? No question it was not the Serpent by his own power, but
Satan in and by the Serpent, which is not impossible. Iliad. 9.
We read of Achilles horse, that foretold his master of his death, of the
flud Causus, which saluted Pythagoras, of the tree that spoke to Apollonius, of
the oak Dodonaea which spoke like a man, of Jupiters Bull, and many such, which
who so considers the guiles of Satan, he needs not to reject as untrue and
impossible. When God permits, Satan is able to shrowde himself under the
creatures, as may best fit his purpose. Many wicked Southsayers Satan casts
into pangs and fits of fury, and then speak they by him, or he rather by them
what he will.

Wily heds be fittest for the Devil.
4 In that Satan chose the Serpent rather then an other creature, because he
was wily and subtle, me think it should give a good watchword to the crafty
heads of this world, to take heed least Satan make also choice of them for some
purposes, as fittest for him, and best able by their guilefull fetches that
they abound with and excel in, to serve his Deuilship. Surely we see by this
they are liker to be assayed, then plain men and true dealers are. For plain
men and women, that walk plainly, uprightly, justly and honestly, they will
not fit the Devils turn, indeed they are too good for him, and God will not
suffer them to be abused by him, but will set him packing, and sheld them from
him, but where there is a crafty companyon, full of subtilties, sleights,
wiles, and false patchings, walking deceitfully in all his doings, O there is a
servant for the devils own tooth, and at him will he, he shall fit the
devils turn many ways.

5 How was it that the woman was not afraid when the Serpent came to her, and
offered to talk with her? some think, because his shape was then otherwise
then it is now, God his curse upon him having altered both his form and
going. Why the woman feared not when the Serpent spoke.
Better me think answer they, that say, because as yet there was no enmity
set betwixt the woman and him. Cyrill thinks, because the woman in
simplicity thought that such other creatures spoke as well as her husband and
she.

6 She was thus tempted, Note.
seduced and overthrown in Paradise, and it may well admonish us, Where took
our first mother such a great fall.
that if that Paradise could not free them from temptation, surely our
Paradises here shall never do it. But even in our Princely Palaces, our
glistering Chambers, our dainty and delicate Gardens, the Devil will be
chatting with us, and seeking to work our woe for ever and ever if he can. Nay
would God these painted Paradises were not rather the places and means of our
woeful faulls, then poorer places be, we giving our selves so much to the
pleasure of them, that God is forgotten, and the passage to Satan's pleasure
laid open a thousand ways. O how have they fallen swimming in pleasures, that
stood most holy, when they had fewer delights? O how have courts of Princes
robbed them of virtue, when in country and meaner places no Devil could
violate or defyle? Bewace we then Satan even in our Paradises, yea rather I
say, then in poorer Cotes: when every thing about us is bright and brave,
beware we that enemy that is black and foul. Many pleasures should effect
many desires to please the giver, God almighty, and no pleasures should make
me wanton, lusting and longing for unlawful things. Let Eve be remembered
where she was deceived, and I say no more, it was in Paradise.

7 In the former Chapters we have heard nothing but the Lord said, the Lord
said, Verse. 1.
but now come we to hear the Serpent said, and the Serpent said. After the
word of truth, comes the word of deceit. Whisperers in sermon o^ service
time.
So see we plainly how after the word of God, comes the word of the Devil.
It was not so then only, but it has so continued ever since. When the Lord
has spoken by the mouth of his Minister, Prophet, Apostle, Pastor, or Teacher,
then speaks Satan by his Serpents contrary. They in the Church, these
as soon as they be out of Church, yea many times even in the Church they will
be hissing in their ears that sit next them. If God have spoken to a child by
his parents, to a servant by his master, to a man by his friend, what is true
and good, straight comes a serpent, one or other, and overthrows all,
leading them captive to a contrary course. What say these serpents, Seducers of
youth.
will you be thus used, will you bear all this? you are now no child, do
this, and do that, you shall not dye, but you shall live, and be like Gods,
knowing good and evil, etc. But as Eve sped by this Serpent, so shall you by
those, if you avoid them not. Such serpents were those young Counselors that
made Rehoboam, 1. King. 12.
Salomons son, do contrary to the advice of the old counselors, to his great
loss. Again mark here which was first, the word of God, or the word of
Satan. Dixit Dominus, Truth elder then falsehood.
the Lord said, goes before Dixit serpens, the serpent said, and so you see
truth is elder then falsehood, and Gods word before Satan's lies: that is
Tertullians rule to know truth by, namely, to look which was first. Quodcunque
primum illud verum, quodcunque posterius illud falsum. Whatsoever was first, De
prescript. haeretic.
that is true, whatsoever was later, that is false, and that is first that was
from the beginning, and that was from the beginning, that in the writings of
the Apostles may find his warrant. Let it not blind you then that such an
error has continued a thousand years, if it be to be proved that a contrary
truth is elder far.

8 Satan tempts the woman as the weaker vessel, and if you have any thing
wherein you are weaker, Satan tempts where we are weakest.
then in another, beware, for he will first assault you there. It is his
manner like a false Devil to take his advantage. Happily you are easilyer
drawn to adultery than murder: that then shall please him, he will begin
there. So did he with David, and then brought him to murder after. David was
weaker to resist the one, the^ the other. Think of your fraylties, and be
godly wise, where the wall is lowest he will enter first.

9 He tells her, they shall be like Gods, etc. And it is his continued
practice still with hope of higher climing, to throw down many a man and
woman. He will tickle you with honor, with wealth, with friends, and many gay
things that you shall get by yielding to him, but whilst you so look to mount
aloft, (...)
to better your state, and to enjoy promises, down shall you fall from heaven
to hell, and find a false serpent when it is too late to call again
yesterday, that is to undo what you have done. Our mother Eve whilst she
looked to become like God, and her husband with her, she became like the
Devil, (...) mark it.
and cast away her husband also, even so shall you if any vain hope, promise
or speech tickle your heart to offend the Lord, undo your self and friends.

10 When she had eaten, she gave to Adam. Verse. 6.
She was deceived, and so was Adam. Many a man deceived by his friend soonest.
Most easily by his wife.

H^man followed his (...) counsel, and set up a g^llows to his woe.

Job denies to curse God as his wife bad to his glory.


And many a man is deceived by his friend both in matters of religion, and of
the world, when the friend is once deceived himself, and does not know it. Eve
meant him no harm, and yet she hurt him because she was wrong her self. Many
a Papist makes a Papist, and thinks well, but erroneously. Good is that
friendship therefore where no part is wronged, and a fair warning is this for
all people to beware what they are persuaded to even by their friends. Again,
why did Satan not persuade Adam himself, but set Eve to do it? because full
falsely he knew there is no easyer way to deceive the man then by his wife,
the husband yielding to her often what he will to none. This continues still
a policy of his, and many a man still daily falls by this means. But good
wives will learn by this what they persuade their husbands too, and wise men
what they consent unto.

11 When they had both eaten, the text says, Verse. 7.
their eyes were opened, Pilate had done well if he had followed his wife. How
many ways eyes ar opened.
meaning the eyes of their mind and understanding: but because in other places
the like is said of the eyes of the body, therefore here consider you how
many ways both the one and the other are said to be opened. For the bodily
eyes, they are opened three ways. First, when of blind they are made seeing.
So were the blind man's eyes opened in the ninth of John, and elsewhere
others. Secondly, when a man is made to see that which before he could not
see though he were not blind. John. 9. Number. 22.
As when Balaams eyes were opened to see the Angel in his way with a drawn
sword whom before he saw not, and yet was not blind. 1. King. 6.
When Elizaeus man was made at the prayer of his master to see the fiery
chariots and horses for his masters defense, when the town wherein he was,
was besieged. When Agar was made to see the well where she might give her
child drink in the wilderness, Genesis 21.
which before she could not see, though her eyes were good. Thirdly and lastly
the bodily eyes are said to be opened, when they are made to know and
discern what before they saw plainly, and yet did not know. Thus were
Elisha his enemies their eyes opened when they were in Samaria, 1. King. 6.
and their eyes that were going to Emaus. These men saw, but they knew not
what they so saw, Luc. 24.
till their eyes were opened. Then the first knew that they were in Samaria,
and the other knew that he was Christ that had talked with them. Now for the
eyes of the mind, they also are opened three ways. First, by doctrine and
teaching. Thus says God to Paul, I have made thee a Minister, Act. 26.
and send thee to the Gentiles to open their eyes, that they may turn from
darkness to light, etc. Secondly, by adversity and affliction, for vexation
gives understanding, Esaias.
says the Prophet. So were the prodigal sons eyes opened, to see to take a
better course then he did, which in his iolitie he did not see. Thirdly and
lastly by conscience and feeling of sin committed. Thus were these our first
parents eyes opened, Fearful in respect of grief felt, but profitable in
respect of good God, if we rightly repent.
even to see how fearfully they had sinned and fallen from God. This of all
other is the dreadfullest blindness, not to see sin, and this opening of
eyes by pearcing a blow into my conscience, is consequently most fearful.
Thus again were Judas his eyes opened, to see how he had sinned in betraying
innocent blood, and when he saw it, not able to abide the smart of it, he
hanged himself. Pray we therefore ever against this blindness.

12 They are ashamed, and make couers for their nakedness, had they bin as
careful not to be shameful, Verse 7.
as now they are to cover their shame, Men more careful of secrecy then of
innocence.
it had bin well. Or were we yet as careful not to do evil as we ^re to hide
it when it is done, it were also well, but we eat more to cover then to avoid.

Verse. 7.
13 Their aprons were but fig leaves, and what couers soever we devise for
sin, they be like these aprons, All our couers are fig leaves, sely couers.
that is seely couers and poor shifts God w^t, before his eyes that sees all.
Trust not to them, deserve not to look them.

The second part of the Chapter, Verse 8.
1 WHen they had thus sinned, Verse. 8.
God is said to have walked in the garden in the cool of the day. God calls
to repentance soon whom he (...).
That is nothing else, but God in mercy came to visit these sinners, and to
reveal unto them what state they were in: which except he had done, no
question but Satan had drawn them further to more iniquity, his manner being
to go forward to worse and worse, where once he has begun if God let him not.
Such is Gods mercy at this day to us miserable sinners. We fall and offend him
some one way, some another, and all of us too many ways. Where it pleases him
to show justice and wrath, there he lets them go on with hardened hearts,
brazen brows, and stiff necks every day, worse and worse, but where it
pleases him to show mercy, there he comes to walk in the cool of the day:
that is as I said, there he visits the party that has sinned happily the
same day, happily the same hour, even as soon as the deed is done, by smiting
the heart, as he did David's, with true remorse, sight and sorrow of and for what
then is done, that albeit that can not be undone again, yet it may be lamented
with speedy and true repentance, and no more added thereunto, as no doubt we
should do, if God thus walked not to visit us with his holy spirit. Happy were
we if we could not sin and offend our God, but since that is not now to this
corruption of ours possible, pray we the Lord with bowed knees that he would
visit us ever, and quickly, yea in the cool of the same day, that is, ere we
go to bed, or take any rest, that we may see and sigh for our transgressions
that day against his Majesty.

2 God walked not then silent, but the Text says, they heard his voice. No
more does he now, God is not silent now in his walking.
but we also hear his voice: for his voice are his Ministers, Preachers, and
cryers, crying in his Church Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.
Happy are they that hear them with profit and feeling, and who so contemn
them, let them learn by this place, that they despise God himself walking in
the garden o^ his Church, and speaking to them, which contempt he will hotely
revenge one day.

The cool of the day, what it does signify.
3 Again by the cool of the day, we may note if we will the opportunity of
time that God took to come to do good upon these seduced sinners, to weet,
when the heat of the temptation was past. Thereby teaching his Ministers some
godly wisdom, to take their time, and notably discovering our vile
corruption, that admit no counsel nor persuasion while the heat of
concupiscence and temptation is upon us. Happily in the cool of the day we
will, that is, when woeful experience has beat us, and sinful heat is
abated in us. But O graceless we that no sooner: Yet better late then never,
so that we presume not: which if we do, surely it is many to one, that
neither in the cool of the day the Lord will visit us, but even cast us away
for ever, because we presumed, making no more account of his Majesty, but to
be at our beck, and of repentance, which is his great gift to be at our call.

4 In that they hid themselves from the presence of God. Mark the fruit of
sin, it wounds the conscience, and the conscience wounded, Sin makes us
hyde from God.
fears, accuses, vexes, and tormenteth a man, distrusteth in God, flies
from him, and vaynely seeks a cover from him that admits no couers. But
let us be warned by it how foolish this course is, nay how desperate and
dangerous: and when through frayltie, wherewith we are clothed as with a
garment, we have offended, run not from God, but run to God, hide not from
him, but open to him what indeed he knows already. Fall at his footestoole,
and cry peccaui. I have sinned, Lord I have sinned, woe is me that I have so,
but have mercy upon me, dear God have mercy upon me, yea again and again
have mercy upon me, and according to the multitude of thy mercyes do away
mine offenses. Thus may you live, but by running from him you cannot run from
him, by hiding you can hide nothing, and yet for your endeavor you shall dye
the death.

5 Adam said, he was afraid because he was naked, Verse 10.
when he should have said, because I have sinned: How hardly we lay the
fault as it is.
so waywarde is flesh to confess a truth, if it touch our selves with any
fault, but God followed him out, and asked him who told him that he was naked?
thereby urging him hardly to tell truth, and teaching us all at this day, that
except we confess truly and fully, plainly and faithfully our sin to God,
there is no forgiveness. Wryings and turnings from the matter will not serve,
minsings and shiftings before him were never current, nor ever shall be. A
direct confession becomes a sinner, and God requires it: A dire^te
confession required ever.
He that hydeth his sin says Solomon, shall not prosper, but he that
confesses it and forsakes it, shall have mercy. Prou. ^8.


6 But see yet further, when he was so urged that he must needs confess,
then he lays it upon the woman and God, Verse 12.
saying: the woman deceived me, and, Translating and posting of faults.
the woman whom thou gave me. Would God this sin of translating a fault
from our selves to others had dyed with Adam, then had not so many of us bin so
faulty in the same as we are, some blaming one thing and some another, and
few men as they ought blaming themselves. To reckon up particulars, were too
long, think of them your selves, and avoid the like. Monstrous is that
boldness or ingratitude, that rather will blame God then themselves, as here
Adam did, when they should be thankful to God for as much as he did. The woman
does the like, and as Adam laid the matter upon her, so she upon the Serpent,
both naught, and far from the course of right repentance.

The third part of the Chapter, verse 14.
IN considering the punishment of each one, mark how first the Serpent is
proceeded against, Verse 14.
Chief ringleaders first to be punished.
because he was the cause and beginner of this fault: thereby teaching, that
ringleaders to any mischief, are first to be dealt against as most worthy:
then remember how before was noted the gifts of God in the Serpent in some
respects above other creatures, which he abusing, now is punished thereby. We
being truly taught what shall befall them that do the like. Mo gifts, more
puni^h^^nt if abused.
Some have wisdom and learning, some have power and authority, some wealth
and riches, some birth and parentage, whatsoever it is if we abuse it to serve
the D^uill, when it should serve God that gave it, that so doing w^^ smart one
day, and the curse of God shall be upon it as here was upon the Serpent, who
being more subtle then other beasts, became an instrument for the Devil to
deceive by.

2 The Lord says, He will set enmity betwixt the woman and the Serpent,
Verse. 15.
and betwixt their two seeds for ever: which may well teach us two things. Not
only outward body but inward affections ruled by God. Prou. 21.1.
First, that not only the bodies of men and beasts are in Gods hand to do
withal what he list, but their very inward affections, passions, and
dispositions, are also rul^d by him. If he list he causes friendship and
love, if he please he sets dislike and hatred, and ever well in respect of
him. The hearts of Kings and all men are in Gods hand as the rivers of water,
and he turns them which way he will. Secondly, see how just it is that they
two which had joined in lyking one of an others counsel, Friends in evil become
bitter foes
and deed, further then God allowed, should now as far jar, and that for
ever. Surely such end will ungodly friendship have. And even daily we see,
that of all others they become most hated, who have been accounted of before,
but in bad counsels conspire^s against God, so able is God to set at variance
amongst themselves, and to continue their jar to his good pleasure.

3 He could have destroyed the Serpent quite from off the earth, The Serpent
not quite destro^d why.
but he would not, and happily, because by his remaining, there might be
continued in us a lively remembrance of our most loathsome fall and sin, so
often as we light of any of them.

The fourth part of the Chapter, Verse 15.
HE shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. He, Verse 15.
The benefit by
that is Christ, not she, that is Mary. This was a promise of a restitution
unto them and to their seed after them, so many as believed in Christ and by
Christ, (...)
who should be borne of the woman to recover their fall. Yea to break the
Serpents head, that is, the old Serpents head, the Devils power strength and
might against man by sin, to quash it, and quell it, that it should not hurt
to eternal death so many I say as believe. Nibble Satan shall at our heels, but
not bite us to death if we hold here: yea, al his power against a chosen one
shall be but a nibbling, a very nibbling, rather to show his malice, then to hurt
the heart that thus is settled: and what a comfort is this? He had a power by
sin to quell us, and utterly to destroy us, but now by Christ it is become
but a poor nibbling, God make us thankful.

2 This being said, the Lord goes on with his punishment again, Verse 16
and now deals to the woman also as she had justly deserved. She was next to
the Serpent in offending, Woman's punishment.
and she is next to him punished of the Lord. This dolor and sorrow, this
anguish and pain that is here inflicted, and inseperably joined to the woman's
travel, should make both her husband and children love her, not adding by
unkindness, grief unto grief. Despise not thy Mother, said o^ld Tobias to
his Son when I am dead, but Honor her all the days of thy life, Chap. 4.
and do that which shall please her, and anger her not. Remember how many
dangers she sustained when thou wast in her womb, and how can thou
recompense her for that she has done?

3 The subjection of the woman to the man, and his rule over her was a just
check of that bold taking upon her both to talk so much with the Serpent, and
also to do as he had her, Verse 16
Man's authority, and woman's subjection.
without any priuitie and knowledge of her husband. And it is as much as if God
should have said to her: Because thou to^kest so much upon thee without advise
of thy husband* hereafter thy desire shall be subject unto him, and he shall
rule over thee. Yet this authority of the man may not imbolden him any way to
wrong his wife, but teaches him rather what manner of m^ he ought to be,
namely such an one, as for gravity, wisdom, advise, and all good government,
is able to direct her in all things to a good course. And her subjection should
admonish her of her weakness and need of direction, and so abate all pride
and conceit of her self, and work true honor in her heart toward him whom
God has made stronger then her self, and given gifts to direct her by. This I
say this authority in the man, and subjection in the woman should effect. But
alas* many men are rather to be ruled, then to rule, and many women fitter to
rule, then to be ruled of such unruly husbands. On the other side many men for
ability most fit and able to rule, yet for pride in the heart where subjection
should be, To wit, in the woman
shall have no leave to rule. So fit we sometimes to the order appointed of
almighty God. Amendment is good on both sides, for fear of his rod, whose
order we break.

Verse 17.
4 In the third place Adam has his punishment appointed, Adams punishment.
but with mention of his fault before, to weet, Because thou did obey the
voice of thy wife, and eat. Thereby giving a note to Magistrates and Rulers
that inflict punishments, to do the like, namely, to be able ever to lay down
a just cause of their sentence. If Herod should have done thus when he killed
John, he would have seen his own cruel injustice: and many in these days
would be to seek of true causes, if they would keep this order.

5 Adam was drawn to it by his wife, and she by the Serpent, Other procuring
no excuse of sinning.
yet neither of them excused by that, well and well again admonishing us, that
no yielding to a friend in an evil matter, shall ever be defended by such
excuse. The case you see here, is in the Church this day. Satan stirs up
his false charmers in holes and corners against the Lord and his anointed.
They are as this Serpent. Many in simplicity are abused by them, thinking all
shall be well, Privy seducers.
they shall know good and evil, etc. these be as Eve. And many yield unto
these for favor and friendship, kindred, and liking, etc. and these are as Adam.
But as Adam was excused because his friend persuaded him, so shall they be and
no otherwise, and would God we might think of it at large, and with a full
meditation.

6 The curse of the earth is a perpetual Preacher unto us, Verse. 17
how we offended, that we might be humble, The earth punished.
and the benefits that we receive nevertheless by labor from it, declare Gods
mercy, that we might be thankful. The labor that is enjoined, teaches how
hateful to God all idleness is, and the course being so, Men living without
a vocation.
that with the sweat of mine own brow I should eat my bread, a vocation is
inferred for every man to walk in, and living at other men's tables, and other
men's trenchers, eating the sweat of their brows, and not mine own is
condemned.

7 God made Adam and his Wife coats of Skins. The beginning of apparel is
here to be noted, Verse. 21.
that it was when we had sinned, The beginning of apparel when.
and so is unto us at this day no otherwise, then if an offender should wear
an halter all his life in remembrance of his faull. What should more cool this
vain delight of apparel in us then this? should the thief that had purchased
an haulter by his faull, yet had life granted him with a law to wear that
halter during life, wax proud of his halter, and dye it red, or green, or in
some brave color, that he might ruffle it out with his haulter? Surely so it
is with apparel, A silken halter is but a halter.
it is our halter and badge of our desert to dye, and we should not be so
proud with an halter as we are: Whether it be silk or velvet, silver or
gold, all is but an halter. And it should make us sighe rather then swell with
pride as we do. It should humble us truly and serve our need, it should
never make us hawtie and serve for pomp.

8 Adam is thrust out of Paradise to pain and labor. Verse. 23.
And it teaches the judgment of God upon all such, Men abusing places of
honor.
as being by his mercy preferred to places of honor, pleasure and good,
graceleslye abuse them, and themselves in them, to the Lords disliking. Surely
they shall be thrust out then in the Lords justice and wrath, when he sees
his time.

9 The Garden is guarded by the Cherubins and the blade of a Sword shaken, that
Adam by a visible sign, Verse. 24.
being put out of all hope to recover it and his estate anyemore, might quietly
subject himself to the Lords ordinance, and faule to till the earth as he was
enjoined.

If any should think the Lord might have kept the tree of Life from him, and
let him nevertheless inioye the Garden. Truth it is he could so, but he would
not so. Thereby as in figure declaring thus much: A figure.
That if any man be not vouchsafed by Gods mercy and savor to enjoy Christ
Jesus the true Tree of Life, the same may have no place in the kingdom of God
the true Paradise. And thus much for a taste of the good of this Chapter, being
but a li^le to that which might be noted, for if either I should seek to note
all, or amplify these notes as I might I should over burden the buyers, whom
I seek to encourage by smalnes of price, and attempt to do what no man can do.

Chap. 4.
The chief heads in this Chapter are these three. The propagation of mankind.
The murder of Abell by Cain his brother. And the punishment of the same by God.


1 COncerning the first it is said, that afterward the man knew Heu^h his Wife,
as if he should have said, Verse. 1.
after man was cast out of Paradise, Marriage not impeached.
then this was. Which some wicked spirits inflamed with venom against the
holy institution and ordinance of God, have snatched at, and thereby sought to
blemish godly marriage, saying it was then used, when paradise was lost and not
before, then Adam knew his wife and not before. But these wicked impes should
know, that if we should always reason from the order of speeches in the word
of God, we should make many absurdities, The manner of the Holy Ghost being so
often to speak of that last that was done first, and of that before that was
done after. In Samuel it is said, 1. Sam. 6.14
They claue the wood of the Cart, and offered the Kine for a burnt offering unto
the Lord, and then in the next verse: They took down the Arc, 15.
and put it upon the great stone: as if they had clou^n the Cart, whereupon the
Arc was before they took the Arc down, which could not be, yet the order
of the words are so. A number of such places there be in the Scriptures, in
all which, as there is a plain figure putting that after, that was done
first, so may it be here very well, that Adam knew her before, although now
spoken of, and not before, and so the Act of Marriage nothing impeached by this
order of words B^t suppose it were not so, but that now first he knew her,
yet cannot these Spirits deny, but even in Paradise it was said, Increase and
multiply, thereby authorizing and sanctifieng the act if they had never
fallen: so that holy every way stands Gods ordinance notwithstanding this
word: Afterward Adam knew his Wife.

2 When Heuah had borne her first son Cain, she said, Verse. I
I have received a man from the Lord. Children the gift of God.
The first mother that ever was, abscribing the first Child that ever was unto
Gods giving: so then acknowledged, so ever since acknowledged, by the godly,
that children are a blessing coming only from the Lord: He makes the barren
woman to bring forth, and to be a joyful mother of Children, and he only
does it.

3 She called her eldest Kaine, which signifies a possession, Verse. 2.
and her second son when she had also borne him Habell, Names of children
what they often show
which signifies vain or unprofitable. By which diversity of names evidently
appears a diversity of affection in the namers, and so teaches us two
things. First the preposterous love that is in many Parents, esteeming most
oftentimes of those Children that are woorste, and least of them that deserve
better. Their Kaines be accounted Jewels and wealth, but their Habels
unprofitable, needelesse and naught. Secondlye it teaches the lot of the
godly in this world many times, even from their very Cradle, to be had in
less regard then the wicked are. So was here Abell, so was Jacob of his
Father, so was David and many mo.

Such and so crooked are men's judgments often, but the Lords is ever straight,
A comfort sweet.
and let that be our comfort: he prefers Abell before Cain, whatsoever his
parents think, he loves Jacob better then Esau, and he chooses little David
before his tall brethren: he sees the heart, and goes thereafter, when men
regard shows and are deceived. Care away then, if my heart be sound, God
esteems me, and let man choose.

Verse. 2.
4 Their trade of life and bringing up we see, the one a keeper of sheep, the
other a tiller of the ground, both holy callings allowed of God: Idleness
hated.
Idleness hated then from the beginning, both of the godly and such as had but
civil honesty, or the use of human reason. The antiquity of Husbandrye
herein also appears, Antiquity of husbandry.
to the great praise of it, and due encouragement unto it. But alas our days:
many things has time invented since, or rather the Devil in time hatched, of
far less credit, and yet of more use with wicked men, a nimble hand, with a
pair of Cards, or false Dise, Dise and Cards.
is a way now to live by, and Jack must be a gentleman, say nay who shall.
Tilling of the ground is to base for Farmers Sons, and we must be finer. But
take heed we be not so fine in this world, that God know us not in the world
to come, but say unto us, Think of this ye over fine Farmars.
I made thee an Husbandman, who made thee a Gentleman, I made thee a tiller of
the ground, a trade of life most ancient and honest, who has caused thee to
forsake thy calling wherein I placed thee. Surely thou art not he that I made
thee, and therefore I know thee not, depart from me thou wicked one into
everlasting fire.

5 In the next place mention is made of the sacrifice or offering that these two
brethren brought unto the Lord. Verse. 3.
The Apostle says that Habell by faith did offer. Hebre. 11.
True worship has ever God the author Roma. 10.
Faith ever presupposes a word because it is a fruit that springs only of
that seed, and therefore it necessarily follows, that albeit we read not
preciselye when God taught them thus to worship him, yet certain it is that he
taught it, and commanded it, otherwise it could not be done of faith nor
please him. Most like therefore that God taught Adam, and Adam his Children,
leaving behind him this holy practice as ancient as the world within a little,
How ancient instruction of parents is, and of what force.
that parents should instruct in religion the seed that God has given them:
and so look unto them, that even their Cains if they have any* dare do no
other, but at least make a show of obedience to God, how wicked soever their
hearts be. Such care would cut the comb of such vile atheism as rules now,
and make all cursed spirits at least not to dare to show their contempt of God
and holy exercises appointed for man to serve God withal, and by, as now they
dare and do.

6 But though they both offered, Verse. 4.
yet mark you a difference in their doings. Cain brings an offering, but
Abell brings an offering of the fat of his sheep, which the spirit of God
notes by a repetition of set purpose, with an edge of speech, saying not only
that he brought of the Sheep, but of the fat of them, of the fat of them. Leu.
22.22.
Thereby delivering to us this difference betwixt a true heart and a false, a
true godly man or woman, and a sinner. They both offer, but the one thinks
any thing good enough, and the other in the zeal of his soul, and fullness of
his Lord, How hypocrites discover themselus.
thinks nothing good enough. He brings his gift, and of the fattest, that
is, of the best he has, and wishes it were ten thousand times better. This
heat of affection toward God, let us all mark, and ever think of: it
vneaseth such as in these days think any service enough for God, half a
quarter of an hour in a week, etc. And such, as if they have any tithes to
pay to their Minister, who is in the place of God to receive them, Bad tythers.
whilst that course stands for his maintenance, choose out the broken and
blind, the halte and lame, the scabbed and scuruye, and the worst of every
thing, thinking that also to good. But these holow hearted Cains, and covetous
hypocrites God sees, and their reward shall be as Cains was.

7 Of whom it is said, that unto Cain and his offering God had no regard, but
unto Habell he had. Verse. 4 5.
See the contempt of God of so unwilling worship, so cold love and grudged
gifts. Thus ^ill he serve such holow seruers of him, but ever regard, bless
and like his true Abels and their offerings, and what wish you more.

Verse. 5.
8 Kain was angry says the text, when he saw his brothers offering regarded
more then his, H^pocrits cannot abide their due reward.
yea and exceeding angry, for his countenance changed and was cast down.
Mark I pray you how hypocrites, though they be hypocrites, yet can they not
abide to be served like hypocrites, no, they will not give God himself (much
less man) leave to deal with them as they deserve. Kaine will fret, and rage
and fret, if his false heart be rejected of God. And all superstitious idolaters
will do the like if their fastings and prayers, crossings and creepings, and
all their worship either in matter or manner, or both disliked of God, be
discountenanced. That which they do is wicked and naught, and yet neither God
nor man may say so, or show so. But we must be content, you see this malice
for telling truth is not of two days age, but as old as Kaine.

How the favor and dislike of God appeared.
9 But how appeared this liking and disliking of their sacrifices, and whereby
knew they of it? The usual answer and opinion is, that either from heaven fire
came down and consumed Abels offering, as that of Elias in the Kings, of
Solomon when he dedicated the Temple, 1. King. 18. 2. Chro. 7. Iud. 6.
or out of the Stone whereupon it lay, as we read of Gedeon. But because the
Scripture is silent, Where the word has no mouth, have you no ear, much less
an itching ear.
let not us be curious. Contented with this, that it did appear, what way we
know not certaynelye. The text is plain, Kaine saw the difference, and was
highlye displeased. Some thing therefore was done of God, and some sign given
of his gracious favor more to Abell and his gift that came from a true heart,
then to Kaine and his gift, not from the like proceeding.

Verse. 4.5.
10 It is especially to be noted, that God is not said to have respected
only Abel his offering, Men regard me^ for gifts, God regards gifts for men.
but to have respected Abel and his offering, putting a regard of Abels person,
before the regard of his gift. Thereby teaching us that it is not with God as
it is with men: for men regard chiefly the gifts and then the persons according
to their gifts, if they give much, they regard them more, if they give less,
they love them thereafter, but God quite contrary. He respects first the
person, and then the gift, and if the person please him, his gift he accepts,
if not, no gifts of his does God care for. Now the person pleases only in
Christ, and therefore no gifts but the gifts of the godly does God respect.
Base is that mind that is won to love by gifts, or to dislike for want of
gifts great enough. Such sin is not in God, and therefore away with Opus
operatum. Opus operatum.
Such popish trash offends God. It is not you see the deed done that
pleases God as they say, but the party that does it, must first please God,
as you see here. He had respect to Abell first, and then to his offering, that
is, first it pleased him to accept in Christ, Abels person, and then the duties
that came from his accepted servant, he regarded. Like place is that in the
prophet: Mala. 1.10.
I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of hoasts, neither will I accept an
offering at your hands. First professing the dislike of their persons and then
his neglect of any thing they gave. Esaias the like again, and many times
elsewhere in the Scripture. Esaias. 1.
Wherefore if ever we would that any thing proceeding from us should be
accepted of God, let us labor first that our selves may be accepted, by being
truly grafted into him by faith, with whom God is perfitlye pleased and for
him, with all that depend upon him. (...)
This does not the Papiste, but wears himself in outward things, thinking
for his many fastings, much babbling and toils of the flesh to be regarded,
but you see the contrary here.

11 This conceived wrath in Kaine his breast stayed not s^: but having leave to
lodge there a while, How danger^us anger (...).
it brought forth murder bloody and unnatural of his brother: a good warning
to all that see it to beware of keeping wrath, and lapping up closely in their
bosoms a conceived displeasure: for questionless it is the way to greater
sin, if God prevent not. Old anger proves curssed malice, and old malice
will have murder cruel, if other circumstances of time, place, and the like
may be had. Let not the Sun go down then upon your wrath, but stop
beginning^ in a godly zeal, and prevent such ends by a godly care. Mark the
means to attain his will: he speaks to his brother to go into the Fields,
and when he had him there he slew him. Anger that cannot speak is most wicked,
A fair speaking anger.
but anger that can speak, and fair speak, and mean so ill, is wickedness
it self. It is a Cains courtesy to speak fair, and mean ill, to walk with
me as a brother, and to cut my throat as an enemy, and even that should make
us hate it. To set brethren at variance how old a practice of Satan.
See also here and observe it well, how old a practice of Satan it is to set
brethren at variance for religion. Cain hates Habell, because God made it
known that his religion and worshipping of God, was better then his. Old satan
has not cast his cote yet, but sows dislike still for the same cause. Gods
word gives testimony to one brothers truth, and disliketh utterly the other
brothers falsehood. This makes the worse to gnash at the better, where he
should rejoice for him and partake in his good by yielding to it.

12 God regarded this jar in Caine, and expostulateth with him what ayled
him. Does not God abide it, and will Caine do it? have we any Cains now that
hate their brethren and hear this, are they not afraid of Gods eye? are they
not ashamed to be like Cain? do they think to iumpe with him in crime, and
not to iumpe with him in judgment? It cannot be.

13 But will Cain confess to God what is the matter? no I warrant you, To hyde
malice as old as Caine.
neither his hatred before, nor his murder after, but concealeth all as much
as he could, though in deed from God nothing can be hid. So old again is this
corruption of hiding and covering, cloaking and shadowing of our sins. When
we do it, we resemble Caine, and what fowler pattern to be painted by*

Verse. 10.
14 Thy brothers blood cries to me (says God) out of the earth. No secrecy
from God.
And do we hope secrecy for want of witnesses? Alas we are deceived. The
wickedness it self will torment us, as if a thousand knew it. The conscience
cannot be bribed to hold his peace, it will give evidence do what we can. And
the very deed we have done will give God no rest, but cry against us till it
be revenged and we punished. If you knew your secret sins should be cried at
the market cross as soon as you have done them, you would be afraid to sin
and take no comfort in the want of witnesses, nor hope of rest by the
secrecy. Now you hear with your ears, and see with your eyes, that be it
never so secret, and without the knowledge of man, it cries in heaven, and
makes all heaven ring of it, as Abels blood did, and shall it not fear you?
Care not then for secrecy if it be evil: for if God see it and hear it, he
is privy that can do more to you then any man, even Kill the soul as well as
the body, and cast them both into Hell fire.

15 The justice of God upon Cains murder, Ver. 11. etc
truly shows us how all sin shall speed. For he hates not murder alone,
What the marginall notes suffice in, here I pass over.
but all sin. Read the words well, and mark the wrath, sharp is his hand
upon this offender and yet most just.

16 In Cains building a City and calling it after his sons name, we see the
care of the wicked ever. Verse. 17.
More to desire to magnify themselves, then to glorify God, more to seek
after a name in earth, then a life in heaven, more to establish their seed
with towns and towers, then with Gods favor. But such course is crooked and
like Cains here. If we desire a name, the love of G^d and his word, the love
of Christ and his truth is the way. You remember a sely Woman that in a true
affection to her Lord and master, powered upon him a box of ointment, Mar.
14.9.
and what got she: Verily (says Christ) wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached throughout the world, this shall be told of the Woman for a remembrance
of her. Here was a name well gotten, and firmly continued, to the very world
ends. Syrac. 49.6
The memory of the righteous shall remain for ever, and the name of the
wicked do what they ean, in Gods good time shall rot and take an ending. For
which cause Moses if you mark it, Note.
^^keth no mention of the time, that either Cain or any of his Sons lived, as
he does of the godly. Polygamy.
Filthy Polygamie you see in this place began with wicked Lamech, that is, to
have mo wives then one at one time: so old is this evil, that from the
beginning was not so: that mention that is made of the children here of the
wicked, tells us how they flourish for a time with all worldly things* whom
yet God hates. The last words show you what eclipses true religion suffceth
often in this world, and let us mark it.

Chap. 5.
This whole Chapter, handles the Genealogy of the Fathers before the Flud,
and has also particulars diverse worthy marking.

Verse. 1.
1 Again it is said, God created Adam after his likeness, which what it was,
you heard in the first Chapter, referring you to the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.24.
who expounds it by righteousness and true holiness, meaning by those two
words, all goodness, as wisdom, truth, innocence, power, and such like,
incident to man's nature unspotted by sin.

Verse. 2.
2 He called them both Adam, says the Text, both the man and the Woman: The
union of marriage
by that one name noting unto us, that inseparable, holy, and mystical union,
that is made by marriage of two persons to become but one flesh: the like in
some sort remains still in use amongst us, Why women married, leave their
own names, and are called as their husband.
in that the wife is called by her husbands name, her own name ceasing, and
being used no more, as if it should be said, now that you are married, though
before you were two, ye are become one, and therefore fit that one name
should se^ue you both, to note so much both to your selves and others. The man
is the worthier person, and therefore by his name shall you both be called,
and the woman's name shall cease to be as it was, since now she is changed, and
become one flesh with him, whose name she inioyeth.

3 Adam is said to have begot a son after his likeness, Vers^. 3.
which is to be understood thus, A^ams likeness what.
a man as he was and corrupt as he was. Like him in sex and nature, and like
him in corruption, impure of impure.

4 From the 4. verse to the 22: two things cheefely are noted. The long life of
these Fathers, and their assured death* Long life and death at last of the old
fathers.
many years they continued, yea many hundreds, but at last they dyed. Death
long ere it came, but at last it came. And touching their long life* some
questions are moved: First why it was so long* Secondly whence or how it came
to be so: Their life why so long.
of the first, two causes are aledged, one for the propagation of mankind, so
much the faster and more speedely: the other for continuance of remembrance of
matters, and deducing of them to posterity the better. To the second, answer
is made, How so long.
that as al men's lives at this day are from God and of God, as the fountain,
so was also that long life of theyrs, and by him only it was produced to and
for such term as it was. Nevertheless, if we speak of causes in nature (by
which also God works when it pleases him) diverse and sundry there were then,
now to be remembered if we will, wherefore their life might pass ours as it
did, and be so long. The indifferent mixture, equal temperature; Causes in
nature of long life.
and good disposition of the chief and first qualities, heat, cold, moisture,
dryness, is in nature the ground of life, and by all probability in that
beginning this was so, more then now. Their diet better and temperance more
from surfeiting and fleshlye pleasures, then is now. The region they dwelte in
hot in a strength to dry up and consume superfluity of humors, when any
were corrupt and rotten: Cura quasi cor rodens
Their minds quieter from eating and gnawing cares, the shortners of man's
life: since iniquity then being not so strong many woes and vexations were
vnfounde. And lastly the fruits of the earth, in their purity, strength, and
virtue, not corrupted as after the Flud, and ever since still more and more
might be to them a true cause and a most forcible cause of good health, greater
strength, and longer life, then ever since by nature could be.

5 Their certain death is noted, Their certain death why still noted.
to show the truth of Gods word ever infallible and immovable. The Lord
said, if they did eat they should dye: they did eat, then death must follow,
or God be untrue, warning us fair if we will be warned, never to mince and
qualify what the Lord pronounces peremptorilye and flatlye, for he will be
true do what we can, and we shall fi^de it so. Adam lived nine hundred years
and thirty, but he dyed. Sheth nine hundred and twelve, and he dyed.
Methuselah nine hundred 69, and yet he dyed: dyed, dyed is the end of all, that
God might be true, how long soever they lived. The ^ame word of the Lord is
no falser now then then, but the same for ever: and therefore for this eaten
Aple against commandment, dye we must still, and whilst the world indureth:
would God this repetition of death, death, to all these Fathers, might make us
as dulye to remember it, as we are sure truly to find it. To find it I
say, and God knows, not we, how soon. To day I, A white Mouse. A black
Mouse.
to morrow thou, says the Wise man. His conceipte was not unprofitable, that
imagined man's life to be as a Tree at the root: whereof two Mise lie gnawing
and nibling without ceasing, a white Mouse, and a black. The white Mouse he
conceived to be the day, and the black Mouse the night: by which day and
night man's life as a tree by continual gnawing at last is ended. Who can now
tell how far these two Mise have eaten upon him. The uncertainty of man's
life
Happily the Tree that seems yet strong, ere night may shake, and ere day
again fall flat down. O let us think of this uncertainty, and that is all I
wish by this speech. Adams coat of Skins might fitlye remember him of this.
And what wear we still in our most ruff, which appertayned not sometime in
some sort, to a living creature, by whose death we being clad, may fitlye
think of our own deaths that are so sure. But you see the Snow how blind
it makes a man, Our apparel may put us in mind of death.
by his great whiteness: so does this world by his manifold pleasures,
baytes and allurement, dazell our eyes, and blind us so, that we forget to
dye, we dream of life, when there is no hope, and we cannot hear of it to
go away. O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man, that lives
at rest in his possessions, Syrac. 41.1
unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all
things, yea unto him that yet is able to receive meat.

6 In the 22. verse it is said, that Henoch walked with God: To walk with God
sometime, signifies to obey and serve, To walk ^ith God.
to reverence and fear the living God, and (by the way) when it does so, if
godly men be said to walk with God, Mich. 6.8.
I pray you with whom walk they that are ungodly? Surely with him, that if
they saw him would fear them, and shame them to be arm in arm with so foul
a guest. But what the eye sees not the heart fears not, yet the end will
find it, when it is too late. In this place to walk with God, signifies he
was translated out of this life and world, not by death as others, but alive as
were no others then, to live with the Lord. Which translation to him was
instead of death, that following to him by this rapt, that to others without it
after death. Where Henoch and Elias are.
The Lord did this to give us some sign of the resurrection to a better life
prepared, and to be a testimony of the immortality of souls and bodies. As
to inquire where he became, is mere curiosity. The like we read of Elias
the Prophet, that he also was caught up into heaven in this extraordinary
manner. 2. Kin. 2.11.
Many vain motions about them, both by idle heads which I will not scan. Yea
even godly men have waded further, then by any necessity they were
constrained: for where God has not an answer we should not have a question,
that is, where it pleases him to be silent we should not be sifters, Syrach.
44.
for he concealeth nothing that may be profitable. Syrach is alleged, where it
is said, that Henoch was translated into Paradise. But as the book is not
Canonical, so in that is the Latin translation false, the Greek having
nothing of Paradise, but simply that he was translated. Other guesses and
talks I take as they be only guesses, and pass them over. Where should they
be but with others of the godly where they are: their bodies in the rapt
changed, as the Apostle says all ours shall be, when corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and mortal, immortality, 1. Cor. 15.
and as they that be alive at the Lo^des coming shall be changed. For we
shall not (says he) all dye, but we shall all be changed. The Lord shall
descend himself from Heaven with a showte, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God, and the
dead in (...) first. Then shall we which live and remain, (...) up with them
also in the clouds, to meet the Lord (...)* and so we shall be ever with
the Lord. So were these no question, at this time changed: That again the
(...) may be so caught, the Apostle shows, when he says he was so* w^^ther
in the body or out of the body, says he, I know (...) thereby that both
might be. We read how Philip was caught from the Eunuch, Acts. 8.
and found at Azotus: but I go no further in this matter.

Verse. 24.
7 God took him away, says the 24. verse, and it may well remember us of
the care that the Lord has over his ever to deliver them from the woes of this
world, The Lords care for l^fe or death.
when it shall be good He sees and knows us, and our estate: while it may
be good for us to live, we shall live, and when an other place shall be better
for us, the Lord as he did Henoch can take us away, yea and will if we trust
in him.

8 Lastly let us think upon this occasion, that though all of us in body
cannot obtain this honor to be thus caught up to walk with God, yet may we
in mind be partakers of this much to ascend upward, Coloss. 3.1.2.3.
to have our hearts above, and not beneath, and to walk in spirit amongst
those endless joys that are prepared for us.

Chap. 6.
Hitherto we have heard of man's generation, now must we hear of his
degeneration, that we may well perceive if we will see any thing, how vain a
thing man is, rebelling ever against his God. This whole Chapter contains
cheefelye, but these three things. 1 Man's degeneration from God in the four
first verses. 2 The justice of God ordaining punishment for him from the 5.
verse to the 8. 3 The mercy of God even in this Justice, from the 8. to the
end.


1 TOuching the first, it teaches us, as I said, Verse. 1.2.
the great and grievous corruption of man, Ma^s great corruption
who the more bound he is for mercy to serve God truly, the more apt and
prone he is to offend him highlye. The Lord had now increased mankind* and
them many to their great comforts, if they could have used it, and now
without all regard and thankfulness for such his goodness, headily, and
hastilye, wickedlye and ungodly they provoke him to anger and great
displeasure against them, by fleshlye following their own wills, every man
marrying as he best lyked, for outward beautye, without regard of Gods
liking, and inward virtue. The Sons of God, that is, the Children of the
godly, saw the daughters of men, that is, of wicked parents descended, such
(...) Kain was, that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that
they liked.

2 We see how grievous a thing unequal marriages be, when the godly with
the ungodly, (...) all (...)
the believing with the Infidels, the religious with the superstitious, are
unequally yoaked: surely even so grievous to God, that for this cause
especially the whole world was destroyed by the Flud. The Lord is no
changeling, he disliked it ever* and disliketh it still. It is a secret poison
that destroys virtue more speedily then any thing. Solomon was overthrown
by the daughters of men for all his wisdom. Iehosaphat matched his Son to
Ahabs daughter, and it was his destruction. He forsook the way of the Lord,
and wrought all wickedness in a full measure. Why? because says the Text,
2. Ch* 21 6
The Daughter of Ahab was his Wife. Ahab was wicked, but a wicked Wife made him
far worse, for she provoked him says the Text: 2. Cor. 6.
Be not unequally yoaked with the Infidels (says the Apostle): for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial: or what part has
the believer with the Infidel. It is a law of marriage that should not be
broken, Think of these reasons, and mary virtue, not wealth nor will.
that it be in the Lord, that is, with his liking and in his fear, with such
as be godly, and hold the truth. Our children we allow not to marrye against
our wills, but our right we challenge to give a consent. And shall the Children
of God seek no consent of their Father in Heaven to their marriages? But his
consent he will never give to marrye his enemy, and therefore do it not. It
is not lawful, it is not expedient, if it were lawful. The Flud came to so
much such disobedience, and forget it never.

Beauty is vain.
2 Consider how God hates it, that in marriage, only beauty and favor should
be respected: for their fairness the sons of God chose wicked Women, says
this place, and God plagued it. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity
(says wise Solomon,) but a Woman that fears God, she shall be praised. Pro.
31.30


Verse. 3.
3 Mark the word strive, in the 3. verse: My spirit shall not always strive
with man. Gods great patience and long suffering.
And see in it, and by it the deepnesse of Gods goodness to us miserable
sinners, he does not by and by bring upon us the desarte of our sins, but
bears with us, and long bears with us, daily and hourelye, giving mercy
more notwithstanding all those sins, yea he strives with us, and tuggeth
with us, that we might be saved and not perish. O what a God is this. Look
how your self strive with your child or friend whom you love, to bring him
to good, and to save him from evil, even so does the Lord with you, yea much
and far more. As I live, as I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of
the wicked, Eze. 33.11.
but that he may turn from his way and live: O turn you, turn you from your
evil ways, for why will ye dye ye house of Israel. 2. Petr. 3.9.
The Lord of his promise is not slack, as some men count slacknesse, but is
patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come
to repentance, says the Apostle Peter. And despisest thou O man says S.
Paul, the riches of Gods bountifulnes and patience and long suffering, not
knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance? Thus good is
God, and thus he strives with us.

4 Again, mark his mercy in the time that he grants here to repentance:
Verse. 3.
An hundred and twenty years says he shall his days be: that is, though
thus greatly and grievously man has offended, and even all the earth is become
corrupt, so that with great justice I might bring a flood forthwith, and
consume them all: yet will I not do so, but still bear longer, and look for
amendment, yea an hundred and twenty years yet will I give him ere I bring
the flood upon him, to see if they will return, and avoid my wrath. What is
long suffering if this be not? and this is the sweet nature of our God.

5 Of Giants and mighty men the word speaks sundry times in several
places. Here he says, Giants.
of these ungodly marriages came many of them, which being mightyer then the
usual sort of men, usurped by their might, authority over others, and did
degenerate from the simplicity wherein their Fathers lived. In the book of
Numbers, they that went to search the land of Canaan, when they returned made
report, Chap. 13.34.
that they had seen there Giants, in comparison of whom, they seemed
Grasshoppers. In Deuteronomie mention is made of Og, the King of Bashan, whose
bed was of iron, nine cubits long, Chap. 3.11.
and four cubits broad. That great Goliath also of the Philistims you remember.
S. Austen says: he saw the tooth of a man as great as an hundred of ours, what
was the body then? somewhat you may guess. Pliny reports, that in Crete out
of a mountain was dug the remnants of a man by guess of proportion when
he lived six and forty cubits, but there were no end to tell you all we read
of this matter. Thus much suffices to cause us to consider Gods power, which
mightily and maruelously has ever showed it self in his creatures.

6 In the fifth verse it is said, The Lord saw the wickedness of man that it was
great. Verse. 5.
He ever sees both good and bad whatsoever it is: God sees all.
neither walls nor darkness can hinder his sight. To the godly it is a
comfort, who are many times wronged by false suspicion, slanders and lies, but
the Lord sees. To the wicked it must be a terror, and a very great one, that
cloak they or cover they, hide they or hap they their sins never so much, yet
the Lord sees. And what will he do? ever see, and never punish? then were he
unjust, but that he cannot be for any man, therefore the end will smart,
without repentance.

7 If you doubt of this, believe the text which tells us what fell out when
God saw it would be no better, Verse. 6.
it repented him that ever he had made man, that is, speaking after the manner
of men. God destroyed man, and in that as it were did disauow him to be his
creature. And mark withal how lively the Lord does discover the corruption
that is in us, saying, all our imaginations, Verse 5.
and all our cogitations are evil, and only evil, and ever evil. Man's
corruption how great.
What greater evil then in this sort and measure to be evil? Where is that
free will that wilful men devise to do good, when our mould and metal is
become thus bad? Away with such dreams, experience is the fools
schoolemaister, and shall not even that teach us, but will we gaynesay our own
knowledge? Austen tells us, and all the world, that homo male vtens libero
arbitrio, and se and ipsum perdidit: man abusing that freewill which before his
fall he had, he lost both himself and it. We are naught waking, we are naught
sleeping, we are sinful dreaming, and when we do not dream, and where is our
good?

8 Somewhat conceive of the measure of sin that was now in the earth, by
these speeches of God, that he repented, The measure of sin then how great.
and that he was sorry in his heart. Could a small measure make God thus
grieved? No, he daily indureth great wickedness, and yet repents not that he
made man: wherefore this must teach us their sin was great, and warn us
again to beware, at the least with great sin to offend the Lord. If we
cannot but sin through our imperfection, yet let us not increase the measure
without remorse by any wicked malice. But stay to go on, if we cannot stay to
go in. Stop the course as the Lord shall enable, and not by fullness of
measure, as this people did here pull vengeance from heaven whether God will
or no. O heavy day and hour to you or me, if the Lord shall say, it repents
me that I have made such an one, yea, I am sorry, and sorry at my heart for it.
Beware then of great sins, and of heaping sin upon sin, till God be
driven to say thus against you. The contrary is sweet, when the Lord rejoices
at our being, and shall say to Satan, have thou marked my servant Job, such a
man, such a woman, how they love me, etc.

9 But why was the Lord sorry that he had made man? surely because he must
destroy him again, his sin is so great. Why then he is sorry to destroy man.
Truth it is, God (...) ^^ow to anger.
if he could with justice choose. O then what see we? Cannot God proceed to
punishment of rebellious sinners, yea of such rebellious sinners as these were,
that made the whole earth smell of their sins, but with some grief, with
some discontent, with some ^othnes as it were to have it so if they would
amend, and shall he be hasty and furious, implacable and unmerciful to a poor
sinner that groneth and greueth, sigheth and sobbeth* wepeth and cries for woe
that he does sin, O comfort to an heavy spirit.
and that he cannot but sin against so good a God, and so dear a Father, and
wishes it better every day he rises, and every night he goes to bed? No no
it cannot be. And therefore be of good comfort thou grieved spirit, the Lord
loves thy longing care to serve him better, and he can sooner cease to be God,
which is impossible, then cast away his eyes of mercy and pity from thee. He
will not punish thee, but he lusts to exercise thee, that the glory of thy
faith after such assault appearing bright, may receive a Crown of comfort
brighter then gold or beaten gold, beset with precious stone: Psalm. 27.
O tarry then the Lords leisure, be strong and he shall comfort thy heart, and
put thou thy trust in the Lord.

10 In the seventh verse the Lord says I will destroy. Before we noted his
merciful striving to bring to repentance, Verse 7.
but now note his justice if man will not repent, God just.
he bears long, and says turn, turn: but at last he catches his sword,
and says, I will destroy. Tempt not the Lord therefore ouerlong you unfeeling
hearts, for you see a fear^. Many times admonished, and never amended, think
you hear this word, I will destroy.

Verse 8.
11 In the eight verse it is said, But Noe found grace in the eyes of the Lord.
So God just that ever merciful, and contrary.
So then God punishes, that ever yet he spares some. So is he just that he
forgets not his mercy. He spares Noe and his household with him, and that
in mercy. Gratiam inuenit, non meriti mercedem. Grace he found, but no reward
of merit. Yet what God gives him, we may not deny him, he was a just man, and
upright in his time, and walked with God. A singular praise in so corrupt an
age to be so unlike them. Would God it might teach us the praise of this, not
to be carried away with corruptions amongst us, be they never so general, or so
embraced of the greatest men. To walk with God is a precious praise, Multitude
or custom.
though none do it but my self, and to walk with man, with the world, with a
Town or Parish in wicked ways, is a deadly sin, though millions do it.
Justice and uprightness will abide the touch, when craft and dissembling will
be discerned dross. Noe in this wicked time, and in this universality of
sinning, was a just man and upright, and walked with God, do they all what they
would, he would not follow the^, and let us mark it.

12 In the 24. verse, and so to the end of the Chapter, direction is given to
Noe how he should be saved, Verse 24.
even in an Arc, which he is commanded to make to that purpose. The
prescription you see, and every particular as they lie. Let me tell you the
resemblance that has bin made by some, peradventure not unfitly. The
resemblance of the Ark.
Noe say they was a fit figure of our Savior Christ, for in him was fulfilled
most effectually that which was said of Noe in the fifth Chapter the 29. verse,
Lamech begat a son, and called his name Noah, saying: this same shall comfort
us concerning our work, and sorrow of our hands, as touching the earth which
the Lord has curssed. The Arc a figure of the Church, for as out of that
there was no safety, so out of the Church there is no salvation. The matter of
it must not be every thing, but of Pine trees direction was given. The children
of the Church are not every sort, not they which are borne of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, John. 1.13.
but of God. The Pitch represented the love of the Church, wherewith as with
glue the members are united and fastened together. Within and without the Arc
was pitched, and within and without a true member of the Church is unfeigned
love. He loves within, he loves without, he loves without, and he loves
within, it is not secret and cannot be seen, it is not seen outward and
wants within, but truth and show, and show and truth go together in this man.
O blessed pitch, would God we were all thus pitched, for the more of this
cleaves to our fingers, the better we. It defiles not, but makes us holy
before the Lord. In the Arc were diverse rooms, and in the Church are diverse
gifts, diverse orders, and degrees of men. In the heaven we seek for diverse
mansions. In the Arc are beasts unclean, as well as clean, and in the true
Church and of the true Church, he that denies sinners to be, shall prove an
Anabaptist. The window they say might represent the Gospel, and the preaching
thereof, for as by that window came light into the Arc to lighten their
bodies, so by the preaching of the Gospel comes light into the Church to
lighten the heart, and mind, and understanding of those that are within. The
door, Christ. I am the door, and so as follows. The Arc was great and very
great. So is the Church of great largeness, dispersed by God both far and
wide. Read the 54. of Esaias 2. Rejoice thou barren that bear not, etc.
enlarge thy tents. etc. The flood resembled Baptism, which kills the old
man, and restores the new* while the Arc was preparing says S. Peter,
whereby eight souls were saved in the water, 1. Pet. 3.21.
whereof the baptism that now is, answering that figure etc. saves us also by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Finally and lastly, the Arc was tossed in
those waves of water both up and down, and so is the Church whilst it here is
militant, too and fro. Yea every member does witness this, tossed of the
world, tossed of flesh, tossed of Satan, and tossed by sin, never able to
hold together, if God, as he did the Arc, did not defend it, guide it, and
keep it, and govern the waves, that they shall not hurt further then in mercy
he will heal again. This is the figure of the Arc, and sum of this Chapter.

Chap. 7.
Having heard in the former Chapter the sin of man in those days, and the
gracious striving of God with him to bring him to amendment, giving even then,
when he might justly have punished, yet an hundred and twenty years to
repentance. In this Chapter we shall see how all this goodness of God was
despised and neglected, those hundred and twenty years in all wickedness
likewise spent, and therefore God forced as it were at last to bring the flood
upon them. The general heads may be these two. The entrance of Noah into the
Arc. The coming of the flood upon all flesh.


Verse 1.
1 COncerning the first, it is to be observed that God bids him enter into
the Arc, Noah entered commanded.
thereby giving his faith that sure stay of the word, without which it must
needs have wauered, and bin shaken in pieces in that great trial. And Noah his
not entering till he was bidden, teaches us truly to take God for our guide in
all our actions, and his word for our warrant and assurance in what we go about.

2 The Lord says, he saw Noah righteous in that age before him, Verse 1.
not meaning thereby that Noah wanted weakness of humane imperfections, Such
God takes us as we will to ^ee a great comfort.
but so calling him in respect of others, and because he had a desire and
hearty affection to be such an one. Whereby we have given us a great comfort,
that the Lord does measure us according to our will, and not according to our
power, and finding us willing with unfeigned affection to serve him uprightly
(which will yet comes not of our selves) he voutsafeth us the honor and title
of righteous men, notwithstanding our great weakness and want of perfection.
These and such like places we should ever have in store against those fiery
darts of our deadly foe, that would persuade us we are nothing regarded of God,
because we labor of some imperfections. How honorable is the remembrance of
their faith in the 11. to the Hebrews, all which had their wants, and many
infirmities.

3 The addition of the words before me, make his praise great, and his virtue
true: for many seem glorious before men, Verse 1.
True praise to be righteous before God, not before men.
which before God are nothing so: that is true righteousness which before God is
so. This if we thought of as well as we know, we would more regard God, and
less think of men, whereas now we prick at it, as our great mark to be
approved of men, and to gain their praises.

4 A question is asked why of clean beasts by seuens, and of unclean but
cupples were taken and preserved? Verse 2.
And the best answer is, after the preservation of seed, because the clean
served for sacrifices, which God had appointed to be served by, God then
provided for commanded exercises, God cares to maintain his worship, and we
care not.
that there might ^e to perform them with* and we as though we were not his
children* nor ever meant to be his heirs, most carelessly contemn the^, and
will prou^de nothing for the^: if we provide any thing, it shall be how to hinder
them and put them down, and this is our resembling of God.

5 God tells Noe when he would begin to rain, and how long he would
continue, Verse 5.
that his faith might be firm in every respect, and not doubting, God hates
doubting.
since nothing more greeueth God then so to do, as you may remember in diverse
examples of the best men, as in Moses and Aron those great pillars, who for
their doubting and wavering, went never into the land of promise. Number. 20.
In Zacharias, whose doubting brought him dumbnes for a time, and such like.
When God says he will do a thing, he would be believed, and because he knows
our weakness, he provides often for us by such particular circumstances, as
here you see.

The profit that comes by the godly.
6 Noah was not only saved, but his wife, his sons, and his sons wives, yet
read we not of their righteousness as of Noah's. But this is the good that
comes by the company of the godly, even to be within the shadow of Gods great
mercy for their sakes. So good is the Lord to his loving children, that to
their friends also he will be good. Genesis 1^.
So was he to Lot and to his friends, if they would have bin ruled. So was he
to Rahab and her fathers house. So is his manner to be in his great mercy. Yet
what is so loathsome to wicked wretches, as the company, fellowship, kindred, or
acquaintance of the godly? But what marvel, since like with like are best
pleased.

Verse 9.
7 If you ask how all the beasts were gotten, the text answers, they came of
themselves, God compelling them by his divine power to present themselves
before Noah as before Adam, when he gave them names, in the second Chapter.

8 In the 11. verse you see the time, In the sixth hundred year of Noah's life,
Verse 11.
in the second month, the seventh day: as we reckon about the beginning of
May, The flood comes, and creatures conspire to destroy sinners.
when all things flourished, and yielded show, then, even then began this
woeful tragedy of man's destruction. So sure shall it be that God says, and so
inchangeable is his purpose. Then were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, heaven and earth agreeing
together to accomplish Gods will, and to destroy mankind. O heavy day, when
man should so offend God, that the creatures abhor him, the fountains and
deepes and waters below and above. But nothing will warn some men.

Verse 16.
9 When all were entered into the Arc, the text says, God shut them in, All
safety from the Lords shutting in not ours
thereby declaring, that by his divine power they were only saved, and the Arc
kept whole against all dangers, and insinuating to us the like cause of all our
safety evermore. It is not our house, our Castle, or tower when we go to bed
that saves us, but that the Lord shuts the doors, and closes us in, this
is our surety, that no power can withstand whatsoever it wishes, this is our
safety, that we may trust unto. Were the gates of the city iron or brass,
if he shut them not, they will never hold out, but were they wood or clay, made
strong by his defending mercy, no canon can batter them* nor man get them open
to hurt any within, whom the Lord will have safe, and to that end has shut
within them.

10 Then all flesh perished that moved upon the face of the earth says the 21
verse. Verse 21.
But whether man perished eternally or no, that is the question, I mean all
that were drowned in the flood, whether were they also condemned to hell, and
so perished that way? we may answer truly, that it becomes dust and ashes to
leave Gods secrets to himself: but for the argument, Like punishment in this
life does not argue like in the next world.
that therefore it should seem so because they tasted of his outward judgment
alike, it follows not: for the two thieves crucified with our Savior, had
like outward punishment, and yet not one inward condemnation. Many dye the
deaths of several offenses, and yet are saved by mercy in the world to come.
God forbid we should censure men so, as to conclude their eternal death upon
their temporal sufferings. We may not do it: well may we learn by these words
(that all things perished) that if nothing could help it self when God was
angry, Trust in nothing to save if god do frown
what shall it be that shall have strength to help us, and sheeld us from his
wrath? may the strength of a Giant, gold, silver, horses, wisdom* or any
thing do it? no, all these things in this flood could not profit any thing the
owners of them, and so shall it ever be, therefore trust not to them.

11 The rain from above, and the fountaynes beneath, are things we cannot
lack, yet see we in this place how they made a flood. Gods favor and anger
changes the use to us of creatures.
Learn we then by it what a great difference Gods favor and anger make in the
same creatures. If in favor he rain, we are nurished by it: if in anger he do
it, we are destroyed: so is it with the fire, with the air, with our meats
and drinks, and whatsoever we use in this mortal life, his mercy makes, and
his wrath marreth the same thing. O how should we then value Gods favor? how
should we seek to have it, and fear to loose it. Pray we when we rise, and
pray we when we sleep, that his creatures we may enjoy in favor ever.

12 Only Noah was left alive, and they that were with him in the arc. Profit
by fearing God against evil men.
Yet say the wicked in the Prophet Malachie, It is vain to serve the Lord,
there is no profit in it. But we see the contrary in this place and ever. If
the Lords wrath be kindled never so little, blessed are all they that trust in
him. When mountains and hills, Mala. 3.14. Psalm. 2.
castles and forts, trees, nor any tall towers can save a man, this keeps him
close from all harm, and not only him, but his friends with him, that he was
godly and served the Lord. Let this be our gain then whilst we see this light,
and we shall never loose. Do thou think to reign says God, because thou
closest thy self in Cedar? Iere. 22.15.
No, no, thy fathers godliness made him prosper, and thy want of that shall
make thee perish, be thy Forts never so strong, and thy braueries never so
many, they shall not serve. Read the 3. of 1. Peter the 20. verse.

Chap. 8.
After mercy comes judgment, and after judgment mercy again, as we may see
in this Chapter, wherein we have The ceasing of the flood to the 15. verse.
The coming out of Noah, to the 20. His sacrifice, and Gods speech to the end.


COncerning the first, we see the author, GOD. The means, he made a wind to
pass upon the earth, the fountains of the deep, and the windows of heaven
were stopped etc. The time when, after the hundred and fiftieth day, by our
computation about the 19. of October, and for other particulars.

Verse 1.
1 It is said, the Lord remembered Noah: wherein is discovered unto us, The Lords
care over his ever.
the most faithful care, and careful faithfulness that is in almighty God for
his true servants ever: he looks upon their perils, he sees their dangers,
and in his due time he remembers to relieve and release them, as he did here
Noah and his family. Can the Bride forget her ornaments, nay can the Mother
forget her child: these things be hard, and easily are not done, yet suppose
they might be done, the Lord for all that cannot forget his, who making him
their God, he has made his servants, Esaias 49.15
and written them in his hand, yea made them as signe^s upon his right finger,
that he may never forget them. Psalm. 8.
O Lord says David, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son
of man, that thou so regardest him? Tarry then but Gods leisure as Noah did, and
be sure of remembrance in due time as he had.

2 To strengthen us in this, Verse 1.
consider how it follows of the Cattle, that God also remembered them. God
cares for the cattle. Math. 6.
Alas does the Lord care for Sheep and Gotes, yea for creatures many of meaner
regard, and forget man in his tribulation and woe? Behold the fowls of the
air, do they sow or spin to be fed and clothed thereby? yet God remembers
them. O how much more man, that is Lord of all these, if we had faith.

3 When it is said, the fountaynes were stopped, Verse 2.
and the windows closed to stay the flood: How to stay sin.
profit by it in a godly policy after this sort, that if any flood of sin
and stream of iniquity go about to drown us, we stop the fountain, and
close up the windows by which it issues and gets out, so shall we stay the
course of it in Gods blessing and be free from danger. O that this lesson were
learned in Court and country, fully, and well, Note.
then many a filthy flood would be religiously stayed, and many a sowsing wave
of a sinful temptation be beaten back, I say if the fountains were stopped,
and the windows shut: conceive of it further, and meditate of it a whole hour
by your self, I say no more.

4 The Arc stayed about the 26. of October, Verse 4.
upon the mountains of Armenia, and why? The Arc stays.
because when wind blows and water fails, sailing is dangerous, and the
rocks may be hit upon: what a providence then is here for poor Noe in his
gracious God, what a prevention o^ danger? shall nothing make us know him and
his sweet goodness? ^^yle we then on in the sea of this world while God will, A
comfort.
surely when it shall be good he will make us to rest, and prevent our peril,
if we trust in him, and O Lord give faith and patience for thy mercy sake.

Verse 5.
5 In the tenth month, that is about the 28. of December as we reckon, Example
of chief men.
were the tops of the mountains seen, a good token and comfort of an end of
that water-flood: we may apply it thus, the great men of this world, of a
kingdom, of a city, of a town, are as mountains and hills in comparison of
the lower sort, and if once they wax dry from such fluds of evil as many times
they are ouerflowed withal, it is a good sign, and yeldeth great hope that
the waters do decrease, and a better state even shortly will ensue: but whilst
they are ouerflowed and covered, what hope of dry land in the valleys? such and
so great to good or evil is the example of the great ones.

6 Then after forty days Noah opened the window of the arc, Verse 6.
and sent forth some of the fowls. Where was his warrant thus to do? Some
things lawful without express word.
surely expressed we see none, and yet is he not disliked: why? because though
it were not prescribed in the word that he should do so, yet was there no
prohibition not to do so: and being not contrary to any word, though it have
no express word for it, it is not disalowed: we are taught hereby says a
learned man, where there is no need of express prescription, as in things not
of such moment often there is not, holy men are left suis consiliis and
conatibus to their own discretions, counsel and liberty, Mus^. upon the
words.
and if the like fall out to us, we may follow their examples.

Verse 7.
7 He sent first a Raven which returned not again, etc. By which foul some
say might be resembled the teachers of the law, What the Raven might signifye.
because they never bring any good tidings, but death, death, for want of
performance of the law, whose promise is annexed only to fulfilling of the
same, and not else. Others say, by the Raven might be noted such men, as having
mind of the dead carions, consider not wherefore they were sent, but plying
their whole care about themselves, and satisfying their devouring nature with
such carrion as they see before them, take their pleasure therein, and make
their abode, not returning any more to the Arc with testimony of their course
applied and employed to that end whereabout they were sent. Such foul Ravens
no question there are but too many.

8 When Noah saw no return of the Raven, Verse. 8
he took a Dove and sent her forth the same day* to see if by her he might
perceive any fall of the waters. And the Dove returned to him again, not
finding any rest for her foot upon the earth as yet, whereby he knew the waters
were not abated. This dove they say may resemble fitly the good preachers of
the word, (...)
which are sent forth by the true Noah Christ Jesus into the world, ouerflowed
all with sin and wickedness, as with a flood: but finding no rest for their
foot, that is, finding no acceptance of their labors, nor good to be done by
them, mocked and scorned, derided and abused, rejected and contemned, they
return again, bringing nothing with them, and yet to Noah welcome, who
puts forth his hand, and receives the^ into the Ark, 1. Cor. 2.15
for we are a sweet savor says the Apostle to the Lord even in them that
perish: That is, the Ministers of Gods word are dear unto him, and most sweet
in his nostrels, if they do their diligence faithfully, albeit the profit follow
not aunswerable to the same, but even all that notwithstanding, men perish, and
are cast away, a great comfort.

9 When it is said, Verse. 9.
the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot upon all the earth that she
saw, A fearful change.
let us consider the marvelous change now made from the estate before and very
late, when thousands of doves, men, women, children, and all the creatures of
the earth had rest for their feet, yea pleasures and comforts above necessities
many anon. Now no such matter, all is gone, and there is not so much as rest
for one poor dove. What should it fitly admonish us of, but to the uttermost
of our power received of God to take heed, least with like sin we procure
like judgment against our selves, our country, our towns, and private
houses, where now is many a comfort and many a pleasure, men women and children
not a few have rest for their feet, that is, Note.
all things necessary to their comfortable being, and live upon us, and with
us, and by us: we with them, and they with us enjoy Gods mercies, blessings and
benefits, to his great prais^ and our great good if we can use them and be
thankful. Shall the day come that in that house where many a man has found
his rest, being the seat of an honorable or worshipful personage, no rest
shall be found for a dove, that is, for any creature any place, all being altered
by the judgment of a grieved God at abuse and unthankfulness, at sin and
iniquity? God forbid, and as we fear God, let us think of it, for he that so
soon could alter in his anger the estate of the whole world, that of a place
so full of rest for thousands thousands of creatures, now there should bend
rest for the foot of one dove, surely he can change as quickly the seat of
any Prince, or noble, or genleman, or other man, that all the honor and
comforts being wiped away in wrath, there should not be rest for any, but a
fearful sight of horror and confusion upon evil deserts.

10 The Arc to the dove was like a prison, a place of restraint, and not
according to her kind, Verse. 9.
which was to fly abroad, yet finding no rest, Better an inconvenience then a
mischief.
rather then she will perish, she returns to the same again. It may teach us
this, that better is an inconvenience then a mischief. If we cannot as we
would, we must as we can. I speak it against all heathenish and
unchristianlike impatiencie. The heathens rather then they would serve, they
would kill them selves. And many in these days, rather then they will suffer
what God imposes, will do what God detesteth, let it not be so. If we cannot
be abroad and at liberty, because Gods judgment against sin has taken away
our footing in such or such sort, whilst it shall please him, let us be
content, return as the dove did to the place appointed, and thank him for
mercy even in that, that yet there we live, and are not destroyed as others
have been.

11 Noah stayed upon this 7. days, and then sent out the dove again says the
text* Verse. 10.
which returned to him in the evening, bringing in her mouth an olive leaf
which she had plucked, whereby Noe knew the waters were abated. This dove may
note the preachers also of the word again, The dove with an olive leaf what.
who bring in their mouths some good tidings to the Arc, that is to the
Church, and every good news may be compared also to an olive leaf, and the
tellers to doves. That good news yt the women brought to ye disciples that
Christ was risen, Matt. 28.8.
was like an olive leaf in their mouth, and they like this dove in this place:
so all others. Read 2. King. 7. of ye good news of the lepers, and 2. Sam.
18.27. he is a good man, says David, and comes with good tidings: so good
men and women have words of comfort in their mouths, when others have the
poison of aspes under their toongs, they have olive leaves to cheer up Noah
and his company withal, when others have wormwood and gall to make their
hearts ache with the bitterness thereof. Such doves God make us evermore, and if
this be regarded of us, we will endeavor it.

12 Then waited he other seven days and sent her again. Verse 12.
When she returned no more unto him. The difference of a good servant and a bad.
First mark the often sending of the dove, when the raven goes but once. It
shows the difference of a good servant and a bad. The first is often used,
because he is faithful and true, the later but once, because then he is found
to be a raven, more heeding the carions that his nature regards, then
performing his message which his sender desires. The praise of these two
fowls, how they differ in this place for their service, we all see, and it
should thus profit us, as to prick us to the good, and afray us from the
evil. In some place or other we are all servants as these fowls were, to God,
to Prince, to Masters, to some or other. Let us be doves that they may often
use us, let us not be ravens* that they may justly refuse us. Secondly in the
doves not returning any more let us mark a type of the saints of God, A type
of the godly.
that having sundry times discharged the trust of their places, as the dove
did, at last have their departure out of the arc, that is, out of this life
and Church militant, and finding rest for their foot in Gods blessed kingdom,
return no more to the Arc again, but then continue and abide for ever.

13 At last came this comfortable word from God, Verse 16.
Go forth of the ark, thou and thy wife, and thy son, and thy sonns wives,
All affliction of the g^dly has his end.
and all creatures with thee. So we see there is no affliction or trial yt God
imposes upon his children, but if they endure it quietly, trust in his mercy
firmly, and tarry his good pleasure obediently, it has his comfortable end. If
God think it good to say to any man or woman enter into the arc, that is, into
this or that try^ll of thy faith and patience, into this prison, into that
indurance, into this restraint of liberty, that affliction and trouble, sorrow
and care, and inward nips, or outward pinches, surely he has also an other
word for them, which in due time he will likewise speak unto them, and that is
this: Go forth of the arc now again thou and thy wife, and al thine, that is,
let there be an end of whatsoever it was yt tried thee, for I have seen yt
faith, patience, and hope, that has pleased me. O our good God, how sure are
we of this, and how sweet is it? what else but that which the Prophet David
found most certain, and testified to the world, saying: Psa^m. ^0.
Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore
shall lodge with us all night,
The Lord to joy shall us restore
before the day be light.
Confessing herein, yt after sour comes sweet, after sorrow joy, after
restraint liberty, after want plenty, and to speak with this place after go in
to the Arc, follows certainly come forth again.

14 Yea but when did God bid Noah come forth, surely not before the earth was
dry, Verse 13.
for so says the text. Then there we see again how wonderfully he disposes
for his children times and seasons, Every thing in his season has God for his
child.
all for their good: when the earth is not for them, he has an Arc upon the
water, and when the earth is fitter then the Arc, he has the earth again,
all in such times as may be best for us, and how should we thank him?

Verse. 20.
15 When Noah was come forth, he builds an altar, takes his beasts,
Thankfulness ever in the godly.
and off^eth his sacrifice: teaching us this, how most careful we should be
whilst life is in us, to be thankful to God for his mercy toward us, either in
delivering us out of danger, or any way showing the light of his countenance
toward us. A thankful heart becomes a Christian and pleases God, and the
very devils of hell, if they were asked, must needs say the contrary is a
fault.

Verse 21.
16 Then says the story, God smelled a savor of rest, that is, Good works
joined to true faith smell sweetly.
showed himself appeased, and his anger at rest: this piety was in Noah's heart
before, but now it smells, when it breaks into work: so was Abraham for
his faith noted of God before, but when that faith flamed out into a willingness
to sacrifice his dear son, then God cried out, now, now, I see Abraham thy
love etc. Surely that which powning and beating is to spice, works be to faith
in some resemblance: the spice is sweet before it be brayed, but when it is
brayed, much more: so is faith in the heart accepted of God, before opportunity
serve to work, but when opportunity does serve, and holy works come to a godly
faith, then smells it maruelously, and the Lord sauoreth a rest to his own
good liking, and our true comfort for ever and ever: let it teach us, let it
school us, and prick us forward to holy life.

17 And what said God, read the text, verse 21. he will no more curse the
earth for man's corruption, he restores nature, Verse. 21.
Se^de time and harvest, cold and heat, winter and summer, The seasons of the
year, Gods gift still.
day and night, and shows us thereby that they are all his gifts, and only
his, to take and give as pleases him. This is some use of this 8. Chapter.

Chap. 9.
ALl things being done, as you read before. Verse. 1.
God blessed Noah and his family. Comfort after sorrow.
So follow comforts after sorrow, as we noted before: The mourning weed thou
tookest me fro, and made me to rejoice, Psalm. 30.
says the Psalm.

2 The fear of you and the dread of you, Verse. 2.
(says God) shall be upon every beast: providing thereby for man's safety,
Beasts how bridled to hurt no more then they do.
for by the virtue of this commandment, beasts rage not so much against man
as they would, but many of them serve even to his use hereby.

3 In the 3. verse: their commission is signed, Verse. 3.
yea signed and sealed, to kill and eat, not herbs as before and no flesh,
Flesh al^^wed to eat.
but flesh now also as well as herbs. Many men thinking it was not so before.

4 But flesh with the life thereof, that is, Verse. 4.
with the blood thereof, might they not eat. Cruelty forbidden.
God meaning hereby to bridle cruelty, which he ever hated.

5 And as before he provided, that man should not be raged against by beasts,
so provides he here also, Verse. 6.
Murde^ restrained.
that man against man should not be a destroyer. For if he be, He that
sheadeth man's blood* by man shall his blood be shed again. That is, in justice
shall either the Magistrate revenge such iniquity upon him, or some other
stirred up in the just wrath of God, shall measure to to him as he has
measured to others, that is, kill him, as he has killed others, and leave his
wife a widow, and his Children fatherless, as he has left others.

Verse. 9.
6 Then God makes his covenant with man, and all flesh, that he will never
destroy the world any more by water: and because man is so hard of belief,
he adioyneth a sign to his word and promise, Verse. 13
The Rain bow why given.
and sets it in the heavens, even his bow, which we usually call the Rain
bow. By which so doing of the Lord, first we learn the antiquity of the
mercy, in adding outward signs to confirm man by: Secondly the use of them.
The antiquity if it had been no more but from Noah it had been much, but we
see it was before, even in Paradise to Adam, there was the Tree of Life, and
the tree of the Knowledge of good and evil. The one assuring him if he obeyed,
he should live, and the other if he sinned, that he should die. A mercy so long
continued to his children should be greatly regarded with hearty thanks for
it* The use of such outward signs is not to confirm God in his promise, who
though he never added any seal, yet would be most true in his word, but to
confirm us in the belief of that promise, which of it self and in it self
is most immooueable. For though he be true to perform, yet we are weak to
believe, and a gracious God he is that will so support us. Again, the
Rainbowe is taken as a figure of Christ, An allegory of the Rainebow.
and therefore we thereby taught, that when either the dark blackness of
vglye sin, or the thick clouds of grief and adversity, do threaten unto
us any fearful overthrow, we should clap our eyes straight upon our
Rainebowe Christ Jesus, and be assured that though that blackness of sin be
never so great, yet in him and by him it shall be done away, and neue^ have
power to cast us away, though those mists and fogges of adversity be never
so thick, yet shall they by him as by a hot and strong sun, be dispersed,
and never able to drown us. The greatest rain we know, shall end ere it come
to such a Flud again, and so shall these things before we fall.

7 In the 20. verse, you see Noah's trade of life, Verse. 20.
he fell to Husbandrye, an old, an ancient, a profitable, a godly, and
necessary vocation, as has been noted before. Then follows in the next
verse his foul fall: when having planted a Vineyard, he drunk of the fruit
and was drunk, and uncovered in his Tente. Such fauls in Gods children, Verse.
21.
The fauls of the (...) they profit.
though they be their shame, yet yield they us weak ones, great comfort. For
we should utterly despair when we see our selves, if such blots and spots
had not been in such greatness once by man's corruption. Now though we have
no warrant by them to do the like, yet if human frailty over carry us ever,
we need not to despair, for with God there is mercy to repentance and
amendment, and greater me^ then we have had their wants.

8 Mark the filthiness of drunkenness, it makes him lie uncovered in his
Tente, vndecentlye, unseemly, The filthy sin of drunkenness.
nay beastlye, and rather like a beast then a man. And could it so disfigure
Noah, a man of such goodness, so highly commended before, and not disfigure
us, that are a thousand degrees behind him? shall once being so, be such a
blot, and shall daily being so, be no blot? Think of it, and if you shame in
Noah's behalf, to think how unseemly he lay, take heed to your self. For
foul sightes are seen both in men and women that are drunk.

9 When Cham the eldest son of Noah saw his Fathers nakedness, he mockingly
went, and told his brethren of it. Verse. 22.
In Cham then behold a true patrerne of all such vilde spirits, Publi^hers of
other men's wa^ts
as joy in the publishing of other men's wantes, whom yet for many graces they
ought to reverence, mocking, flyring, and geering at them, with profane
hearts, concepts, and censures, like this Cham. Such has this world had ever,
but in these later days, as though Satan's kingdom were driven to this shift,
he stirs them up in every place most busilye, and seeks their service,
They most unawarely not marking whom they serve, and what they do, are
contented to be carried, tempted, and drawn to this curssed course most fully.

Verse. 23
10 But when Sem and Iaphet heard of it, they took a Garment and put it upon
both their shoulders, The good spir^t of them that cover as they may their
brethrens nakedness.
and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father, with their
faces backward, and so they saw not their fathers nakedness. As notable a
picture on the contrary side, of all such mild, modest, loving, godly, and
christianlike spirits, which cover with love their fathers and brethrens
imperfections, infirmities, wants and weakness, charitably expounding
whatsoever may be so taken, either speaking the best, or not the worst, and
wishing in their hearts all men were amended, and no man disgraced if he will
be amended. Such spirits are blessed, when the others are curssed, and shall
stand as well liked before his face, who shall retribute to the other in due
justice, the very blackness of darkness for evermore.

11 Mark it again in this place diligently, that a good Father has his
children not all good, Good men have evil children.
not all alike qualified, not of the same virtuous and honest conditions all,
yet this is not the fathers fault. It greeueth him full sore, if Cham play so
lewd a part, that procures a curse, and not a blessing. But so God pleases
to exercise his children sometimes, even with the undutifulness and
untowardness of their own flesh, fruit and leede. Abraham had his bad
Ismael, as well as his good Isaac. Isaac again had his profane Esau, as well as
his godly Jacob. Jacob had his crosses mo then one in his children, if you
mark them, Ruben defiled his bed, Simeon and Leui bloody and treacherous, Dina
ravished by her gadding abroad, all of them unkind to Joseph in such ^ad
sort as you know. David had his Absalom, Ammon Adoniah, and many others have
thus been crossed, that I name not now. Consider it duly, and grieve not above
that which is convenient, if you know the like. Say with an obedient heart: Let
the Lord do whatsoever pleases him, and let no man censure the parents above
their true proof, for Childrens faults.

Verse. 24.
Lastly the waking of Noah from his drunkenness, and finding what was done,
Note.
teaches us two things. First to do well to every one as we can, knowing that
though when we do it, they to whom we do it, know it not, regard it not,
esteem it not, nor us for it, as being drunk with anger, malice, youthful
temerity, and such like, yet a wakening time may come, when they may do
otherwise, see the good and bless us for it, whilst we live, and the very
memory of us when we be dead. Secondly as in figure it may tell us, that the
godly sin not to death, but though they sleep they awake again, though they
slip, yea fall quite down, yet they recover and rise again, even seven times
a day. A great comfort when I am down, but no imboldning to fall down.

Chap. 10.
THis chapter wholly consists in a description of the propagation of mankind,
Verse. 1.
by the posterity of Noah, Gods power and man's forgetfulness.
after they were now released from the Flud, wherein all flesh but they, was
perished: which great increase in so short a time, notes unto us the
wonderful power of God, and discovers also what most unkind forgetfulness
of the Lords goodness to their fathers, but as it were yesterday, was crepte
so quickly into some of them.

2 With Sem and Iapheth is curssed Cham, telling us, In the Church good and bad.
that this outward militant church has her blots and wrinckles in her: not
only in respect of the godly, whose regeneration is not finished till they
dye, but in respect also of the evil that are mixed and mingled with the good,
betwixt Sem and Iapheth, two good men, Cham a caytife has a place in the world.

3 Cham was yoonger, and so ever is falsehood later then truth, sin later then
innocence, and evil later then good, Truth elder then falsehood.
Cain was old, but Adam was elder, nay Adam sinning was very soon, but yet
Adam not sinning was before, first good seed is sown, and then after Tares.

Oppression how old.
4 Nimrod a tyrant starteth up in this Chapter. When? when he waxed mighty.
Ancient therefore is oppression and cruelty, and the abuse of Gods blessings:
when God has increased a man in power and wealth, then most is he bound to
serve him for it, but quite contrary it is, the mightier the worse, and the
richer the crueller to oppress the weak ones. Read the 2. of Chron. 26.16.
and Deutro. 6.10. verse.

5 His tyranny is compared to Hunting, and the tyrant to a hunter. Verse. 9.
Hunting has snares, nets, dogs, and diggings of deep ditches, Tyranny
compared to hunting
spyings, and pryings, watchings and wardings, and ever the death of the
creature hunted is the game. Tyranny and oppression has the like, if ye list
to compare them, at least in this they join full just, the party hunted must
dye at last. But such Nimrods, such tyrants, such hunters God sees, and such
huntings of the poor till they have their blood, God in his justice together
with the hunters, will repaye.

Sin grows by custom
6 In that it is said Nimrod was such an one before the Lord. It notes the
nature of sin and custom, to wit, to gather strength by continuance, and at
last not to fear, even the face of God, nor his holy eyes to look upon it.
Custom of sinning takes away the feeling of sin, and therefore if we stay
not to do evil before man, at last it will be said of us as of Nimrod* that
even before God we are become hunters, that is, we are grown to an impudency
and boldness of sinning.

In every town a Nimrod great or little.
7 As Nettles then Roses be of greater increase, and bad weeds multiply apace.
so spread this iniquity further then virtue, and filled the world with such
fruit daily. To this day they fructify in a full measure, and what town is
that almost in the world, that has not a Nimrod one or two at the least in it.
That is, a hard, a cruel, a greedy, and covetous man, that grindeth the faces
of his neighbors, till both skin and flesh being of the bare bones, do only
remain. I say no more, yet think you more of it that read it.

8 Though we see here divisions of Countries made amongst them, and some
dwelling here, some there, as they liked, yet one blood remained amongst them,
as a knot ever to join them, what distance of place soever severed them. And
is it not so still, though longer time and larger increase have spread it
further? Surely it is so, we cannot deny: and therefore this bond of blood,
stock, house, lineage, and kindred in root, though I say the degrees be far,
should continue regard one of an other, and love more then is. Likewise
trading and traphiking, helping and releeuing with mutual interchange of
commodities one of another, desire of traueling no less one to find out and
know an other, what distance of place soever does separate. For we be all as
we see of one blood and parent. And should a man placed in France say adewe for
ever, and in all respect of affeccion, care, and love to his house in England,
out of which he descended? Then might he justly be accounted unnatural,
currish and unkind, above the course of a good man: surely even so in the
other, and thus profit by it: for men are not to be thought of, only according
to far or near dwelling, but according to the root from which they descended.

9 Again when we read this chapter, remember Chams curse by his father, in
the former chapter, Earthly glory no true token of Gods favor.
and then mark his worldly estate laid down in this, and see how the one may
agree with the other. There I say he was curssed, and here he seems more
blessed then any of them: for his Children are many, the place of his dwelling
most fruitful, pleasant and fertile. Now he that has so great a posterity,
as eleven sons, so sweet a portion of the earth as he had, with all the
circumstances of these two worldly felicities, how is he curssed? surely even
as the wicked usually are curssed, not by denial of outward blessings, but by
a taking from them of heavenly favor: wherefore learn by it this secret ever,
that in earth they flourish with earthlye pleasures many a time, whom GOD has
marked never to love, but to carrye his curse for evermore. Fear not
therefore though one be made rich, and the glory of his house be increased,
Psalm. 49.
for the favor of God consists not in these things, but for all them he may
be a Cham, and his fathers curse settled upon him, and his seed. Blessed are
the people (says the Psalm) that be in such a case, having relation to
outward blessings named before, but then follows after as a correction of the
former: yea rather blessed are they that have the Lord for their God: noting
the former to be but blessings in respect, and the later only the true and
certain happiness of any flesh. See also how even in those days to judge of
the estate of the wicked, and godly, they had need to enter into the
Sanctuary of God, for if they went by outward show either of the one or of
the other, they should be deceived, as also now.

10 But why does Moses mention so carefully and precisely the borders or
limits of Chanaan or of the Canaanites? Certainlye it was by the guiding of
Gods holy Spirit in respect of the church and children of God, The wicked
often prouiders for others that shall be better then they.
to whom after it should be given, that they might know them the better. Where
mark we the depth of Gods hidden and secret providence, in such sort as it
peereth out and shows it self unto us. Do we not see how earthly things are
given to the wicked, which even then when they enjoy them, by a wise God are
appointed in his providence unto others, whom he favors more, and for whom
he uses but those for a time to provide for them, and to make them readyer to
their hands? Adore we therefore this secret depth, and say we with the
Apostle: O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, Romans 11.33
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor, etc. Many
things more might be noted in this Chapter, if the Genealogies should be stood
upon, wherein with praise many have traueled, but I choose rather with him that
did so before me, Calvin.
to leave that diligence to them that have showed it, and to content my self
with these few notes at this time.

Chap. 11.
The heads of this Chapter, especial and principal are two. The confusion of
tongues, from the 1. ver. to the 10. The description of S^ms offspring, from the
10. to the end.


1 TOuching the first, it is said, that the earth was all of one language,
Verse. 1.
and question is made what that was, What language was first.
and whether it remained still or no after the confusion, and with whom: for
the first, it is answered, that although it be uncertain, yet probably it is
coniectured, that it was the Hebrew. For so say the proper names of men and
women, which remain as yet and are Hebrew, being imposed then and not altered
by Moses the relator into any language else. Of this judgment is Hierom upon
the 3. of Sephon, when he calls the Hebrew tongue the mother of all the rest.
Augustine thought otherwise, writing thus: Vnam sane linguam primitus fuisse
didicimus, Aug. lib. 9. cap. 12 sup Genesin ad literam.
antequam super bia turris illius post diluuium fabricatae in diuersos signorum
sonos humanam societatem diuideret. Quae autem illa lingua fuerit, quid attinet
querere. That there was one tongue in the beginning we learn, before the pride
of the Tower built after the Flud, had divided man's society into diverse sounds
of words: but what tongue that was what need we ask. To the second it is
answered, that it did remain, being as is supposed, and inioyed of us at this
day. And to the third, yt it was in the house and family of Sem, Arphaxad, The
Chaldie tongue
Selah and Eber, of whom it had denomination Hebrew. Philo thinks ye first
tongue was the Chaldee, contrary to Hierom as was said before, and Hierom to
him. But since Arphaxad was a Prince of the Chaldeans, what hinders that
rather the Chaldee and Hebrew should not be all one at first, though in
process of time some difference grew?

Verse. 4.
2 When it is said to reach up to heaven, we may not think they were so mad
as to imagine they could so do, Hyperbole
but we must know the manner of speech to be a figurative amplification often
used of men without fault, and often used in the scripture it self: when David
says of them that sail on the seas, and are occupied in great w^ters, that
they are carried up to the heavens, and down again to the depths: Psalm. 107.
he does not mean as he speaks, that they are carried up to ye heavens
indeed, but by the same figure he means very high. So is the former and so
are many more speeches in the word, which if Julian could have seen or other
such like profane spirits, yet perceive, their carping impiety had a faull.

3 Unity of language was a great mercy of God, by that means keeping them by
a notable band knit together, Unity of language.
whom far distance of place had set a sunder. And if this be a mercy that we
speak, as it is a great one: surely far greater it was that they all spoke one
speech, for so might they continue not only in a most profitable interchange
of any earthly commodities, but even also in a holy communion of al mercies
whatsoever, one understanding from an other, and of another, what wonderful
good soever the Lord should show. Now as a punishment of pride the case is
altered, and we neither in the one nor other can do as then they might But as a
wonder it is at this day, that speech being as it were the image of the
mind, where minds agree, and thoughts do join, speech should differ as now
it does.

When the tower was built.
4 The time of this tower built, and speech confounded, may be asked, to which,
answer is uncertain. There is a fragment under the name of Berosus (if it
should not wrong him to say such trifles be his) and there it is said, that an
hundred and thirty years after the Flud it was. Others better like to say, it
was three hundred and 40 years after: so as I said, certainty there is none.
I stand not upon conjectures to s^an it out. Agreed it is that old father No^h
was yet alive, to whom no question but it was a great grief when he heard of
it. But so pleased it God even in his oulde age, to exercise his servant, that
no continual succes^^on of woes should make us faint, if God so please to have
them.

5 It must needs be, that one man gave this counsel first, Bad counsel soon
taken.
saying to the rest, Come, let us build, etc. But when once it was broched not
one man allowed it, but even all full quickly yielded to it. Whereby we see
first the vileness of man, not only to devise that which is naught, but to
set it full greedily abroche when it is devised, and to labor to persuade
others to embrace and follow the same. Again to consent to that which is
wickedly devised of others and to make a particular concept a general
judgment, action and work at last. Great cause therefore that men's lewd
devises should be restrained from being published, since both the deuisers
wish, and man's great corruption, is so prone to yield a wicked consent, and
following of the same. John. 11.
Caiphas counsel when it once sounded of Christ's death, was quickly harkened
unto, and from that day forward consultation had together, how they might
accomplish the same. Whosoever broched it first, Mark. 15.
that the people should ask Barabbas and refuse Jesus, it was soon received,
liked, and followed of such ignorant spirits, and giddy heads. Acts. 23.12
That a sort should combine together and kill the Apostle, had a beginner, and
how quickly pleased the plot, such other bloudye minds and spiteful hearts.
How soon embraced Lots yoonger daughter, Genesis 19.^1
the counsel of the elder to do so vile a thing. That unbrotherly conspiracy
against Joseph was soon yielded unto, when once it was uttered. Genesis 37.2^
Lie upon thy bed (said Ionadab) and feign thy self sick, when thy father
comes to see thee, pray him that thy sister Thamar may come make thee some
meat etc. 2 Samuel 13.^
You know the counsel, you know the consent to the same also, how ready it was,
and how well liked Ahitophels devise, 1. Sa. 16.21
that Absolon should enter into his fathers concubines left to keep the house*
though it were horrible* yet how it pleased and was embraced, cannot be
forgotten. A sort of green heads, Oratores noui* stulti adolesc^tuli, new
orators, fools young counselors laid a plot for Rehoboam, Salomons son to
follow, he liked it, he followed it, and cast away the counsel of the aged,
experienced, learned and faithful counselors to his father: but it cost him
the setting on, he bought it dear, and had I wist came as ever it does, when
it was too late. Thus might we run on a large and long course if I would.
But it shall not need one example more shall suffice, and then an end of this
note. Do you remember the murmuring against Moses and Aaron in the book of
Numbers? Chap. 16.
how began it? had it not a Captain* then a second, then a third, then a
number? once broched, that Moses and Aron took too much upon them, that others
were equal with them, and therefore should be in like authority, that the
people wronged, and so forth, soon was it liked, soon was it catched, soon
was it prosecuted of proud minds, that would be aloft, and knew not to obey.
But what was Moses and Aron that they should be thus used of their brethren?
Surely the Lords faithful ministers, his chosen serauants they were, whose
cause (when he had thus exercised them with a trial) he took into his own
hands, his jealousy on their behalf began to burn, and till he had showed a
judgment that should make all ears to tingle that hear of it, and all
hearts, not forsaken of God, to fear how they do the like, he never left
them Conclude we then upon all those that sin, some be wicked, to broache a
wickedness, and thousands weak to follow the same when once they hear it,
yea though it be to build a Tower against God, it never was, nor ever shall
be, either godly policy, or christian duty, to suffer men's brains to broche
what they list, and others to follow unquiet devises, hateful to God and
hurtful to his Church in a high degree.

6 It follows in the text, That we may get a name, see the madness of the
world ever to neglect heaven, Verse. 4.
and seek a name in earth where nothing is firm, Vain glory how it pricketh
to do evil.
nothing continues, but fades away and perishes as a thought. This madness
the Prophet David mentions in his 49. Psalm, and laugheth at it, saying,
They think their house, Psalm. 49.11.
and their habitations shall continue for e^e^, even from generation to
generation, and call the lands by their own names. This their way utters
their foolishnes, yet their posterity delight in their talk, etc. That saying
of Iuuenal is known, Mors sola fatetur quantula sunt ^ominum corpuscula: only
death acknowledges, of what power men's bodies be, such are our minds, so
greedye of a name, and so blind in the true course to attain the same,
whereof we had speech before. This sin of ambition and vain glory pricked
the hearts of our first parents, to the very death. It is not rooted out of
their posterity nor ever will. But yet less and more it pricketh, although
all be not evil in this respect alike. Would God this ungodly and vntowardlye
regarding and desiring of a name, had not been before, and were to this day a
cause to make many reject the truth of God, which they should embrace. For
times past, what said our Savior in the 5 of John: How can you believe which
receive glory one of an other, and do not seek that glory that is only of
God. Verse. 44.
For times present I content my self with that confession openly at Paul's
cross, that amongst some other causes, W. Tedder Seminary priest. 1. December
1588. page 9
which kept one in such disobedience to God and her Majesty, this was one
chief one, the tickling of vain glory. Which cause said he, I am sure does
detayne most of the contrary side (meaning Papists) in their perverse
obstinacy, howsoever they brag, that they seek nothing by their dealings
but the glory of God, etc, What I could say, I do not* let them that take bad
courses, examine their own hearts, why they do it, and remember, how deep he
that made the heart sees into it. Yea let others also look that be no
Papists, if this hidden conceit to get a name, do not make them tread awrie:
and if secret thoughts give secret sentence on my side against themselves
(because conscience will speak true, though not ever alowde that others may
hear) remember his saying, that said it well: Melius est de media via
recurrere quam semper currere male. Ruff. li. 1.6.
Better it is to return back, when we have gone half way, then still to go
on, and that ill.

7 They will build they say to save them, that they be not dispersed: But
behold the issew, Verse. 4.
this very thing is the cause of their dispersion both far and wide a sunder.
What the wicked fear comes upon them.
So cross shall God turn the counsels of flesh against his glory, liking, and
will. For even that which the wicked fears shall come upon him, says the
spirit of God. As in example one, for many beside this place, Christ may not
be suffered to live and go on, least the Romans came upon them, Ioh. 11.48.
and took away both their place and the nation. But even this conspiracy put
in practice, brought that which they feared upon them most truly, justly, and
heauely to their utter ouerthr^w and subversion, by Titus and Vespasian. There
is no strength* there is no counsel* wisdom or policy against the Lord. If
fle^h devise ways to establish it self without his fear the folly of flesh
shall soon appear, (...). 21.30.
that very thing by that means being speedily procured, which was intended by
the same to be diuected and turned away. O how could I run this note to the
admonition of them, that seek by such towers as this, not only to get a name,
but to keep their posterity from dispersion, that is, to continue the^ in
that country, in that town, in that house, etc. never seking the Lords favor
and mercy, to direct and make strong their desires, neither ever seeking to
plant his fear in them that must inioye those things. But their issew is
according: the Lord turns all cross in his judgment, and for that very
thing they are dispersed and driven often, to forsake not only the place, but
the very land. I say no more, think what you know.

8 If they thought by this Tower to prevent drowning when the like Flud came
again, Wicked men never see the true cause of Gods judgments.
as some think they did, though it be not propable (the reason being
expressed before by themselves, to be for to get a name, etc.) then may it
admonish us how bad men never look at the true causes of Gods judgments and
plagues, but frame unto themselves some other concepts, and run their course
according to the same. The true cause of the Flud was sin, Note.
and therefore they should have said: Let us sin no more, least a worse
thing happen unto us, and not let us build a tower. For the cause bring not
taken away, for which God smites, no towers nor steeples, no tops nor top
gallants, though they could reach as high as was said, can ever deliver from
his blows. Let their folly be our instruction, and whilst we live, pray that
we may, and endeavor when we have prayed, to see the true cause of Gods
visitation any way, upon us or ours, that that being known, we may take a
true course to turn his wrath away from us. Verse. 5.


Magistrates must look for cause just before they smite.
9 The Lord descends to see, if their folly was so great. It is a figure,
meaning the Lord punished not before there was true and due cause. And a good
lesson it gives to all in authority that they will look before they judge,
see, and be sure of the desert* before they lay on the censure. So did not
Putiphar, and it was his blame. Joseph is adjudged, and there is no cause.
John. 7.
So did not the Pharisees when they sent to apprehend Christ, without any
matter of truth against him. So did not David, 2. Sam. ^6.
when upon flattring Ziba his report, he condemned his faithful servant
Mephibosheth, and gave away his living, being afterward feign to reuerse
his sentence with shame, when he knew the truth. So do many at these days
to their great discredit. First judge and then know, but follow we a better
pattern in this place.

10 The people is one says the Lord, and behold we by it, Verse. 6.
a bad unity, to the end a glorious name may not dezell our eyes, There is a
bad (...) to be avoided.
when the thing in nature answers not the same. You read of an unity in the
second Psalm: But it was against the Lord and his anointed. A like unity
again in Joseph's brethren to deal unjustly and vnkindlye with their brother.
There was an unity in Sodom against Lot and his persuasion. And the whole
world was one against Noah and his preaching. So is it here and so is it
often, the people are one, but not in truth, not in right, not in GOD, and what
unity is that. Be we not then as I said, amazed at a name, we know who
cry, unity, unity, but we see no proof nor ever shall, of verity. And we
know the Fathers speech, who spoke it truly, Vnitas sine veritate proditio
est, Unity without verity is but a conspiracy.

11 They have begun says God, and they will not give over. Mark how steadfast
flesh is in a wicked course. (...)
In a good thing I warrant you no such thing, but just contrary: In the end we
will soon begin, or hardlye or not at all give over. In the other either not
begin, or most easilye give over. Alas our corruption and our weakness,
waywardnes also if ye will, shall we thus see our nature described, and not
consider it, and not amend it as God inableth. I hope we will.

Fear not ^he heat of the wicked
12 Yet overthrown are they for all their ill will, to desist and give over.
Fear not then with what might and maine soever the wicked go about their
wicked purposes, and that they will so hardly be persuaded to give over: for
the Lord is stronger then they, and will make them mauger their hearts to give
over at his pleasure: a great comfort to all that are oppressed and pursued.
Their tongues are changed, and it hinders this earthly building, and can it
further the spiritual to be ignorant what is said? An unknown ^ongue.
Such a place is Babell says the Lord himself, that is confusion, and shall
we say it is profitable? God forbid. And thus much of this Chapter, not
standing now upon Sem his Genealogy.

Chap. 12.
The general heads of this Chapter are cheefely three. The calling of Abraham,
from the 1. ver. to the 4. His obedience to that calling, from the 4, to the 8.
The crosses accompanying and following the same, from the 8. to the end


1 IN the calling of Abraham, consider first who called, God his work to call.
God: and thereby learn we, that it is the Lords work, only to gather hi^
a church, to appoint before all times, whom he will call in time, and make a
member of the same. What man does in the gathering of the same, he do^th but
as a minister and servant under him, so far prevailing as he will bless, and
no further. The foundation of GOD stands sure and has this seal, 2. Tim.
2.1^
the Lord knows who are his, etc. And whom He predestined, them He called,
He I say He, f^r it is his work

2 Consider whom he calls, Abraham the younger brother, God looks not at
merit in his calling
and peradventure an idolater, more like so then otherwise, though uncertain.
And see we by it that Gods choice is free, not tied to circumstances of age, of
birth, of degree, or any quality in man whatsoever: but on whom he will have
mercy, Romans 9.
on them he will have mercy. He looks not as man looks, for man many times
regards the elder brother before the younger, and the outward gift of nature
before inward graces of the spirit, as Ishai offered his eldest to Samuel to be
anointed King, and all the rest before he offered David, thinking least of him
whom yet God appointed. And Joseph would have had his father laid his right
hand upon his eldest son Manasses. But God does not so, finding nothing in
the best to deserve a calling, and therefore using his liberty without all
respect of circumstances as I said before.

3 Whence was he called? even out of his own country, All must be forsaken to
follow God.
and from his fathers house. Teaching us first thereby, that neither Father,
Mother, country, nor any thing, may be sticked unto above Gods commandment,
for he that loves any of these things more then me, says the Lord, is
unworthy of me. In the Psalm it is said to the Church and to every member of
it, 45.11.
Harken O daughter and consider, incline thine ear, forget also thine own
people, and thy fathers house: secondly admonishing us what a perilous thing
country impiety is, Country impiety perilous.
able to infect any man if he tarry in it. And therefore God draws Abraham
away from them, because with them he should hardly ever have been good.

4 Whether did God call him, surely to no certain place, but from his own, to
some strange place, Be not curious when God does call.
which he would apoynt unto him, thereby making trial of his love so much the
more, by how much he knew no certain place whereunto to go. It teaches us
above hope, under hope, to cleave unto God, and i^ once we have a general
commandment, to leave particularities not yet so manifest to his holy
providence, and the further manifestation of the same in his good time.

5 To what end does he call him? surely that he might make of him a mighty
Nation, G^d ever cal^eth us to our go^d, if we follow him.
that he might bless him, make his name great, and bring to pass that in his
seed, that is in Christ, who should descend of him, that blessing might be
recovered which was lost in Adam, and so all the Nations of the world be
blessed. So see we plain how Gods dealings shoot ever at the good, and to
the good of them whom he loves, and who obey him and are ruled by him. Many a
man has he drawn from home and out of his own country, but to his great
good both in body and mind. In body, by honors, preferments and earthly
blessings many, wherewith he has enriched him in a strange place. In mind,
by a true knowledge of his holy truth there attained unto and got, which
otherwise in likelihood had never been. How preferred he Joseph in a strange
land, with many mo, etc. But mark how the Lord expresses his favor further,
when he says, I will also bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them
that curse thee, Verse. 3.
etc. thereby showing us what it is to have him our God, surely to have a
friend of him to our selves, and to all that are friends unto us, and a foe to
all false hearts, harboring and hatching mischief against us. And what can we
wish more?

6 How did God call him? by his word: and by this word at this day he calls
us, God calls by his word.
sending us his messengers early and late to speak unto us, and to entreat
us as the Apostle speaks in his name, that we would be reconciled to him, not
dye but live, and enjoy a place of eternal comfort for evermore, with his own
self, his son, his holy spirit, one God of majesty, glory and power, with
angels, archangells, Saints and Martirs, the spirits of just and perfect men.
To day then, or any day when we hear his voice, harden we not our hearts,
neither despise him that speaks Christ Jesus. Heb. 12.25.
For if they escaped not that refused him that spoke on earth (to wit Moses)
how much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that speaks
from heaven, whose voice then shook the earth, and now has declared saying,
yet once more will I shake not the earth only, but also the heaven, etc.

Abraham's obedience
7 Having considered the Lords calling, in the next place we must consider
Abraham's obedience, which not only appears (...) this ^e^t, but is honored
with a most notable remembrance also ^y ye Apostle in his Epistle to the
Hebrews: for by ^aith says he, Abraham when he was called, obeyed God, to go
out into a place which he should afterward receive for an inheritan^e, Cap.
11.8.
and he went out, not knowing whether he went, etc. A great obedience to leave
house and home, country and friends, where he was ^ought vy, and such an
obedience, as thousands of us cannot brook ^n these days, though it were to
glorify God, or serve our Prince and country in great measure, but a far
greater, to go he knew not whether. For what a do would some of us have made
at such a motion, what folly, what madness would we have accounted it, to
leave a place we knew and ever had lived in, to go we could not tell whether.
But so did not Abraham, he obeyed to go, and to leave all, yea he obeyed to
leave all, and go he knew not whether. Mark therefore I pray you the nature
of true faith, and the measure of it in Abraham, it wrestleth, it strives, it
over comes at last all objections of flesh and blood, and yields a holy and
sweet obedience to the commandment will and pleasure of almighty God: such
faith shall honor us, as it honored Abraham, if being in us for our measure,
there shall flow from it such dutiful obedience to our God, as occasion shall
be offered, and we called to now, wherefore ever let us think of it.

8 But when we speak of this obedience of Abraham in departing, Monki^h
practice nothing helped by Abraham's leaving all. etc.
I pray you let us remember ever that it was upon a word, commanding him and
calling him as has been said, and not upon his own head. The fourth verse
says he departed, but how? as the Lord spoke unto him, says the text, etc.
Cutting thereby and therein the combs of all momish Monks that apply his
example to their bad doings, and their leaving of friends, as they say, and
Fathers house, to his example. For Abraham was commanded, they not. Abraham
had cause, least he should be seduced by his idolatrous kindred and country,
they not. Abraham knew not whether he went, they full well. Abraham carried
his wife with him, and left her not, they not so in any case. Therefore you see
how well this example fitteth them, and how justly they resemble it.

Verse. 4.
9 If we note Abraham's age when he thus obeyed, he was as is thought 75.
years. Abraham patiently tarieth God his leisure.
He lived 175. in all. And so it appears that a whole hundred years he was a
traveler, and possessed not the breadth of a foot as Steven says of all that
was promised to him, and yet his faith failed not, but by the same he abode
says the Apostle in the land of promise as in a strange country, etc. when we
far unlike him faint, and are grieved with every little delay in the Lords
doings.

10 That Sara went with him, we may see the obedience of a faithful wife.
Verse 5.
Not one grudging of her is mentioned, not one objection carnal and worldly
either to excuse her self, The obedience of a faithful wife.
or to hinder him from that whereunto the Lord had called him. But she trusseth
up and away with him whither God should apoynt, knowing his lot to be her lot
in well or woe: taking her self called when her husband is called, as if she
had by name bin expressed, because God is no seperater of man and wife, whom
himself has joined till death depart. O honorable Sara for this obedience,
without crossing, gain saying, contrarying, repining and murmuring: being a
comfort and encouragement to her husband to obey his calling, and no dasher, no
cooler, no pulback, no hindrance, no carnal perswader to the contrary, nor yet
any pidling Lots wife, either all day ere she can set out, or yet looking back
when she is in her journey. What a praise is this for all faithful wives to
aim at whilst they live.

8.10.11. etc The crosses of this good cupple.
11 Thus having considered both Gods calling, and Abraham's obedience, think we
in the third place of the crosses that accompanied this faithful couple,
Abraham and Sara in their journey. Their remoues are diverse, which carry ever
some griefs. There arises a famine, a double trial in a strange place from
that it is at home, where a man being known and friended, has many helps.
Then smites a fear ye heart of Abraham that for his wife he should be killed
amongst ungodly men that feared not God, a great cross. This fear drove him
to a shift that was a greater cross to endanger his wife and her virtue for
the safety of him, which even that way also could be but uncertain. The
concept was accomplished, and his wife was taken from him to be Pharohs wife,
a hellish wound to the hearts of both Abraham and Sarah. And what shall we note
in all this, The lot of the godly.
but first the lot of the godly through many fears, many troubles, many
trials, many gripes and greefes to pass along this life toward the kingdom
of rest and joy, with him whose servants we are to abide whatsoever it shall
please him to exercise us withal: true obedience to almighty God in any
thing, wanting no crosses more or less in this world ever to wait upon it.
Secondly we may note again the weakness of Gods chosen many times, not of
the smallest faith and place in Gods Church, but even of the greatest account
and service. For in our great Father Abraham, The weakness of chief pillars
in Gods Church.
what a blot was this to cause his wife to make a lie, to deny her marriage,
and to cast her self into such danger, and himself into such grief, as that
course did? but this is our mould and metal, and these are the wants of great
ones often times. Glory we not therefore of flesh ever, for it is too full of
imperfection, neither commit we the like folly ever for any fear.

12 But was Sarah wronged by this wicked King? no, but when man's strength
failed, 17
God steppeth in to save Sarah
and both Abraham and Sarah were even at the pits brinke of great shame and
violence, God steppeth in, and takes the defense of those poor strangers upon
him against a mighty King, and saves Sarah from all hurt. He plagued Pharoh
and his house with great plagues till she was restored to her husband again.
Showing thereby that he never fails to consider the crosses, griefs, wrongs
and injuries of his children, but ever watches over them, and for them, ever
provides and eats to deliver them so farfoorth as shall be good for them, to
the great incoragement of all us that see it and mark it, to trust in him, and
ever to serve him.

13 Pass we not over the judgment of this heathen King concerning adultery
when he knew the truth. 18
How odious adultery to an heathen.
Why did thou not tell me says he that show is thy wife, why saydst thou she
is my sister, that I thereby might have been deceived and done thee wrong,
taking her to be my wife. Insinuating by these words how he abhor^ed to think
of taking an other man's wife, and committing iniquity with her. And when was
this? before the law, when the light of nature only reigned and taught them.
Who was it that made this conscience? surely Pharoh, and Pharoh of Egypt, a
heathen King, a profane King, an ungodly King otherwise, without knowledge,
without care or love of the truth. N^te.
Shall it not shrike shrill in the Lords ^ares, and give a mighty witness
against brighter days, against other times, when knowing, professing, and
houlding the truth, called, esteemed, and taken ^or Christians both of our
selves and others, yet wilfully, wittingly, carelessly and presumptuously we do
the contrary, abhorring as much any scruple one way, as he made conscience an
other way. No doubt, no doubt, but this very Pharoh of Egypt will rise in
judgment, and condemn many.

14 Conclude we then quickly, and mark the end. When he knew the truth that
she was his wife, Verse 19.
behold thy wife says he, take her, The griefs of the godly have a good end.
and go thy way. And he gave commandment in his Court concerning them, so
that they were conveyed forth both Abraham, his wife, and all that they had in
peace. So shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord, that obeys his
word, and follows his commandment, calling him whether it pleases him. All
his troubles should by Gods providence be ended and turned to his good. God
shall be for him in the midst of his enemies as a sure refuge. And what should
we say, or what can we say more truly and fitly in this place, then as the
Prophet David said, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all. Psalm. 34.
Blessed be that Lord for ever and ever.

15 Here might we end, if I thought it not good to tell you how some have made
this story of Abraham and Sarah a figure of that which befell their seed after
them. A figure in Abraham and Sarah.
Abraham and Sarah go into Egypt, so did their seed in the time appointed.
Sarah is taken to be wronged and iniuried, so was their seed most cruelly
oppressed in their time. Abraham is favored for Sarahs sake, so were Iaakob and
his family for Joseph's sake. Pharoh is plagued till he delivered Sarah, so was
both king and country afterward till the Israelites were let go. Abraham and
Sarah are delivered and sent away, so was their s^ede out of Egypt in their
times. They had gifts given which they took away, so had their seed when they
departed, jewels of gold, and jewels of silver, and many things. Very fitly
thus do they resemble this to that, and we may observe it. Still I must say or
might say, in every Chapter I leave out more then I note, and I follow no
further then thus that which I note, because my purpose was but to try by a
little taste, if the ^^^urse might profit, and if it might, then further
hereafter to enlarge the same, and in such sort, as then should be judged
better when my drift was seen.

Chap. 13.
The especial heads of this Chapter are these. The wealth of these 2 me^ Abr.
and Lot, from the 1.v. to the 7. The dissension betwixt them from the 7. to the
14. The iteration of Gods promise from the 14. to the end.


THe wealth of them shows that riches also sometimes are bestowed upon the
godly, Verse 2.
such as shall be heirs and inheritors of the peerless joys of everlasting
life. Riches given to the godly.
And therefore though it be hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God, and even easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle, yet it is
not impossible, but God with whom all things are possible, can bring it to
pass.

2 It teaches us that even with wealth a man may be godly, and follow his
vocation, to the good liking of almighty God, and the discharge of himself,
in such measure as humane frailty permits, for neither Abraham nor Lot are
hindered hereby from pleasing God. Needless therefore it was, and but a
Philosophical folly or pang, that Crates cast his money into the Sea, and
said, Ego te mergam, ne mergar a te. I will drown thee, least I be drowned
of thee: for with money and many worldly blessings more a man may serve God, as
here Abraham and Lot did. Or that our holy Monks thought (at least made the
common people think) that the touching of money would defile them, and the
not touching or dealing with it was great purity and holiness. There is no
such matter we see by these two great servants of God. But there is a rule
which we may far better follow, and in deed ought to follow, laid down by
the spirit of God in the Prophet David, to wit, If riches increase, set not thy
heart upon them, etc. Use them we may, but love them we cannot without a fault.
That which is said in the Gospel, Sell all, and give to the poor, is
understood of a heart willing if need be, not of a deed when cause concurreth
not. Liber si sis ab auaritia, omnia vendis licet nihil vendas, sin minus nihil
vendis, licet omnia vendas. If thou be free from covetousness, thou sellest all
things though thou should sell nothing, otherwise thou sellest nothing,
though thou should sell all things.

Verse 7.
3 The contention betwixt them shows an accide^t of wealth through our
corruption, Wealth cause of contention sometime.
now and then to make strife and disagreement, even where a bond of nature is
to the contrary: so it did here, they were both so wealthy, that the land
could not bear them, that they might dwell together.

4 But where began the contention? amongst their servants, their heardmen could
not agree together: Servants set masters at variance.
and brawles amongst servants at last reach to their masters, they many times
harkening to the same more partially then they should: too true this is by
daily experience found in every coast and country, would God either this
example, or thousands of evils that grow thereby, might make them amend that
yield too much to this mischief. It is neither pity nor charity to believe
all reports, much less the reports of a man grieved against the party, who
has grieved him, least of all against him, who having nothing at all offended,
the master I mean, is only abused because his servant has done what his
master neither wished nor liked. Let not Lot and Abraham so cruelly jar and
stomach one an other, because their servants cannot agree together: and what
servants? their heardmen, their dogkeepers, or horsekeepers, or the basest they
have. Where should wisdom appear if not in this, to discern persons,
causes, times, and occasions, and never for a baser to lose a better, for a
stranger, a neighbor, for a servant, and cause of no account, a gentleman and
love of most great account.

5 I but what shall a man do? his servant is abused, other men's servants seek
to crow over them, Masters excuses to deal in their servants quarells.
and to rule the roast as they list. This is an injury to the master, and a
shame to suffer it. So a man may be made a fool, and compted a wretch and a
dastard of no reputation, and never a man care to serve him that will no better
stick to his men, then so. Well said flesh and blood, and old Adams
corruption, I know this is the song thereof, and much more then this to this
end. But either we be Christians or none. If we be Christians, and care
for his word, we have here a direction what to do, surely even as godly
Abraham did at this time. He considered all circumstances, loved concord,
regarded peace, sought it, and insewed after it. Thought it would be far
more credit for him to have unity and good love, then the bitter effects of
the contrary. Therefore he hartneth not his servants and sets them on, he
takes not their tales into his bosom, to work dislyke of Lot his Cosen, he
looks not big upon Lot, bids him not away from him, etc. But he
talks with him of the matter, and that not hotely, but kindly and friendly,
with great meekness and love, knowing in wisdom that speech somewhat, but
kind and soft speech much more cools a heat that begins to rise, Speech
ends anger, and silence nourishes and increases it.
and does out a fire that began to flame. He is Lots elder and Uncle, his
better in that respect and all other, yet he stands not upon that, looking
when Lot should come unto him, and stoop to him, but as in years and every
way he did excel him, so in wisdom and mildness, in humility and
temperance of affections he far passes him. Ouerruling himself by that
virtue thus far, that he goes to him, and urging him with that which Lot
not so well considered, to wit, that they were brethren, neighbors, friends,
kinsfolks, etc. moves him thereby as by so many strong reasons, and mighty
hands, that love and peace might remain betwixt them, and contention and
brawles be far away both from them, themselves, and from their people: I pray
thee says he, I pray thee, let it not be thus, but so, and so forth. He gave
him his choice to go which way he would, and would accept what he refused. O
pattern of wisdom and all virtues for all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and whosoever
may say they be brethren either in nature, or in Christ and Religion. Shall
we not observe it and follow it? Are we ^ shamed to be Abraham's? so wise, so
meek, such lovers of concord and unity? Take heed that the God of Abraham be
not then ashamed of us, both ^eere and in his kingdom for ever. Yet was
Abraham a man, I warrant you, and had a sort of tall fellows that would
strike, if he bad. As you see when he went to rescue Lot from the furies of
them that had taken him prisoner. When ma^hood ^s to be ^hewed.
But Abraham will never show his manhood and might against his brother, his
neighbor, his kinsman. He defyeth that manhood and stomach, he think^th
nothing can be more reproachful to him, then to break such bands of love, and
to jar with such a person as is so near unto him. Would God we would mark
it, and remember ever that the bond of one God, one faith, one baptism, and so
forth, is as far above the bond of one father, one mother, and such like, as
God is above man, spiritual things above carnal, and the spirit above the
flesh. Amplify it further your self in your meditation. I may not be long.

6 Mark the estate of these two men now. Remember the famine mentioned in the
Chapter before, Verse 10.
a cause why these men removed hither. Piety never brings loss in the end.
Have they now any want? Do you see any misery upon them? Nay do they not
abound with all store, comfort, and plenty? Never then can that man or woman
perish for want, that want not an heart to serve and trust in the Lord. The
Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but a man or a woman that fears God, Psalm.
34.
shall want nothing that is good. Gain is not godliness, but godliness is
great gain, if we be content with that which we have, 2. Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 4.
and it has the promise both of this life, and that to come.

7 Let us mark also Lots yielding to reason, when it is laid before him,
Verse. 10.
and acceptance of kindness when it is offered him, without any wayward
wilfulness in his own conceits and dealings. Good men yield to reason.
So should all good men do, hating to be of the number of them, whom nothing
can please, who have made Will their God, and wilful waywardness their plot
for ever: yielding to nothing, accepting of nothing, caring for nothing, but
what their own wits devise, and their own tongues motion, yea many times
going even from that also, if it be consented unto.

8 Lot chose the plain of Jorden for his place, because it was most pleasant
both for water and all commodities, Verse 11.
Men gaping for pleasure, get pain.
even as the Garden of Eden. But see and mark, when he thought he had got
Paradise, he got Hell. Sodom and Gomorrha proved filthye places, and all his
pleasures were sowsed with sour fruits of curssed inhabitants. Sped never man
thus but Lot? gaping for pleasure, has none gotten pain? parting from Abraham
a faithful friend, because they were wanton and over wealthy. Have none light
of Sodomites and filthy Gomorrheans, God being just, and so quitting their
folly? Go we not always then by show and pleasures, when we chose a place to
abide in. Good neighbors.
But look we rather at virtue and honesty of our neighbors that shall be,
for fear of a grief as great as Lot had by these filthy folowers of all vice
and wickedness. Better is a place with fewer pleasures amongst good livers,
then many mo delights, with an ungodly neighborhood. It is a great grief
that is a daily grief, yea an hourly grief, and that at home too, where a
man would feign find comfort, to oppose to foreign woes and troubles.

9 In the repetition of his promise, Verse 14.
which it pleased God to make, The continual weakness of man, needs continua^^
comforts from God.
Verse 14. we may first observe the weakness of all men's faith, and what
need there is that with often helps it should be propped and strengthened.
The Lord uses no means without a cause, and therefore using here the means
to comfort Abraham, his wisdom saw what was needful, we are assured. If
Abraham needed, how much more other men, so far inferior in strength of
faith to Abraham.

10 Again, we may see ye sweet goodness of God watching, watching oportunities,
and even then ^o^^^^ting Abraham, Gods comfort^ (...) in fit times
by repe^^^^o^ of his promise, when Lot was gone from him, and he by reason
thereof might have bin sad and dismayed. So is the eye of our gracious God ever
upon us, to spy our distresses, and to help us, when we have most need.

Obedience
11 Abraham's obedience, an argument of his faith. You also see here removing
when God commanded, without ever any grudging or carnal gaynesayings, as
before has been noted.

Thankfulness.
Lastly, let his building of the altar show us his thankfulness for Gods
mercies to quicken our dullness, and teach us his open professing of the
Religion he truly embraced, against all close dissemblers of their consciences,
Open profession of religion.
yea let it make us remember always, that it suffices not any man to believe
with the heart unto righteousness, Romans 9.10.
unless also as occasion shall serve he confess with the mouth unto salvation.

Chap. 14.
The heads of this Chapter are chiefly these two. The war betwixt the Kings
from the 1. verse to the 13. The victory of Abraham from the 13. to the end.


Verse 4.
1 THE cause of this war you see in the text, that by this means they might
shake off the yoke that they endured twelve years, Rebellion.
I mean the one part, for twelve years faith the text, were they subject to
Cnedor Laomer, but in the thirtenth they rebelled, a bad course to get
liberty, where subjection is due. For Rebellion God never loved, never
prospered, but ever plagued. The issue in this place says as much. The
fearful destruction of Corah and his company, Absolon and his company, and in
our own stories of many an one says as much. Papists charge us that we are no
good friends to Princes and Rulers, and it is no news to hear it of them.
Elias had such measure measured unto him by the wicked King, when he was
called a troubler of Israel. Micheas the true Prophet, Jeremy and Amos as true
as he, 1. King. 22. Iere. 38.4. Amos 7.10
all of them faithful to Princes ever, were so accused, and with venomous
words if you read the places, but all most falsely and injuriously. We say,
the doctrine of Rome is no friend to Princes, and judge you how truly. Sanders
monarchy freeing subjects from their oaths to their natural Princes. The Bull
of Pius the fifth. The answers of them that were examined, whether if the Pope
invaded, they would take the Princes part or his. The Oration that Cardinal
Poole made to the Emperor. The many many most fearful, most wicked, most
unnatural and damnable conspiracies entered into by them, their rebellions, let
them be your lights to lead you to a true verdit and sentence. They that
rebelled in King Henry the eight his days, Papists Rebels.
in King Edward his sons days, in her Majesty's most happy days that we
have now long inioyed in the mercy great of our most gracious God, and long
long that we may yet enjoy, beseech his goodness: were they Papists or
Protestants, men favoring the Gospel, or addicted to, and drowned in the dregs
of Popery and superstition? They that repented that they were so busye in
Queen Maryes days, in cutting off the boughs, and still let the stock
remain, which above all rather should have been he wed down, meaning her
sacred Majesty, what were they? men helding out the light of Gods holy
Gospel, or fighting for his triple Crown of Rome, that shall never be able to
save their souls, from due desert of such disloyal thought and most
undutiful spea^h. Show the Princes the Gospel has deposed? Show the Princes
that Popery has not wronged? It is our doctrine that we firmly hold, and
that they fully defye. That he that takes the sword, shall perish with the
sword: that is, Math. 26.
he that takes it without the bonds of a calling warranting him as all Rebels
ever do. Romans 13.
That he which resists superior powers* resists the ordinance of God, and
to his own damnation, that we ought to obey and be subject not for fear, but
for conscience sake, that the weapons of subjects be but prayers and tears,
Ambrose.
and so forth. See then whether Popery or Gods holy Gospel which we hold,
stand better with the safety of P^inces, and the flourishing estate of
Kingdoms.

2 To the man of Sodom this was further the revenging hand of God for their
sins. Sin punished.
Long did he spare, but at last they had this touch by the sword of these
Kings against them, and when that would not serve, a final destruction from
heaven by fire and brimstone. Jude applies it thus, that if God spared not
them, certainly he will not spare us, and let us think of it.

3 Lot is taken prisoner by this occasion, and carried away, such good is
gotten by dwelling among ye wicked, Verse 12.
even to partake in those plagues that the Lord justly scourges their sins
withal. The evil of dwelling with the wicked. Read 1. Reg. 22. verse. 32.
how near Iehosaphat was to a shrewde turn, for companying with Ahab.
Therefore little joy we for any commodities in such causes of greater woe when
once it comes, then all our profits can counteruayle. Avoid them as we can,
and avoid with them the wrath of God that ever follows them. But ever remember
what our calling permits, and let us not under show of this godly care,
prove peevish Anabaptists, without consciences.

4 In the 13. verse it is said, that one escaped to tell Abraham, where see the
providence of God for his ever. No sooner is Lot in danger, but one is prepared
to procure him rescue. So shall it ever be with Gods faithful servants we
may be assured, Verse 13.
one or other shall escape by this careful goodness of God, that shall work
their help so far as God will have for his glory and their good. The Lords
care for his.
For he is not Lots God alone, neither any partial regarder of any, with
neglect of others that trust in his mercy.

5 When by this messenger Abraham heard it, straight he addressed himself to
succor him. Verse 14.
Where note the nature of one truly godly. You saw the i^rre betwixt Abraham
and Lot before, and how they parted by that means one from the other. In
d^stresse of friend, forget all former faules and help.
Many a crooked nature would have thought of this now, and have let Lot taste
of that which his departure in some sort had procured. But does Abraham so? No,
but in his friends distress all former faults are forgotten, and willing offer
of him and his into danger, with all speed made to relieve and release him
from his oppression and danger. This is love that God loves, and this is love
that well beseems all friends that would be accounted truly true friends.

6 Abraham's thus dealing with Gods alowance, shows the lawfulness of war
upon just occasion, War lawful.
against foolish Anabaptists that think the contrary.

7 The division of his company, and the taking of the benefit of the night,
Verse. 15.
teaches us the use of godly policies as need shall require, Policy in
war.
and that also true confidence in God takes not away, but carefully uses
outward means. For not to do it is not faith, but presumption, not trust in
God, but a bold tempting of his Majesty. Our Savior Christ himself fled,
Math. 2.
and in the night also, who yet could have bin safe from all tyrants if he
would, without such means. Joshua came upon them unawares, Josh. 10. Act. 9.
and Paul was let down in a basket by the window.

8 Melchisedechs coming to meet Abraham when he did return, having
vanquished the enemies and delivered Lot, Verse. 18.
bringing with him bread and wine to refresh them withal, Religion and (...)
together.
shows the kindness of a man that is truly godly, ever ready by any means
he can to comfort and cherish, to relieve and do good to his weary, weak, and
needy brother. For godliness is loving and comfortable both by words and
deeds, ungodliness is churlishe and hard, parting with nothing, as you see
in Naball.

9 This place is abused by the Papists as many more be, to prove their Mass.
But they show their wickedness, Melchisedechs fact no figure of popish Mass.
and want their purpose. Behold (say they) a type and figure of the unbloody
Sacrifice that Christ offered at his last Supper. This the figure, that the
fulfilling of it in truth, and he remaining for ever a Priest after the order
of this Melchisedech, the truth of this figure, that is an unbloody Sacrifice,
under the signs of bread and wine, must also ever remain, etc. We answer
them first, that forasmuch as the Apostle so fully discussing this comparison
betwixt Christ and Melchisedech, makes no mention of any such Sacrifice, it
being yet as themselves say, the chiefest point of the comparison. Too much to
blame are they, that they shame not to obtrude unto the Apostle such an
unknown Mystery, and to supply of their own what he directed by the spirit
of God quite left out and never mentioned. If they deny this consequence, to
wit, from the Apostles silence or omission to the nullitie of the thing, we
tell them it is most strong by virtue of a rule in divinity which they shall
never improve whilst they live. A rule touching types and figures.
The rule is this. Of types and figures of the old Testament, so far only
and never further may a doctrine be established, as the same types and figures
by express and plain words of the Apostles shall be expounded and
interpreted. For if every man might expound them as he thought good, variety
of allegories most uncertain and doubtful should overthrow all truth amongst
us. If therefore any relief for the Mass must be had from this fact of
Melchisedech, needs of necessity they must bring some place of the new
Testament where it is so expounded: otherwise they play but with allegories of
their own making, and their speech may be termed allegorical, but not
theological. For that fullness of persuasion and (...), that is in Divinity,
stays not upon allegorical devises, except they be warranted by God himself.

Melchisedech offered here bread and wine to God, we utterly deny it, and
refer our selves to the words of Moses, wherein is not any such matter. The
text is protulit, not obtulit, he brought forth bread and wine, not he offered
bread and wine. Except to bring forth were to offer and sacrifice, which it
cannot be. And that knew even that old Translator whom they make such
account of, and thereupon translated the Hebrew word to bring forth, not to
offer.

Melchisedech was a figure of Christ, and offered bread and wine to God.
Therefore Christ in his holy Supper offered himself vnbluddely to God the
Father for us, which also is done still in the Mass. Consider of it, is there
any sequel in the world in it? may we not as well conclude, that Christ ought
to be offered daily under the signs of Lambs, of turtle Doves, young Pigeons,
Goats, and Calves, and many such things, because once these things were
offered, as they, that he must be offered under bread and wine, because bread
and wine were offered by Melchisedech? Surely those burnt offerings of the law,
did far far more lively resemble and express the future sacrifice of Christ,
then the offering of any bread could: for in them was suffering, dying, shedding
of blood, and a being slain and killed, which is not in bread, and therefore
if any should remain to such an end as the Papists would, rather they should
remain then the signs of bread and Wine.

Melchisedechs were a figure of Christ, either Christ has fulfilled it or not,
if he have not, then was not all finished as he said, which God forbid, and if
he have then being fulfilled, why should it not cease, as all other figures
do of the old Testament: shall the figure and the truth stand both at once?
It is strange divinity: nay the contrary is true, and sound divinity, to
wit, that Christ having upon the Cross, with his own oblation of himself,
ended and determined all figures, used to show his coming, this also if as
they take it, a figure of him, ended likewise, and finished, and taken away.

Melchisedech, their transubstantiation is quite gone, for that which
Melchisedech offered (if he offered as they say) was not any figure or bare show
and accidents of bread and wine, but bread indeed, and Wine indeed, the
substance there as well as the accidents, and therefore if that was any figure
of the sacrifice of the Mass, then must that sacrifice be bread and wine
indeed, as that was. Again if Melchisedech offered any offering, it was an
offering of thanksgiving* whereupon his words proceeded, blessed be the Lord
that has delivered thy enemies into thy hand. But they will not have their
Mass offering so, but a propitiatory sacrifice, how then agree these together?
Conclude we then in a better sort then these men do, that in truth, Christ
is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, as the Psalm says, but
this order consists not in any real offering of himself daily, for the
sins of men (for with one oblation, says the Apostle, has he consecrated
for ever them that are sanctified) but this order consists in these things.
Heb. 10.14
The comparison how it stands.
First, Melchisedech was both a King and a Priest: so was our Savior Christ.
Secondly, he was by interpretation, says the Apostle, King of righteousness,
and King of Salem, Hebr. 7.1. verse. 2.
that is, of peace: so is our Savior Christ truly and verilye, King of
righteousness and peace, yea of all righteousness and peace. verse. 3.
Thirdly, Melchisedec was without father, without mother, without kindred, and
had neither beginning of his days, nor end of life: that is, none of these
were left in Scripture to our knowledge, but he is propounded to us as
eternal, so is our Savior Christ eternal indeed, and without all these,
verse. 3.
in respect of the one or other nature, his Priesthood ends, not as Arons
did, but is for ever. Lastly, Melchisedech was in this above Abraham, and all
the Levites of Abraham after descended, ver. 5. etc.
that he received tithes of him and them, he paying tithes unto him, and they
also, as the Apostle says, because they were in his loins: And he blessing
Abraham, the lesser being blessed of the greater: so was our Savior Christ
above Abraham, and above all the Leuiticall Priests of the law, that descended
of Abraham. This resemblance has warrant as you see in the Scripture, and
therefore is ^ounde thus far. But if we will go further, to say,
Melchisedech offered Bread and Wine, therefore Christ's body must be offered
of Priests in the Mass daily, vnbloudily, under the accidents of Bread and
Wine, for the sins of the quick and the dead, we add that which the
Apostle adds not, which yet he would never have omitted, if it had been to
be added, we go beyond our warrant, and we must vanishe with our vanity,
that has no surer stay then our own devise and fancy* And thus much of this
matter.

10 The ^are lastly that Abraham had to keep both the credit of himself a
professor, and the Lords honor, Care of the credit of a professor of truth.
whom he served, appears in this Chapter: For he will not have so much as
a thread of him, least he should thereupon speak evil of him, his God, and
religion. Such a remembrance should we ever have by his example of the Master
we serve, of the office we bear, and of the parties we deal with, abhorring
bribes that rob both us, and our God, of good report, and set open the
mouths of the wicked against the truth, whereof we are professors. Abraham
would not, that this wicked King should say, He had made Abraham rich, and
we care not that any man says of us. We can be content to be fed of
Papists, that they may freelye dishonor the Majesty of God, of Thieves, that
they may escape and steal again: Note.
of adulterers, and filthy lyuers, that they may still transgress, and never
think what may be said by them, or by others, upon this occasion of the
Lord, whose name we profess. Of his truth, which we say we houlde, or of
our selves, whom yet we gladlye would have men think well of. This is now
far you see from Abraham's example in this place, and therefore, except we
learn of him hereafter to amend this course, it may iustlye be feared, we
shall never come where Abraham now is.

Chap. 15.
The heads of this Chapter. In this Chapter there is, the promise renewed
again, the faith and justification of Abraham, from the 1. verse to the 9. 2.
The confirmation of him by an outward sign, from the 9. to the end.
Particulars as in other chapters many.

1 IN that it is said, The word of the Lord came to Abraham in a vision: note
we the manner of Gods reueyling himself in those days. In the 12. of Numbers
it is thus said. verse. 6.
If there be a Prophet of the Lord amongst you: I will be known to him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by a dream. Noting the two ordinary means in
those days, Aug. de genesi ad liter. lib. 12
vision and dream. Here it was by vision, of which S. Augustine makes three
kinds, Corporalem, spiritualem, mentalem, corporal, spiritual, and mental,
if I may so speak. The corporal vision is, when corporal things to our
corporal eyes appear and are seen. The Spiritual, when the likeness of
things are seen in spirit, in dream, or in an ecstasy. The mental, as we
term it, is when understanding is given, to know the meaning of such
likenesses and forms, when they are seen. As for example, Pharoh saw the fat
Kine and lean Kine, Genesis 41.
but knew not what they meant, Joseph knew what they meant, and yet saw them
not: Pharoh therefore had a spiritual vision, and Joseph a mental. An other
example: chap. 40.
The two servants of Pharoh, the Butler and the Baker had their spiritual
visions, but knew not again what they pretended, Joseph did, which had no such
appearances made unto him, and that was a mental vision. Nabuchadnezar again
had the spiritual vision, Daniel. 2. Daniel both the spiritual and the
mental. This vision of Abraham was a corporal vision as is thought, and
proof thereof alleged out of the fifth verse.

2 Observe we the opportunity of this Vision, when it was. Surely when Abraham
was returned from the rescue of Lot, and was now in a great fear what might be
faull him by those Kings, whom he had so pursued, conquered, and delivered his
friend from. He was a stranger and they at home, he but a few, they of great
power, alyance, and kindred, how should it be, but they would combine
together to destroy him, and never put up and digest what he had done to
them. This multiplied in Abraham's mind, as all fear will, and gave him many a
secret gripe, that all the world felt not so well as he. But behold a
gracious God, a dear and tender father* that never slumbreth nor sleeps when
his be in agonies and perplexities. In this opportunity of time he appears to
his servant, renueth his promise to his great comfort, and dasheth in sunder,
with his words of sweet mercy, the bones of all such troubled thoughts, and
fearful concepts. Could Abraham's heart have wished his comfort, in a more fit
time? Did he not thus again before, when Lot was departed from him. Let it
ever then be one of our notes, in reading the word, how fitly, in respect of
time and need, God comfort his, and let us know, that he is one and the
same, for ever, to all that put their trust in him. He sees what Abraham
wants, and when he wants, and sees he not us? He gave Abraham what he
wanted, and when he wanted it, and is ^e only his God? Stir we then up the
faith within us, ever ever to trust in him, to depend on him, and to expect
from him our wanted helps, even in the very time they may best steed us.

3 Let us mark the manner of comfort, and the words themselves. Fear not
Abraham (says he) I am thy buckler, Verse. 1.
and thine exceeding great reward. How God comfort.
He tells him not that his enemies be wicked and he just, or that they shall
be weak, and he strong, or any such matter, but this he says only, I am thy
shield. Teaching us, that this is enough against all the threats of foes, and
terrors of a whole world, if God care for us, and take upon him to be our
shield against them. Earthly hearts do not conceive this, but they cry: Give
me friends and favor with men, with Princes, with Noblemen, with Magistrates,
and Gentlemen, give me gold and silver, give me alyance and kindred, and such
like, and then let me alone, but if we want these all or some, woe be to us, we
cannot live, we shall be so crossed, so snubbed, so browbeaten, so pinched a
thousand ways, that death were better a great deal, then such a life. But O
carnal wretches, and carnal comforts, is God nothing, and man all, is the
Creator so weak, and the creature so strong, where are our eyes: If these
things be had with Gods favor, they are good means, and may be our
comfort, but if these want, and God love, is he all to weak to shield us?
God forbid. Nay only his love is life and liberty, though all the world
with his power were set against us.

And this is that which in this place God would have Abraham to see* That he
might not think, alas I am a stranger, weak and without friends, great men
malice me, and how shall I do, how can I escape their hands, etc. away
(says GOD) Abraham with such concepts, I am thy Buckler, and I tell thee, that
is enough against all thy foes, were they never so many and mighty. Truth
Lord truth, and far be it from us, Romans 8.
ever to think otherwise. If thou be with us, who can be against us, to hurt
us. If I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, says the Prophet David,
I will not fear any evil, Psa. 23.4.
and why? Quia tu mecum es, Because thou art with me, and O Lord it is our
song also, increase our faith for thy merci^ sake.

4 In that he says, he is his reward, and not only so, but his exceeding
great reward, No loss in serving God.
we do well see there is no loss in serving God, as the wicked do complain
in the Prophet Malachie, Mala. 3.14.
that there is, but on the contrary side, this is profitable and most
profitable, yea this is riches, and exceeding great riches. For what has
Heaven or Earth that is not ours, God himself is ours, and we are his* and
unto God what may be added for more perfection: D^uid says, The Lord is his
^^ephe^rd, and therefore he shall want nothing. And may not we say, the
Lord is our God, our Father, Psalm. 23.
our shield and buckler, yea our reward, and exceeding great reward,
therefore we are rich, and loose not by his service? Most truly may we say it
evermore, and most sweetlye should we taste it, when we are tempted. It is
wealth, to have Corn, and Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4.
increased, but sure, far greater wealth, to have the light of Gods
countenance lifted up upon us, in the Prophets judgment. It is gain, Psalm.
144.
To have our Garners filled with all manner of store, to have our Oxen strong
to labor, no leading into captivity, nor any complaining in our streets, and
the people be happy, that be in such a case, but surely, yet far greater
gain it is, to have the Lord for our God, and rather, rather happy be they,
that inioye that mercy, then all the former.

5 When Abraham says to God, yea but O Lord what will thou give me, seeing
I go childlesse, etc. Verse. 2.
We may see the weakness of Gods children, even his dear ones, and
cheefe-ones, if things answer not their desires. They are a little impatient,
and think less of many mercies, that both they have and are promised after to
have, because they want some one thing that they would gladlye have. So was
Abraham here for want of a Child: as if he should have said, O Lord, what
is all thou promisest whilst this wants, that I have no issue. This is a
great corruption in us, and we must beware. For if God were not merciful, it
were the way to rob us of all, to think light of any for want of some.
Let us not think it is denied, that is differred. God has his times for all
things, and bound are we to his Majesty, for what we have till more come,
and though never more come.

6 When Abraham thus uttered his grief, for want of seed, God tells him in
great goodness, he should have seed according to his desire, yea far and
far above that which he could imagine or ask. For as the stars of heaven so
should his seed be for number. Verse. 5.
A gracious promise to a grieved mind, for that same thing. But when or
wherein will not God be good to those that truly serve him: Justification by
faith
this promise Abraham believed, (says the text) and it was counted unto him
for righteousness. By faith then was Abraham justified, we plainly see, and is
there an other way for other men? this were madness to think, and therefore
choose we with him to believe, that by faith, as he was, we may be justified.
For it is not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness (says the Apostle) but also for us, Romans 4.23.
to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness, which believe in him, that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Again, I count all things loss, and
do judge them dongue, Phili. 3.8.9
that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is not having mine
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God, through faith, etc. With many
such places, if it were not needless in many words to follow this doctrine
now. Away therefore with whatsoever yields man to boast in, and know that
the thing that God regards in us, is faith. First because of his eternal
purpose, only to save believers, and secondly, because faith ever ascribes
to him the glory, both of truth and power.

Verse. 8.
7 But it is laid down here, that Abraham asked a sign. How could that stand
with a right faith: A sign asked.
may a man believe and yet ask a sign to confirm doubting? answer may be
made, that God promised two things: a Seed, and the inheritance of the land of
Canaan: Abraham believed the first, and was justified, but somewhat wauered in
the second, because he could not conceive how he so old a man should ever be
master of that land. And that a man may have true faith, though not all faith:
it is manifest in all Gods children, Number. 6.
Moses himself, that was so faithful in Gods house, and to whom God showed
himself so marvelously, and spoke so familiar lie* yet had not all faith: but
doubted of water to come out of the rock, and so grieved God. Truth is
sufficient, and perfection falls not into this life. Look what your note
says in the Margin.

8 In giving him a sign, God accepts an imperfect faith.
we see the great mercy and goodness of God, ever ready to supporte man's
weakness, and never snubbing any child of his for imperfection of faith, in
whom there is the truth of faith, a great comfort. And in the division and
placing of these beasts, we see the old manner of making covenants in those
days: They first divided them, to show, The manner of old co^enants and the
s^gne of the ceremonies used.
that such love and liking, should thencefoorth be betwixt them two, that made
that covenant, as that they could find in their heart to divide any
commodities or pleasures mutually and equally either to other. Secondly to
show, that they wished even their own bodies so divided and cut a sunder, if
they should break that covenant: read the 1. of Sam. 11.7. Then they laid one
part answering to an other, to show the answering, and agreement, and
consent, that should be in their two hearts either to other. Lastly, the Birds
were not divided, to show, that though all external matters might be parted,
yet their minds and wills not. Read the marginall note again in your Bible.

9 The lighting of the Fowls upon the carkeises to eat them, if they might
have been suffered, Verse. 11.
An allegory.
showed Abraham in such sort, how both his Seed according to the flesh, and
according to promise, should of the profane Gentiles, and wicked worldlings,
be molested. But as Abraham drove them away, so should his Seed by Gods
help, conquer and overcome their cruel enemies. Yea God for his promise
sake, would drive them away from deuowring his chosen, as Abraham did these
from eating the carkeises.

10 That it pleased the Lord, thus long, Verse. 13.
to let them be strangers in a sorren land, even four hundred years, First
sower and then sweet.
to serve a cruel people, and to be evil entreated of them, we may note the
manner many times of the Lords dealing, with such as he means to do much
for. Surely then he used, and now he uses not to make any man rule before
he have served, not to give freedom, but after a taste first of bondage. First
must come sower and then sweet, first pain and then pleasure, first travel
and then rest. So know we better what his benefit is, by former experience
of the want, and we become more thankful for it. Joseph found it thus,
David, Daniell, and many more.

Verse. 14.
11 But what follows, notwithstanding (says God) the Nation whom they shall
serve, Sin ever punished, first or last 2. These. 1.6 etc.
will I judge. Teaching us thereby, that never any wickedness shall escape
always a due punishment. But true it is that the Apostle speaks: It is a
just thing with God, to recompense to his childrens enemies tribulation and
vengeance, and everlasting perdition, from the presence of God, Genesis 4. Genesis
19. Exodus 14. Number 16.
and from the glory of his power, etc. Remember what you had in the 12.
Chapter, and 3. verse. Remember how Cain sped, how Sodom and Gomorrha sped, how
Pharoh and his host sped, how Corah and his company sped, how Miriam Moises
sister sped, for her wicked speech against her brethren, 2. King. 2.
and to go no further, how those wicked impes of children sped, that cried to
the Prophet, Bauld head, Bauld head. True it is, that God spares long
sometime, but as true again it is, that he paieth home at last, and as true as
either of these that the sharpness of his wrath when it lights,
recompenseth the long stay of it before it light.

Sorrow has an end.
12 In that God says, yet they shall come out, and names a time, we get this
comfort sweeter then honny: that we may be assured whatsoever is our case,
Egrediemur tandem, we shall at last come out, and not loose by our patience,
if we have performed any. (...) ^ere. 25.12. and (...). ^05.19
The time is known to the Lord, as this was, and appointed, and shall never
break, though not expressed as this was*

And often (...) wealth
13 With great substance, says the Text, and so it was we know: Jewels of
sil^er, and Jewels of gold they had of the Egiptians at their departure,
beside their own which was also great. See and consider the end of the
troubles of the godly, when God will. Not only liberty but great substance
is given to them. So every thing works for the good of them that love God,
says the Apostle truly. Romans 8.2^.
Joseph had honor and great wealth, as well as liberty, when Gods time was
come, so had David a kingdom after many troubles that he first endured: so
had Daniel and other many, if you will remember them. Fear not the issue then
of your woe, whatsoever it is, if you cleave to God, and houlde you fast by the
word of this promise.

14 But thou shall go to thy fathers in peace and shall be buried in a good
age, says God to Abraham. Verse. 15.
Noting unto us in the very phrase, The death of the godly full of comfort.
the comfort to be conceived in the death of the godly. It is no perishing nor
departing to woe, but a sweet going to our fathers before us in lasting
bliss. It is a walking with God, as an other place says, Genesis 5. Genesis 49.
a gathering of us to our own people, a sleep, a rest, yea a resting of the
flesh in hope, the way of all flesh, and so forth: therefore not to be
feared. It includes feliciti^, it excludes misery, finisheth the toils of
age, preuenteth the perils of youth. Multis remedium, nonnullis votum, omnibus
finis. To many a remedy, to some a wished thing, to all an end. It deserves
better of none then of them to whom it comes before calling. Heathens have
been strong, and shall we be weak. The Swans do sing and shall we weep to
think of death? M^r^ nomen tantum fidelibus, says the Father. Death to the
godly is only a name, and no worse is in it. Chrysostom. Genesis ho. 29
Surely to dye no man fe^^eth, but he that dispayreth of life after death, yet
hasten not the time by thy desire, for that is a fault as far the other
way. It is the part of an unthankful man, either to will a good longer, or
to be wearye of it sooner then the giver and lender of the same does limit,
and is contented. No man may break the prison, and let the soul out, but he
that enclosed it in the same. Let all these comfort us, and let all these stay
us. Fear not when it comes sent of God, and procure it not till it come for
any dislike and discontent of a weak mind.

In a good age does the Lord add, and who makes old, but even himself.
The hoar^e heirs are his gracious gift, and the timely death is also his, to
escape the woes to come.

Verse. 16.
14 For the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full, says the 16 verse.
God spares, till sin be ripe.
Then God spares many times, till iniquity be ripe and at an height. Most
true it is, and let us mark it. It may well daunte those curssed spirits, and
stop the stream of those wicked hearts, that flatter themselves, because God
yet suffers. What say they, needs all this threatening of the preachers,
against men's doings, iwis God is not so hasty as they make him, nor yet so
ready to smite as they report him. For my self have hither to found him
favorable, albeit I trod awry, etc. But take heed says the Wiseman, Syrac.
5.4.
and say not, I have sinned, and what evil has come unto me: For the
almighty is a patient rewarder, but he will not leave thee unpunished.
Because thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear, to heap sin upon sin.
And say not, the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins,
for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes forth upon
sinners. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to
day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy
security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance.
In this place we see, that God often spares the wicked, the wicked nation,
and wicked person, man or woman, not because he will not smite, but because
they may have a mighty payment and f^ar^full vengeance, together* when their
sin is full, that at once he may destroy them for ever in his great justice.
Know you then your self to tread awrye, and does God still suffer? Stand in
awe, and go not on. Make not your sin full, by continuing of it. For if you
do, your death is determined. Many things more yet has this chapter, but let
these suffice now,

Chap. 16.
The principal heads of this Chapter are these. The double marriage of Abraham,
to the 4* verse. The dispising of Sarah by Hagar, to the 7. verse. Her flight
and return, to the end.


COncerning the first, the occasion of it is noted, Verse. 2.
when it is said Sarah was barren, Good Spirits in men or women, blame
themselves before others.
and bare no children to Abraham. Her barrenness shows the power of God, in
after giving her a Child, and is noted to that end.

2 In that she lays the fault upon her self, and not upon her husband,
saying, The Lord had restrained her, etc. It shows her spirit modest and
godly, and tells us the better to discern them, that had rather blame any
themselves, and that in a thousand things, then themselves in one. Such
Spirits be proud and arrogant, swelling with vain concepts of themselves,
and poisoned with spite against others. And if they be women, they are no
Sarahs we well know, by this good mark of a good Sarah in this place.

3 The Lord restrains honest Women from child bearing, and none but he, but
filths restrain themselves, least their secret whordomes should appear.

4 If Sarah thought she was finally restrained, because of age, it was a want
in a good woman, and a little spotte in a fair face. For God is not to be tied
to time, to age, and years. But is as able when years be many, as when they
be fewer. Yea age and youth to him are one, if his pleasure be to have it so.

5 Her giving her Maid to her husband, notes the corruption of that time:
from the beginning it was not so, for male and female God created them first,
Read Mal. 2. verse. 15.
one for one, and not mo for either at once.

6 Abraham obeyed his wife, and took her maid, says the text, and this also
was a blemish, though then endured as we know. He should have said* no, I
will not do it, we will tr^st to Gods promise, who is able to give us children
though we be old, when it pleases him, and we will tarrye his time. But
whom has not a woman deceived, if she were hearkened unto at all times.

Verse. 4.
7 When Agar saw she had conceived, her Mistress was despised in her eyes: and
so truly verified we see the proverb: Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in
altum,
Pungitur in celsa simia sede sedens.
Nothing more proud, than a beggar set on horseback, and a very Ape, if you
place him up aloft, begins to bridle the matter, and take upon him maruelously.
Secondly it teaches, that adversity is better borne then prosperity, of
many one. Thirdlye it shows the end of evil counsel, Sarah is beaten with
her own rod.

Verse. 5.
8 But does she so apply it, no: but in a rage she flies upon Abraham, and
chideth him, because her maid abused her. An angrye mind will lay the fault
where it is not, and especially an angry woman.

Verse. 6.
9 Abraham answers his angry Wife with meekness, a virtue in him, and best
for her to appease her wrath, for fire never quenches fire as we all know. But
a soft answer breaks anger says the Wiseman.

10 Sarah handled her roughly, after Abraham had answered, and behoulde by it
the certainty of Women's affections. Before she promoted her, and now she
plagueth her: before she desired fruit of her, and now when she sees the hope
of it, it will not serve. To be woone with the Egg, and lost with the shell,
is a great inconstancy. Sarahs cause was better, but yet her hardness more
then happilye answered the cause as it was.

11 Agar runs away, when she should have amended her fault and submitted her
self to her mistr^sse, so take we the course in the crookedness of our
nature, that we should avoid many times. Stubborn stomachs had rather break
then bow, but we must beware it.

12 When she was thus fled* the Lord yet rewarded not what she deserved: but
by his Angel admonished her in the wilderness* to return again: so good is
he, Verse. 7.
that he regards all sorts, and contemns not the poor estate of a
seruante.

13 When the Angel asked her whence she came, and whether she would, she
plainly answered and lied not, Verse. 8.
that she fled from her Dame. Such truth is an ornament, where it is found in
Man or Woman, Read Job. 31.15.
and such truth in a servant in these wicked days wherein we live, O how rare.

14 This council to return, was not given her by and by, Verse. 9.
neither this finding of her in the wilderness, but after she had tasted a
little smarte, then was it said unto her, teaching us that then is the best
time for good counsel, when our own rod has beaten us, and not before,
with many natures.

15 When he bids her humble her self to her Dame, we see the duty of
servants plainly, and the duty also of Dames, truly to be content, and
accept to be appeased and pacified with the submission of a servant that has
offended, which some will never, so fierce is their nature, and so void of
remembrance, that even their master is also in heaven, read the Epistle to
Philemon, for his servant to be received again, that had gone away.

16 In the 13. verse, behoulde her thankfulness, when she thus used of the
Lord. She called the name of the Lord that spoke to her (for this Angel was
Christ) Thou God look on me, and so forth, a good bringing up in a good
house, makes some show in her manners, more then at these days it will do in
many.

Lastly, see how afliction and good council will make Hagar come home again
to a good place, and learn to perform more duty where it is due. So should
it make others as well as her, but that grace is wanting which was in her.

Chap. 17.
The general heads in this Chapter are these. The change of Abraham's name,
from the 1. verse to the 7. The institution of circumcision, from the 7. to the
15. The promise of a Child to Sarah, from the 15. to the end.


PArticular things worthy our noting, may be these, Verse. 1.
and such others. First the mentioning of his age, Their age noted for 2.
causes.
wherefore it was. Surely to teach two things: First, that the Seed which God
gave him, was not by strength of nature, but by extraordinary grace, for Sarah
and he both were of these great years.

Secondly to show how long in patience and faith Abraham expected that gracious
promise, not doubting as the Apostle says of the same, but strengthened in the
faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4.19.
and being fully assured that he which had promised was able to do it.

2 The words I am God all sufficient, Verse 1.
have been observed before to contain a most strong and sure stay to a
christian heart, A comfort by Gods omnipotency.
in all perplexities and distresses: for if his promises be great, this power
of his assures us he is able to pay and perform them. If we pray and ask
any thing be it never so hard in flesh and bloods conceit, this assures us we
shall obtain it if it be good for us. For what cannot he give that is
all-sufficient, if it be his good pleasure to do it? and so in all things as I
say it is a marvelous fortress to shield a man's faith from the battring shot
of Satan's assaulting fears and doubts. In iourneying on the way, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, 2. Cor. 12.26.
in perils in our own country, in perils in foreign countries, in perils in
the City, in perils in the wilderness, and every every way it is a stay to
us, that God will either deliver out of them, or in them, as shall be best, for
he is all-sufficient.

3 Observe we the covenant betwixt God and Abraham, Verse 1.
how it contains first a condition of Abraham to be performed, and then a
promise of God upon that condition to be expected. The condition that Abraham
must perform* is this, walk before me, and be thou perfect or upright. Gods
promise is this, I will be God to thee, and to thy seed after thee, verse. 7.
This covenant stands still to all the seed of Abraham after the spirit, that
is, to all those that are ingrafted into Christ by a true faith. Godlynes
gayneth God to us and our children, ungodliness l^seth him to both.
And therefore as then he and all his seed according to the flesh, if they
would enjoy the promise, were to perform the condition, so still it is with
us, and shall be with all Gods children to the end of the world. True religion
in the heart of man or woman, shall ever find God a gracious guide, staff, and
stay, and want of the same a just neglecter of us, because we have broke the
condition. For this cause it is said by the blessed Apostle, that gain is not
godlynes, 1. Tim. 4. and 6.
but godlynes is great gain, and profitable to all things, as that which has
promise both of this life, and that to come. For this cause was God ever so
careful by his Prophets and Preachers to call upon the people for sincerity
in worship and holy obedience, that they performing their part, he might
perform his to be their God, and their childrens after them for ever. And for
this cause again were all those exhortations made by good Fathers to their
children, and charge that we read of in scripture, that they should fear
God, know God, and serve God. That they seeking him, he might be found of
them, they loving him, he might love them, they serving him, he might serve
them with his mercy and favor, with his providence and blessings needful to
this life, and with his kingdom and comforts for ever and ever when this life
is ended. Marvel not then if either your self, your seed, or others and
their seed whom you know be rejected of God, and taste of his wrath by sundry
judgments, if you know that you and they do not walk before him as here he
commands Abraham, nor perform the condition with any care, whereunto you see
God makes his promise in this place.

Verse 5.
4 The change of Abrams name was for confirmation of his faith touching the
promise, His name why changed.
that in all hope and assurance he might expect and reckon of what in all
truth and certayntie would be performed on Gods part if he believed, yea even
as surely and verily as now he was called Abraham of Abram, and Sarah of Sarai:
so careful was God ever to underprop the faith of his children by all good
helps, that it might abide.

5 Concerning Circumcision, which is the second head in this Chapter, Verse 7.
note what it was, a cutting away of the foreskin of the flesh of every male
child. Circumcision what, and why there, etc.
Consider why in that part of the body, to show, that whatsoever is begotten
and proceeds of the seed of man issuing from that part, God that would not the
death of a sinner, but that he should know him, serve him, love him, and live
for ever. Jews, till the truth of Christ and the effect of his coming might
be better known. For what end, to confirm this promise that now you have
seen,

6 Note how the sign is called by the name of the thing signified. This cut in
the flesh is called Gods covenant, Verse 10.
when it was but the sign: and the covenant as you have seen this, The sign
has the name of the thing signified.
I will be thy God, etc. This is no new kind of speaking with God, but usual
ever in his sacraments: here you see it in the circumcision, afterward in
Exodus when he comes to the Passover, he calls the Lamb the Passover,
which was but the sign of the Angels passing over all those houses that were
stricked with the blood upon the door cheeks. Exodus 12. 1. Cor. 10. Luc. 8.11.
Tit. 3.
In the new testament the rock is called Christ, the seed is called the word,
the water is called the washing of the new birth. And yet may not God be
allowed by some men in the sacrament of his last supper to speak as ever he did
in all sacraments? but because there he says the bread is his body, etc.
therefore it must be so really, carnally, substantially and grossly by
transubstantiation devised of themselves. But by these examples of like speech
and phrase you well see that their assertion is a real lie, a carnal lie, a
substantial lie, and a gross lie: and truly said the Father if they would
regard him, Christus non dubitabat dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum fignum daret
corporis sui. Christ doubted not to say this is my body, when he delivered but
a sign of his body.

7 That the child was not circumcised before the 8. day, it teaches us that
God has not tied salvation to the sacrament, Verse 12.
for it had bin a hard thing in the Lord to defer it an hour if the child
had perished without it. Salvation not tied to the Sacrament.
This answers the fear of some good ones, and the false bouldnes of some bad
ones in these days touching children that dye without baptism, for God is not
worse to us under the Gospel, then he was to them under the Law, neither
less able to save now without baptism, then in those days he was without
circumcision, the seed of the faithful. This grace was not then free and now
bound, then more and now less, then stronger, and now weaker, far be it from
us so to dream. David's child when it died before the eight day, he yet for
all that judged not damned, neither cried out for it as he did for Absolon that
was circumcised, but said that he should go to it, refreshed himself, cheered
his wife, and made his servants to wonder at his comfort. And when he said he
should go to it, 2. Sam. 12.23.
we know he meant not that it was in Hell, or any hellish Limbus, and that
thither himself looked to go to it, but rather comfortably he conceived it was
with the Lord, because the promise extended it self both to the godly and to
their seed: if further we desire to think of this matter, consider we this
and the like reasons. he that hears my word, says Christ, and believes in
him that sent me, shall be saved, cannot be damned, John. 5.24. but this may one
do before he be baptized, therefore before a man be baptized, he may stand in
the state of salvation, and out of all danger of damnation. The assumption is
evident in the Eunuch, Act. 8^ and others. Note.
and yet hard to say that whosoever so dyed was damned, since God in that
omission intended no cruelty, but mercy and pity to his people. and
blasphemous against the bottomless mercy of a sweet and tender father, who
has said, I will be thy God and thy childs, not adding any condition of
baptism, if it cannot be had as it ought. Luther observed, and long before him
Bernard, Epist. 77. in the words of our Savior. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, Man. 16.16.
and he that believes not shall be damned. Mark says Luther how in the
affirmative he mencioneth baptism, but not in the negative. For he does not
say, he that is not baptized shall be damned, but he that believes not, he
shall be damned. Are covenants made by Sacraments, or only sealed by them?
Constantine, Nectarius, Nazianzene, etc. not therein doing so well as they
ought, but yet evidently showing the faith of the Church then, that God without
baptism is able to save, and has not tied his grace to any sign. Abraham his
covenant reached to his seed, and by deferring the seal of the same, to wit,
circumcision to the eight day, which he would never have done, if the want of
it simply had bin damnation. Conclude we therefore with Austen, Inuisibilis
sanctificatio sine visibili signo esse potest, the invisible sanctification may
be without the visible sign, (...)
with Ambrose, who comfortably speaks of Valentinian dead without baptism,
with Bernard, that not want, but contempt of baptism hurts, and even with
Lumbard himself Gratia Dei non est alligata sacramentis, The grace of God is
not tied to the sacrament, beside many others that I omit.

Verse. 12.
8 In your generations says the text: And why so? Surely to show the use of
the sacrament to be, Not sin, but the imputation of it.
not to take sin away quite, that it be no more in the party circumcised, but
only the imputatio^ of it, that though the venom of it remain so rooted in our
nature, that but by death it cannot quite be rooted out, yet laid to our
charge it is not for Christ his sake. As therefore you see the corn clean
wynowed from his chafe, Note.
yet has in it nature to yield chafe again to that which grows of it when
it is sown: so does this nature of ours to those that spring of us yield
corruption and original sin, though we our selves were circumcised or
baptized and so purged thereby from it. Because that purgation is ever to be
understood thus, Non vt non sit in nobis peccatum, sed vt non imputetur, Not
that we are cleared from the being of any evil in us, but from the
imputation of it to us. Therefore then in your generation, says the text,
shall this sign and sacrament of circumcision be continued, that is, from
father to son, and then to his son again, and so to every male, forasmuch
as sin like chafe being propagated from the father to the son, the chafe of
that is now sprung up must be fanned away as well as his was of whom this
blade sprung up.

Verse. 14.
9. Mark in the foureteenth verse, the punishment of them that should
contemn this ordinance of God, Contempt of sacraments.
and remember how God never could abide the contempt of his sacraments, and
that he takes the wrong done to the outward sign as if it were done unto
the thing it self signified by it. Because (says he) such an one has
broken my covenant: when he had but neglected the sign of his covenant. This
may lead us both to the consideration of that Popish folly, and also to a
true answer unto it that concludes out of the eleventh chapter of the first
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, that because the Apostle says, They that
eat and drink unworthily are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, etc,
Therefore needs it must be, that the wicked eat the body and drink the blood
of Christ. which they could not do except they were there really, for by
faith they can not eat that are void of faith. Therefore there is a real
presence by transubstantiation. When all this in very deed proves no more
then evidently we see in this place, namely, that God attributes the abuse of
the sign to the thing signified, saying, that because the wicked come
irreverently and vnpreparedly to those holy signs, and receive them vngolilie
without faith, therefore they shall be guilty even of the body and blood it
self, that is, even as guilty by abusing the sign, as if they had abused the
thing signified it self: for the contempt of the one redoundeth unto the
other. Circumcision was a sign of his covenant, and here he says, he that
contemns that being the sign, is guilty, and shall be guilty of the
breach of his covenant, which was the thing signified: so are bread and wine
the signs of the Lords body and blood, and therefore says the Apostle by
the same manner of speaking, he that abuses them by eating and drinking
unworthily of them, he shall be guilty even of abuse done unto the thing
it self, the true body and blood of Christ. No more proouing hereby that the
signs are changed and become really the thing it self, than here it is to
be proved that circumcision was really the covenant it self, because it is
said, he that omitteth the one, breaks the other. Weak proppes therefore
you see Popery has, if they be with a godly indifferency examined and
considered, casting away that most wicked wilfulness and prejudice that
hurts so many, and will let them see nothing.

10 In the fifteenth verse you see God changes also the name of Sarai as well
as he had done to Abraham, Why Sarai her name was also changed.
and says her name shall be no more Sarai, but Sarah, and he will bless
her, etc. Where we may note, how it being a great honor to Abraham, so to
have his name changed by God, Verse. 15.
he would have his wife also partaker of the same with him, as teaching
thereby that what befalls the husband, either to weal or woe, reaches it
self also in some sort to the wife as a partaker with him in the same. Women
think of this.
No question but some part of this doctrine sounds well to women, and they
readely catch at it, but I doubt twice, whether all of it do so or no. My
meaning is, they most gladly hear that any honor of their husbands should
reach unto them, and exalt them also, but to partake with their husbands in
affliction and crosses, in sorrows and cares, in reproaches and ignominy
causeless, in bitterness and unthankfulness of an unkind world, is it as
sweet a doctrine to them? I do but move the question, let all women answer it
in their hearts to themselves in stead of me.

Verse 18.
11 In the 18. verse, but O that Ismael might live in thy sight, Fathers
affection to children, and childrens to fathers.
says this great Patriarch. See and see the heart of a father to his child.
Though God here promised more seed unto him, and that he should be a Father
even of many Nations, and his progeny like the Stars of heaven for number,
yet all that remoueth not his affection from that one that he had already, to
wit, Ismael, but still his heart is to him, and O that he may live also. So are
Fathers, but God knows so are not ever children to them again. Note.
The parent cries for life to the child, and the child for death to the
parent. O that Ismael may live says Abraham, that I may enjoy my child: but O
that Abraham may dye will Ismaell say, that I might inherit his land and goods,
and be a young master or mistress, and ruffle it out: yea, when will this old
Father and Mother of mine be gone, I think they will live ever. Too true this
is, and let it teach parents wisdom, to moderate affections, though they
retain nature, to do what shall be necessary and fit for their children.

12 We have heard the commandment of God touching Circumcision, Verse 23.
now in the 23. verse mark we the obedience of Abraham to the same, Great
obedience.
how much soever flesh and blood might startle and stagger at it, marueling why
God should inioyne such a thing, and in such a part of the body, etc. Abraham I
say casts no stops, neither admits of any humane objections, but
obediently circumciseth both himself and his son, and all that were in his
house, yea even the same day did he it that God commanded him, where we think
it great readynesse, if after many and many biddings, admonitions and warnings,
we be brought to do some thing that God bids us do. Again somewhat
consider we here of the conditions of Abraham's family, that so willingly
suffered their master to circumcise them, A godly family.
without either resistance or imagination that their master was mad to seek
such a thing at their hands, as to uncover all their shames, and to cut them
there, as some others would have thought. Surely it is a notable token of that
instruction and discipline that was in Abraham's family, for had they not bin
well trained in the way of godliness, they would sooner have mocked then
obeyed their master.

Lastly, but alas why spared he not his own son, and his only son in
this hard action of cutting? Duties to God bind all.
surely because the commandment reached to all males, and therefore to him
as well as others. Learn then parents that in obedience to God you must be no
more partial to your own children then to others, but as streitly require
duty of them, as of any others, yea rather rather though many do it less. But
I say no more.

Chap. 18.
The general heads of this Chapter are these. The hospitality of Abraham from
the 1. to the 9. verse. A confirmation of the promise from the 9. to the 16.
Gods wrath against the Sodomites to the end.


PArticulars many, as first that he says the Lord appeared, Verse. 1.
and then by and by says upon it three men, noting thereby unto us, Verse. 2.
How we see and hear God
that as we hear him, so we must see him. But we hear him only by his
messengers, and so we see him not in nature or essence, but in such
testimonies of his presence as it pleases him to give.

Verse. 2.
2 In that he calls them men, being indeed Angels and no men, we note that
custom of the scripture that a name does not ever constitute a nature.
Circumcision is called the covenant as you heard before, the Lamb the
Passover, the seed the word, the Devil is called Samuel, and many such.

How the A^gells did eat.
3 For their eating, we know it was but by dispensation for the time, not for
any necessity of nature. And if you ask what became of the meat which they
did eat, the Schoolmen will readely answer you that it did vanish in the
chawing, as water does in boiling. Wiser men ask no such questions, and
therefore need no such answer. In the extraordinary dealings of God what
need we to sift his secrets, and to be wise above sobriety?

4 Touching his hospitality, you see here how earnestly he inuiteth them, he
ran to meet them says the text, how reverently he uses them being but
strangers to him, A hearty householder loved of God.
he bowed down to them, and speaking to one of them in whom appeared to be
most majesty, he gives him the title of Lord, he accompteth it favor to
him if they will turn in to him, and take such as God has sent, he terms
himself their servant, and in a word he prays them not to go from him in any
case, all testimonies of a courteous and bountiful good housekepers nature, and
true tokens of hearty welcome if they came. It is an old saying, frenum and
vestes veniendi sunt tibi testes. When a man catches a man by his horse
bridle, or by his own clothes, and will not part with his hold till he have
his petition, they be tokens of no words of course, but inward truth and
loving welcome if a man come, where as, twenty fine phrases with when, and if,
and will you, and such like be but court holywater as the proverb is, a very
hearty householder therefore was Abraham, and that would the Lord have noted in
these words and gestures in this place to these strangers.

Verse. 5.
5 In that he names a morsel of bread, and yet performed better, True welcome
wherein it consists.
we see the antiquity of this modesty, that of a man's own things he should
speak with least. So use we to inuit men to a pittance, or to some one
particular morsel, when yet we intend somewhat better. But whatsoever Abraham
made ready, was all but moderate in comparison of that ungodly excess that
some now use, rather to show their own pride, then to welcome the guest. True
welcome never consisted in meats and drinks, and multitude of dishes, but in
that affection of an inward heart, which truly has appeared in a cup of
water, where better ability wanted, and which passes all dishes and meats
under the sun.

6 In their answer do as thou say, Verse. 5.
we see first how they are content to conceyle a truth for a time, to wit, that
they were Angels and not men. Secondly, how they admit of his kind offer,
without either proud contempt, or stern frowardness.

7 Abraham made haste says the 6. verse, another token of a good and through
heart, Verse. 6.
and went to his wife to tell her that she might do her part, to his wife
again I say Sarah, Women should have rule in their own houses, and how.
and let them mark it that acquaynt rather every droy in the house, yea the
kitchen maid rather with any intertaynement to be given in their house, then
their wives: their wives must be syphers to fill up a place, and make the
number thus or so, but have any rule, disposition or government of such things,
as yet properly belong to their place and sex, or to be acquaynted with their
husbands purposes, strangers, cheer, or any thing they may not. Well, good
Abraham went here to his wife when he was to have guests to meat with him,
and has left behind him an order of good rule in every house in so doing, and
chawked out such hen huswiues, or such sour grubs as will not follow him in
the like, ever I speak of such, as whose callings are not contrary ^o this
order by height of estate in the common wealth.

8 But where found he Sara his wife? Women keep in etc.
that also in this place may we mark, surely in her Tent: within doors I
warrant you and not abroad, not in the Market place, not in the Tavern, not
in the Feelds, not in any place but where she should be, and where good women
for the most part are, in her own Tent. You know what the Apostle writes of
some women, to wit, that they are idle, and being idle, 1. Tim. 5.13
they learn to go about from house to house, yea they are not only idle, but
also pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are not comely, etc. Let
all good women mark it, and take heed of it. Sara did not so, but was within
in her tent, and there her husband seeks and finds her.

Verse. 6.7.
9 Sara must make ready the flower, and he goes to the foulds. Mulieres
muliebria curant, and viri mulieribus muliebria committant. Women regard women's
matters, and men commit such things unto them as I noted before, he does what
is fit for him, and not so fit for the woman, and good women vsurp no more upon
the man's office, then they would have the man to do upon theirs. The text
says he hasted, Sarah hastes, the boy hastes, and all this teaches truly
the cheerfulness of their hearts in that they did, and how kindly and wisely
they considered circumstances, that their strangers might be weary, and
peradventure wish some refreshing quickly, that they were trauelers, and to
pass on their journey, not to be stayed over long, in curiosity to be fine,
or prodigality to be pompouse. Altogether confirming the common proverb,
Optimum condimentum beneficii celeritas, and bis dat qui cito dat. The best
sauce to a good turn is to do it quickly, and who gives so gives twice.

Lastly, he stood himself by them, noting his care to see all well, and to
have them tended, and warranting our like custom in some sort either to attend
if so there be need in our own houses, or to sit the lowest and last down.
Their eating was touched before, yet here being mentioned so expressly that
they did eat, your marginall note answers, that as God gave them bodies for
a time, so gave he them the faculties of the same bodies, as to walk, to eat
and drink, and such like, and thus much in the first part of this Chapter
shall suffice to have noted.

2
Verse. 9.
The second part of the Chapter I told you was a renewing or a repetition of
the promise touching a child to be given to Abraham* and in this also some
things to be noted, as that these Sarah thy wife. Some men think that in those
days women came not so usually abroad to the tables as now they do amongst
us. Others mark how after awhile their Angels are bo^lder and more familiar
then at first, Ministers.
and so say they ought the Ministers and messengers of God by little and little
more and more to acquaint themselves with them to whom they are sent, and to
be familiar.

2 In th^^ he says he will return being but a stranger and not requested,
Verse 10.
we see the honest simplicity and plain friendship that then was usual,
far from our nice curiosity in these days, as also the blessing of
hospitality, he that once receives an Angel and uses him well, shall have
him again.

3 Sara heard in the tent door which was behind him, Verse 10.
a pattern of that curious nature that especially swayeth in women, Women
desirous to hear and know every thing.
they must hear and know every thing, or else they are not quiet many of them,
and to that end, if in presence they cannot be, often they are harkning behind
doors and walls, where they may hear and not be seen, as here Sara was, a
fault many times in a good woman otherwise, that her ear itcheth too much. It
is not true in all, but in too many, for some be sad and discrete, both to
govern what they know, and to be content with ignorance of that which they
should not know, the number of them I wish far more, and the number of the
other far less.

4 She laughed, and it notes her incredulity, Verse 12.
wherein she respected rather the order of nature, then believed the promise of
God, yea a shroud measure of unbelief it notes, for laughing is more then not
believing, and had she not believed, it h^d bin* her fault, but both to give no
credit and to laugh too, was a more fault.

5 But she laughed within herself says the text, and it may again in her
praise teach us that modest men and women laugh sometimes, but mod^st^y* How
wise men and fools laugh. Cap. 18.20
and as may become the^r places well, not as the fool of whom Jesus Syrach
speaks when he says, a fool lifts up his voice with laughter, but a wise
man does scarce smile secretly. Not unlike unto which is that also in the 19.
Chapter. Verse. 27.28
A man may be known by his look, and one that has understanding, may be
perceived by the marking of his countenance. A man's garment and his excessive
laughter and going declare what man he is.

6 After I am old shall I lust? says she etc. Showing therein that she
considered what is fit for all persons to consider, namely, what is agreeable
or not agreeable with their years, age, and time, for that becomes younger,
which will not become elder, and contrariwise again, a good thought then in
every age, since I am thus or thus, does this or that become me? The like might
be said of diverse estates and callings.

7 In calling him Lord, not I but the Apostle Peter notes her reverence and
obedience to her husband in an humble womanhood: and he wills all wives to
learn of her what shall be their great praise as it was hers if they do it. If
the argument follow that because she called him Lord she obeyed him, and
regarded him in his place, how should it also follow that whom so often we
call Lord Lord, our true Lord and God, him we should obey regard and reverence?

8 The Lord that knows all our secrets, knew that she laughed behind the
door, Verse. 14.
and asks why she did so, adding these words, Privy mockers mark it.
Shall any thing be hard to the Lord? By which words we may remember that
usual division of the things wherein our faith uses to slip, that they are
either matters touching Gods will, Gods constancy, or Gods power, as also what
godly advise teaches us to oppose against them, namely these three, his
goodness, his truth, and his power: to a doubt of his will, the first, to a
doubt of his stedfastnes in his promise, the second, and to all doubts of his
power, his might and omnipotence, the third. Sarah respecting too much the
course of nature, doubted of the last, and you see how the Angel answers by
his mighty omnipotency, Shall any thing be hard to the Lord? No. Now because
this place is abused by the Papists, judge I pray you how this argument
follows. He is able to give a child, which he in good will has promised,
therefore he has and does in the Sacrament make bread his body really, which
he never willed, meant, or promised? He will do it, ergo he can do it, is ever
true, but he can do it, A ^^sse ad esse.
therefore he will do it, does not ever follow. I speak not what God cannot
do, and yet no want of power in him, but a more perfect power, as it should be a
weakness in him, and not a power if he could do them. But this I say if an
argument from his power to his will do not follow, then much less from want of
both power and will to his deed does any sequeale lie. I call that power now,
which in deed as I said were no power but weakness if God could do, his word
or his nature being to the contrary. But what do they consider that bring
doctrines to the word, and would have the word confirm them, not learning all
doctrines from the word as they should.

3
The third part of the Chapter begins at the 16. verse, Verse. 16.
where we read that Abraham went to bring them on the way, noted no doubt by
the Lord, Perfect curtesye.
to tell how every way Abraham used his guests with his best kindness.
Alacriter inuitare, to inuit heartily, liberaliter tractare, to feast
chearefully, comiter dimittere, and to send away friendly and kindly a stranger
or guest, it is perfect hospitality, and very true and commendable curtesye.
And this we see here was in Abraham, who unto the former added this, that at
parting he brought them on the way. Surely this mention made of these things by
the Lord, is a very great testimony of his great good liking of them.

2 Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? Verse. 17.
See the love of the Lord God to his faithful children and servants, love
conceyleth nothing. The Lord loves Abraham, and therefore he cannot hide from
him what he is about to do. A friend will impart his mind to his friend, and
whosoever regard what God commands as Abraham did, God calls them his
friends, Ihon. 15.14.
saying, ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

3 (...) the judgments of God are (...) now and then* with their intents and
meaning (...) men enjoy no such blessing. Surely (says the Pro^h^t) the Lord
God will do nothing, but he reueyleth his secret unto his servants the
Prophets, Amos 3.7.
not meaning ever in all things, but sometimes and in some things especially in
his judgments toward that people of the Israelites. So would God here impart
his purpose to Abraham his Prophet and servant.

4 Seeing he shall be a great Nation, etc. And who shall make him so great a
Nation? Verse 18.
surely the Lord, who had now already promised and determined it. The Lord
will be good because he has been so.

O sweet.


Why then because the Lord has been good, he will be good, and add mercy to
mercy? In deed it is so, and what a comfort is this? Can any tongue express
or heart conceive this goodness of the Lord? To draw an argument from his
first mercy to a second, and from a second to a third, and so ever on from
mercy to mercy. O sweetness and goodness. This knew David well, and
therefore in every Psalm almost he prays him to be good to him, because he
has been good to him before. Thou have set me at liberty when I was in
trouble, Psalm. 4.
therefore still have pity upon me, and regard me, etc. In the Epistle to
the Romans the Apostle thus reasons also, Romans 8.32.
concluding that since God had not spared his own Son, but gave him for us
to death, therefore it could not be but with him he should give us all things
also. Man uses to reason thus, I have bin good, therefore he may not grate
upon me any more, and I have done a very great good unto him, therefore in all
equity and reason I am not further to be urged. But our sweet and gracious
God quite contrary, I have been good, and therefore I will be still and ever
good, and the greater benefits I have showed, the more sure it is I will not
stand at the lesser, but from the more to the less with me shall be ever a
sure sequel. And if I have bestowed mine own Son upon man even to death,
how should it be thought that with him I will not give far lesser things
also. O sweet again I must needs say, for what man or woman has not
thousands of mercyes from the Lord, and therein even so many comforts to his
^ealt, that he will never forsake him, but I may bouldlye and with a cheerful
heart, say, O Lord be merciful unto me, not because I have been a good
servant to thee, but because thou have been a good God to me. If my obedience
were to be the argument why thou should show me favor, my heart were gone,
for I know mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. But since
thy former goodness in thy sweet mercy, are arguments to thee of more
goodness to be showed by thee to the former, O Lord I abound with such
arguments to move thy majesty blessed be thy name for them, and I pray thee
my God and my comfort so gracious and kind, to add mercy to mercy, favor to
favor, and help to help in this need of mine, that I owing thee now my self,
for so many mercies, I may for more owe thee more then my self, or my self,
many and many times to love thee, to fear thee, to serve thee, and praise
thee, whilst I have a day to live. Thus may we chaw this comfort in our
minds, and taste the sweet of it.

5 Yet if we have any care of the Lords glory, surely the Lord has a
quick eye to see it, and even for that also in mercy he will do for us and
to us, for behold what follows here as a second reason, why the Lord will
reueyle his purpose to Abraham, and hide nothing from him. For I know him
says he, that he will command his sons, etc. A good thing to move us to all
obedience generallye, which the Lord ever sees, and to this particularly of
teaching and instructing our families and companyes, Instruction of our
families how h^ghly God likes.
which the Lord hereby (to set an observation of it) most greatly
commends. Abraham did it, and God highly extolleth it, we cannot abide it,
and shall he likewise praise us? Abraham did it, so many hundred year a go,
and is it now but a new devise, that is not needful? Surely, conclude thus,
and it is most true, he instructed his family, that they might know as he
knew: and religion, and the service of God, live in them to the glory of God,
when he was gone. And for this God will hide nothing from so careful a
servant: we will not do it, but are both ignorant our selves, and let others
be also, caring not what betommeth of Gods glory, either in our life or after
our death, and therefore from so careless wretches he will hide all his
secrets, all his counsels, yea all his comfortes, and the light of his
countenance, for ever. Beware, beware then, whilst we have time to amend and
reform this fault.

6 When the Lord says The cry of Sodom, etc. he would give us thereby to
consider well, Verse 20.
the horror of sin. So great and so vglye, The horror of sin.
so foul and grievous, that it even cries, and shriketh in the ears of the
Lord for vengeance. Caine thy brothers blood cries to me out of the earth,
etc.

Shall we then nourishe and foster that with such pleasure, that day nor night
cease to solicit the Lord against us, yea to cry in his ear, that he
would awake and plague us? Surely that man, that would cry still against us
but to man, we would abhor and hate, and that which cries louder then all
the men in the world can, and that to God himself, and for greater punishment
then any man can inflict, we are so far from hating, that we hate him that
persuades us to hate it.

This is straung madness, if we would consider it. The Drunkardes
drunkenness cries against him, and will not suffer the Lord to rest till he
punish it, and yet he loves it, so does the Swearer, Adulterer, and such
like, their sins cry against them, etc.

7 When the Lord says, Their sin is exceeding grievous, ^erse 20.
we may rightlye note the wonderful patience, and long suffering of the
Lord, ^ods great ^^tience.
who bears, and bears, spares and suffers, holds and stays,
expecting amendment, till many times the sins be horrible and exceeding
grievous, as now they were in Sodom. Now has he this slownesse toward
sinners, that will not amend, and is he void of affection toward broken
hearts, that would do better, if they could, Note this and be of good
comfort.
and daily do better as they can?

Far be such sour conceits from us: and no less far to presume to sin,
because he is patient. For we see here, though he stay long, yet he
comes at last: surely and truly, yea dreadfullye and terriblye, with
streams of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, upon such as presumed to go on in
their wickedness: notwithstanding any admonition to the contrary, till their
sins were exceedinge grievous.

8 But the Lords phrase is, that He will go see if all be true or no. Verse
21.
Not therein employing any want of knowledge in himself, how all was,
Knowledge before punishment.
who can not be deceived or ignorante of any thing, but by an human
speech. After our manner giving us to note, how ever in justice, knowledge of
a fault, should go before punishmente of the same. And credulity avoided,
to believe the worste, Overmuch credulity a blot.

Read upon Genesis 11.5.


as a horrible vice. It blotted Putiphar, it blotted David, and it blotteth and
blacketh who so ever is spotted with it.

9 When Abraham heard the Lords judgments against Sodom, What does he? A
true touched heart with regard of God and his brethren.
As we do in these days: Care not who sink, if we swim, pass not who
perrishe so we be safe. No no, such sinful vnfeelingnesse is far from the
heart of so good a man. And the Text tells us, He stood yet before the
Lord, and enters into a zealous and careful consideration, both of the
Lords glory, and Justice, as also of the good of as many faithful as might
be found in Sodom, and with all humilitye pleads for them both: his
words you see, and mark them well. O this heart, where is it now amongst
us, either to tender what profane tongues may speak of our GOD, or to pyttye,
and pray, against the intended punyshmentes of our Brethren? Alas, (as I
said) we care not for any man's woe, but our own, and this true love to God
and man is decayed amongst us. We will scarce pray for our near neighbors,
that live daily amongst us. Much less do the estates of many righteous people
in foreign countries affect us. But learn we in the fear of God, from our
father Abraham, here to have a better heart, whose true touch and hearty
speeches in this place, shall witness against us, if we do not.

Good men hope the best.
10 But why did Abraham dream of any righteous in so vile a place? Surely
because he was a good man, and hoped the best of all places. so teaching us to
leave that judging vain, and condemning brain, that we love too much. A good
heart hops God has his portion, and all be not bad.

11 If fifty, if forty, if thirty, if twenty, if ten righteous had been
found, Of what price Gods children are with him.
a promise from the Lord we see he^re, that he would spare the whole City
for their sakes, and shall we not see in it the price of his Children with
him, whatsoever the world thinks of them, as also what good comes many
times to the very wicked, by them and for them? The world hates and maliceth,
mocketh and contemns the godly, making more account of one profane Esau,
then of twenty true hearted Jacobs: but the Lord, whose love is life, and
worthy regard indeed, more esteems one Jacob, one true Israelite, one
faithful servant of his, then he does ten thousand worldlinges of
uncircumcised hearts and ears, yea ten of them shall stand before him, even
to turn him and alter him, as I may say, from anger to mercy, when he will
not vouchsafe, but for their sakes, to respect ten thousand thousand, of such
as the world has honored for magnificoes, and men and Women of great
account. O ever then may my soul and yours, seek and sue for the Lords lou^,
rather then the worlds liking, and say with the sweet singer of Israel: The
greater sort crave worldly goods,
and riches to embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make our hearts
more joyful and more glad
Then they that of their corn and wine
full great increase have had.
And let these dogs and swine of Sodom behold, whether good or evil
comes to a land, a City, a house, by such as fear God. For ten sake they
all should have found mercy, and have escaped this fearful plague of fire and
Brimstone from heaven, and are these then the hurtes of a place, the woes of a
commonwealth, such as must be not only weeded out, but dug and rooted out,
or else we shall not be well? O price with God, and profit to men, of such men
and women wheresoever they are, more then we think of, and let us ever
hereafter consider it better.

12 In that he calls them righteous in hope some were so, who yet were not
circumsised, plainly it shows, Salvation not tied to the Sacrament.
that in those days this popish doctrine was not hatched, ye salvation is tied
to the sacrament. If righteousness the^ might consist without circumcision, why
may not children now be saved without baptism, which is in the place of
circumcision, so long as no contempt, but Gods speedy visitation by death is
the cause. This is a new doctrine you see then, and not ours, which was
embraced and held of father Abraham so many hundred years ago. And I warrant
you this Angel which was Christ, controlleth not his speech as untrue, but
lets it pass as very right. And as he tyeth not righteousness and
salvation to the sacrament, so neither does he it to his own life, but even
then he knew it true, that Peter after long preached, that though God chose
him and his for his peculiar people, Act^. 10.
yet in all other nations also he might have, if it pleased him some.

13 When he asks whether the Judge of all the world should not do right, he
reasons from the Lords office, and teaches us, that with humble boldness
we may do so in our earnest desires: as shall not the father pity his child,
and help him, etc. Lord thou art my father then, for thy place sake, pity
me, help me, save me, and keep me, I beseech thee and pray thee, etc.

With what humility God is to be prayed unto.
14 In his title of dust and ashes, so often applied to himself, we see all of
us, both the humble conceit that this great Patriarch had of himself, as also
the reverent humility he spoke to his God withal. Two special things for our
use in these days, wherein we are puffed up, and swell with filthye pride and
forgetfulness of our selves, as though we were made of some far more
precious matter then dust and ashes, and wherein we speak to our God as
irreverently and rashlye, as ever did any profane mind, for many of us,
without any such spirit of lowliness and dread, as here was in Abraham, not
considering what we are, and what God is, how unworthy we are, to speak or
breath before him. But we swap us down in our places most irreverently, and
then we stare, and look, and gape, and yawne, and huddle and tumble up some
vnliked prayers of the Lord, not only without any profit to us, but to our
great harm, for so undutifully using the name of God. Well think hereafter
of this example of Abraham better, and amend both these faults.

15 It is worthy marking again, how Abraham iterateth his requests one after
an other, from fifty to ten, and yet the Lord is not angry, but hears him
patiently, and kindly makes answer to every one, he will not do it for so
many sake. And is he changed from this kindness now, if I do the like upon
occasion. No no, our God is one for ever, not subject to change, and therefore
bouldly and comfortably do as your need constrayneth, he will abide you, and
answer you as shall be fit.

O comfort
Lastly mark it, and forget it never, Abraham makes an end of entreating,
before God of hearing him. O sweet, O dear, and gracious God, what joy is
this, can my soul wish a greater mercy, then that I may speak on, and he
will hear, yea that I shall give over first, and not he, when once I sue unto
his Majesty? Lord make us profitable users of this mercy.

Chap. 19.
The cheefeheads be three. The care of God for the safety of his faithful, to
the 24 verse. A fearful example of his wrath against sin, to the 29. The
faull and fault of Lot, from thence to the end.


PArticular things in this Chapter, observe we may many, as in the former.

1 He calls them Angels, who before were called men, and therein we may note
the manner of the scriptures and word of God, Verse. 1.
how it uses by one place to lighten and expound an other, One place of
scripture expounds an other.
expressing more plainly to avoid doubt, what before was more obscure, and
might cause doubt. Again in so expressly saying they were Angels, that
foolish conceit is overthrown, that they were these three, the three persons
in Trinity, as also that most wicked blasphemy of some heathnish spirits, that
Sodom was destroyed by Necromancie, to wit, by fire procured by that art: when
the Lord as he uses, executed his wrath by his Angels.

2 When it is said in the 4 verse, from the young to the old, Verse. 4.
even all the people from all quarters. You see the state of that city, how
general the evil was, and how fearfully it had spread it self, through all
the veins and members of that place, that there was none good, but the spirit
of God says, all, all. A lamentable estate of any place whatsoeur, when
iniquity shall ouerflowe all, and would God we drew not toward such fearful
measure now under the Gospel, when it may be observed to a maygame, a Bear
bayting, a profane stage play upon the Lords day, and many such things, how
we compass the place round about, as here is said these Sodomites did, from
the young to the old, even all the people from all quarters. Verily the words
of the Holyghost to iumpe upon us, and may very truly be said of us, and the
Lord prevent by mercy and favor, in changing us from such lewd likings, that
such judgment and wrath do not iumpe also upon us, as it did upon these men.
Mark again you may, when he says all were such, the nature of sin how it
spreads and infecteth, first one and then an other, till it have gone over
all. It is the devils leaven, which stays not, till it have leauened the
whole lump, and therefore happy is the place where it begins not: for it
spreads quickly and largelye and dangerously.

3 Their shameless speech to have the men brought out that they might know
them, Verse. 5.
very notablye discovers unto us, Custom of sin.
the impudency that sin affects in time, when it once gets rule. Surely
it takes all modesty, and shame, and honestye away, and proves the saying
to be most true: Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. The custom of
sin takes away all sense and feeling of sin. At the beginning men shame
to have it known what they do, though they fear not to do it, and they will
use all cloakes and couers that possibly they can to hide their wickedness.
But at last they grow bold and impudent as these men did, even to say, what
care we. And why? Certainly because this is the course of sin in Gods
judgment, that it shall benum and harden the heart wherein it is suffered, and
so fear up the conscience and conceit in time, that there shall be no shame
left, but such a thick visard pulled over the face, that it can blush at
nothing, either to say it or do it. Behold these brazen browed wretches
here, who after long use of sin (no doubt at first more secret, are now come
to require these men openly, and to tell the cause, that they mighe know them,
without all shame or spark of shame, in and at so horrible abomination.
Marvel not then any more, that the adulterer blusheth not, the drunkard
shameth not, nor the blaspheming swearer, hides not his face. You see the
reason, custom to do evil in that kind, has utterly bereaved him of
feeling and shame, as it did these Sodomites. A heavy and fearful case, for
Gods plague is even at the door of such people, as you see it was here for
these Sodomites.

(...)

Shall Abimelech be cheerful that his hand is clean, and assure his heart
that God both s^^th it and regards it, Comfort in innocence how great.
and shall not we that know more delight in innocence, and be bold in the
comfort of a clear conscience, ^^^ecially when our just God must be judge* If
Abimelech an heathen believed God would not smite a faultlesse man, will our
dear Father smite his chosen children. when they be guiltless? O ever then
let it be our joy to have clean bosoms, and our comfort strong upon that
again, God will regard it.

4 Even a thousand times consider the manner of his answer here, how he does
not plead any pre-eminence of a King, Verse. 5.
or any authority to deal with such as were in his country as he listed,
but only pleads innocence, and a true meaning. No prerogative has any
calling to sin.
And shall Pagans go before us in understanding? Shall we which know so
much be of opinion that the fig leaves and poor couers of our Gentry, of
our Authority, of any thing in our selves, or our friends, may make our
sins now a days to be no sins? Can we dash the Lord out of his justice
with such Cards and colors? O learn of Abimeleck another lesson, that sin
is sin, as foul, as black, as ugly, as damnable in great ones, yea, even
in Kings, as in other. And as hot or hoter shall the Lords wrath be against
us, happily much more, for mighty ones shall be punished mightily.

5 We may also see in this King Abimelech the comfort of a clear conscience.
He does not hyde himself as Adam did, but bouldly reasons with the Lord,
and says: Did not he say she was my Sister? Read 1. Sam. 22.15.
Have I done any thing but with an upright mind? Great therefore certaynely is
the boldness and peace of a guiltless mind when one is wrongfully accused.

6 God knew the integrity of Abimelech, Verse. 6.
and does here acknowledge it, and will he not do the like by us, if our
innocence be as good? Surely we may be certain he will to our great joy, and
even with his own good liking. This example tells us so, and it is very
comfortable if we mark it.

Verse. 5.
7 Yea says God further to him, I have kept thee, least thou should sin
against me. O heavenly goodness of our God thus to care for one that professed
not his name. God keeps from sin a heathen, and will he not us if we seek
it?
Can this God suffer us, or will he suffer us to whom he has voutsafed the
blood of his own Son, to run headlong into sin, if we had hearts to beg
strength to the contrary, and to be afraid and loath to fall into so disliked
a course of his Majesty? Never, never. And therefore by this occasion let us
consider the same, as also whether the world, the flesh, the Devil, and all
sin haleth us, and with true heat with fervent spirits let us crave his
defense, Read 1. Sam. 25. verse 34.
be assured that he which kept thus Abimelech an heathen man from sinning
against Abraham and his wife, he will never cast our petition away, so good,
so honest, so liked of his Majesty: but will make us strong against all
fraylties of our nature, yea able to refrain and stand sound, though sin
be even present as it were, and the opportunity very great. If we love
holiness and purity we will ask, having such a comfort as this to move us:
and if we love to fall, we shall be left, he will not keep us, and woe be
to us one day.

8 Least thou should sin says he, and that against me. Ignorance
excuses not from sin, but from less or more.
In the first remember, that if he had wronged the woman, he had not known
it was any man's wife, but took her as she said, that she was his Sister,
yet sin says the Lord had it bin, and thou had sinned against me in
doing it. A good caveat for those that think ignorance shall salve sores, etc.
Surely they are far wide. Ignorance may excuse a tanto, but never a toto.
Ignorance may lessen faults, but not change their natures. Sin shall be sin
though I do it ignorantly. The latter teaches us, Sin against man is sin
against God.
that all sins against the second Table, and our duty toward our
neighbors, redound to the breach of the first Table also, and are challenged by
the Lord as offenses against his Majesty. Against me, against me, says the
Lord. By name, this sin of adultery and whoredom, it reaches to the Lord,
and stays not at the woman's husband, or the man's wife, and the Lord will be
revenged of it. Think of it ye adulterers and adulteresses, and know it
betimes: O note.
though ye may deceive man, and bleare his eyes with a thousand devises, of
love, of service, and profit by you, whilst in the mid way he loses by you
what no gold can redeem, yet never can you blind the Lord. The sin is
against him as well as the man, and no gifts, no bribes, no cunning, can stop
him nor stay him: as he is GOD, he will have vengeance for his part, and
thou must have as sour sauce to thy sweet meat, as his dreadful justice can
give thee.

9 Then says the story, Abimelech restord the woman to her husband. A true
testimony, Let knowledge reform what ignorance offended in.
and in deed the only testimony of a touched heart, when knowledge reformeth
what ignorance committed. As Soon as he knew, he restored her. Contrariwise,
when we persist in that afterknowledge, which want of knowledge let us fall
into, what touch is there, what token or testimony of God his working spirit?
Surely all is dead there, and the veins of spiritual life frosen up: that man
or woman's end shall be worse then their beginning, those later sins are more
ugly then the former, and hell and damnation have even seized and taken
possession of such souls to eternal woe.

10 When God says Abraham should pray for Abimelech: Verse. 7.
mark the high price that God makes of the prayers of such good men if they
may be gained and gotten. Secondly, that sins done in ignorance, and for
want of knowledge, yet need prayer. Thirdly, how by this means God deriu^th
both honor and safety to Abraham, a most gracious providence and comfort to
all that mark it. And lastly even chiefly observe and note it how acceptable
to God that the party offended and hurt should pray for him that did him the
wrong. O what an hard case is this, and what one amongst us may be drawn unto
it: yet even thus mild and sweet will the Lord have us if we please him.

Verse. 7.
11 Thou and thy whole house shall dye says the Lord to this man, Offense
after knowledge.
and yet he knew not that she was an other man's wife. O Lord how assuredly
then do they overthrow themselves and theirs, that know, and yet offend even
in despite of knowledge, of conscience, of God, and grace, and what motions so
ever they have to the contrary. Job 31.9
Will you remember what Job says: If my heart have bin deceived by a woman, or
if I have laid wayt at the door of my neighbor, then let my wife grind unto
an other man, and let other men bow down upon her. And why, and why? mark
what follows: for this is a wickedness and iniquity to be condemned says
he. Verse 11. Verse 12.
Yea, this is a fire that shall devour to destruction, and which shall root
out all my increase. O smarting wrath, how should it fear us. Hebr. 13.
Whoremongers and adulterers the Lord shall judge says another place. The Lord
even the Lord, whose love is life, and whose wrath is weeping and gnashing of
teeth for evermore.

For the sin of superiors inferiors also smart.
12 Mark again how the sin of the head, redoundeth in punishment upon the
members: and be sure that it is not only so with Kings to their subjects, but
also with Ministers to their flocks, Parents to their Children, Masters to
their servants, and all degrees. Contrariwise, if the chief be good, see how
the blessing reaches unto the whole family in some sort also. Luc. 19.9.
For to Zacheus it was said: This day is salvation come to this house, not to
Zache alone, but to this house, etc.

Verse. 8.
13 Observe it also how early this King rises in the morning, after he was
thus admonished to perform the Lords will, To def^rre amendment.
and even heartily consider with your self, that if a Pagan could not thus be
quiet to defer amendment after he was wakened and warned by God to reform
his fault: how is it possible that Gods spirit should be in us, and yet no
more touch, feeling, sense, remorse, nor amendment, then was in the days of
our ignorance and deepest darkness? Truly it cannot be but this heathen King
will accuse us in the great day if it be not better with us.

14 It is said again in the text if you mark it, A good thing to inferiors
the admonition of superiors.
that when he was up thus early, he called all his servants together and
tells them all: both to take away all suspicion of his fact with Abraham's
wife, and so to clear her credit which he was to be careful of, and also to
teach his servants by his example ever whilst they lived to beware. So
careful are good minds not only of themselves, but of their charge. And how
much the serious and earnest warning of so great a personage may do, I refer
to your experience. Would God such warnings and speeches were more often made
by such. But because you should not doubt of it, the spirit of God himself
has testified so much in this place, and says, they were all afraid. See
then the piercing power of a good exhortation or admonition made by a
superior. Therefore again I say greatly to be wishshed they would speak more
often.

The third part.
THe 9. verse. These things thus done, the King called for Abraham, and talks
with him: which teaches us, Verse. 9.
Religion is humble, and Atheism proud.
that a true touched heart indeed with the word of God is not proud nor
disdaynfull, but admits of far inferiors upon occasion to speech. If this
King had followed the customs of some in our days that be no Kings, nor Gods
neither, he would have sent out a message to Abraham by some page, boy or
woman, and have kept his state, with great disdain that a stranger as Abraham
was, should come to speech with his own person. But it is enough, Religion is
humble, and Atheism is proud and sirly as the Devil, for such heart, such
show.

2 What have thou done Abraham says he, etc. A phrase and manner of speech if
you mark it, Verse. 9.
that shows a wakened spirit in Abimelech from that great security whereinto
his carnal affections had cast him. And it is a speech that would wonderfully
profit us if we would use it to our selves now and then, demanding of our
selves what we have done. The drunkard, if God gave him an heart to say alas
what have I done, surely he would amend, so the swearer, the slanderer, and
such like.

3 What have we sinned says he, we, we. A notable estate when a Governor
joins himself with his people in this to avoid sin, Verse. 9.
caring that neither they nor he do any thing that may be sin and offend:
and still carry your eye upon it, how he calls sin, sin in himself
as well as any others, no way excusing or shifting or diminishing the matter
with respects of years, of estate, of frayltie, or any such like, and yet he
an heathen, and we Christians.

4 Upon me and my kingdom says he, full well confessing again that a
superior sins not to the hurt of himself alone. Verse. 9.


Verse. 9.
5 But how should Abraham bring a sin upon them? verily because he said
she was his Sister, Ministering occasion of sin.
and so gave occasion to the King to offend, to his own harm and his
kingdoms. Well then we learn that to give one occasion to sin, is to bring
sin upon him, Note.
and therefore we must make more conscience hereafter of ministering
occasions, then happily heretofore we have done.

Verse. 9.
6 Pass it not over how this heathen King caulleth taking an other man's wife
thus but upon ignorance not only a sin, Adultery by ignorance a great sin.
but a great sin, a strange sin, and a thing that ought not to be done. You
know our days, and the manners of the same, I say no more, your selves be
judges whether Heathens and Pagans shall not rise in judgment against some
that cannot say they knew not that she was his wife, and yet no remorse. Do
these men think there is a God? a hell, any damnation, or salvation? would God
they did. It would wring some grace out of them, if not for love, yet for fear.

7 In Abraham's answer, that he thought the fear of God was not in that
place, Verse. 11
The fear of God as a bank.
and therefore they would kill him for his wives sake. You see what holds
out, and what lets in all wickedness into a place, be it kingdom, or town,
or house. If the fear of God be there, the bank is strong, the fluds of lewd
life cannot ouerflow: but if it be not, no thing so horrible but it will enter:
yea even this in Abraham's judgment, that a man shall be murdered for his own
wife. Happy then is the place where this fear is, and curssed where it wants.

Lastly, the Kings gifts and liberality to Abraham, his kind offer of his
land to dwell in, his good nip that he gave to Sarah for her dissembling,
saying, he was her brother, whom God had given her for her husband, and to be
a veyle to shield her, and cover her from all harms, are good fruits of a
heart moved with that which God had said to him and for our instruction. Also
that Abraham prays for him heartily and unfeignedly, and is in perfect love and
charity with him, though somewhat he had wronged him is worthy noting. And
lastly, how when sin is reformed, God alters his punishments, and takes
them away, heals all the house whom he had closed up from bearing of
children, with such other things, are matters of profit to us if we mark
them. Blessed is that man and woman that hears God warning them, obeys his
warning willingly as this King did, abhors that which is evil with him, and
with speed and care reformeth things amiss, as he did, for such will all
godly Abraham's pray, and God by them will be entreated to take punishments
away, and to put mercies in their place to his great praise and their great
comfort evermore.

Chap. 21.
The general heads of this Chapter are these three. The birth of Isaac from
the 1. to the 14. The banishment of Agar from the 14. to the 22. The covenant
betwixt the King and Abraham.


THe first particular I note is this, the performance of that promise in his
appointed time that was made unto Sarah before in the 18. Chapter verse 10.
concerning a Son. Verse. 1.
God ever performs promise, but in his time not in ours.
It does assure us thus much, that the word has not passed Gods lips ever,
which proved not true, and shall prove true to the worlds end. Truth being
essential to him, and he never changeling: only this there is, a season and
time appointed, either revealed or otherwise, which we must expect. Tarry that
and all shall be well, for so did Sara here, and the godly elsewhere ever, and
had their desires.

Verse. 3.4.
2 Isaac is circumcised, and called Isaac at his circumcision, so have we now
our names at baptism. Our names remember us to be new men.
That Sacrament then, as this now, are sacraments and signs of our new birth.
Fitly therefore by the receipt of our names at such time should we ever when we
hear them be remembered, that we have promised to God and his Church that we
will be new men.

Verse. 6.
3 Sarah reioyseth at this gift of God in her old age and her husbands age,
Children should cause joy, and not distrust.
reproching therein and reproving plainly the couldnesse and dullness, the
blindness and unkindness of some, that having children given, not one, but
many, not in age only, but from youth to age almost every year, rejoice not,
but murmr fearing and distrusting, and far far from this good woman's
heart. She even danceth for joy in her mind, and says, who would have
thought, etc.

4 Sara gives this her own child suck, her self, Verse 7.
till it was to be weaned. That mothers should nurse their own children.
An ancient and good example to be followed of all women, that have no true
inabilitie indeed to deny it. For to this end has God provided nourishment
for it in the mothers breast, that it might be so. The earth also nourishes the
plants and herbs which she brings forth. The tree no less with her sap
and suck, the bows and branches that spring out of her. All other creatures do
the like, be they never so fearce. The Tygar, the Wolf, the Bear, and the
Lion, yet gentle to their young ones, and give them suck. Shall only women
more unkindly then any, deny them nourishment? The mother is content, when
she cannot see it, nor handle it, but has it in her body to nourish it, yea
and to abide many a sharp nip and pinche for it, eating this, and forbearing
that, as shall be best for her child she goes with: and when it is borne,
that they may see it, and h^^^le it, behold it, and joy in it, yea when it
lies in their lappes and cries, houldeth up a pair of little hands and
eyes, begging as it were, and entreating for Gods sake, to be nurssed and
nourished by them, rather then any other, is it not a hard heart, that can cast
it away, and put it to a stranger whose affection can be but frosen in
comparison at least for a while? Lastly the dangers of this are not few, if
they were well considered. For many a disease and ill quality is drawn with
the milk from a bad Nurse, beside that experience teaches us, that many
plants will never prosper, except they have of their own earth about them. All
these things then persuade us as much as may be, to follow Sarah here this
good Woman, and to nurse up our little Isaacs that God does give our selves.
Yet necessity has no law, I know it true, but let not wanton
unwillingness, nor unwilling, wantonness, be necessity. Judge of this thing
in a godly feeling according to your place, and other true circumstances, and
I leave it to you, I prescribe to none, neither say any more.

5 When the wayning time came, Abraham made a feast, yea a great feast, Verse 8.
says the text, and it teaches us the liberty of Gods children, Customs
ought not peeuishly to be carped at.
according to places and times wherein they live, touching such matters and
customs as this is. We our selves have our fashions and uses at birth, at
Baptism, at the mothers going to church to give thanks, in her lying in, etc.
What may well be done, and suffered and liked, let it not be peeuishly,
waywardly, spitefully, and unjustly traduced: For this very feast and fashion
of Abraham might be censured, if to find fault were to speak true, if malice
were zeal, and a froward nature were a good mind by and by. Surely as the
Apostle said, To the clean all things are clean, Tit. 1.15.
so say I to meek and modest minds, all customs that may any way be
charitably interpreted are acceptable, and as he says again, but unto them
that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their minds and
consciences are defiled, so say I unto those that are waspish, and wayward,
spiteful and froward, every thing that they fancy not, is unclean and
unlawful, either Heathnish or Jewish, or popish, or somewaye intolerable, and
their fancy is regularerum the rule of right, unto which all men's doings must
be framed, if there be peace. But there is a rule, that all godly minds
prefer before all such rules, to wit, even the rule of the blessed Apostle,
If any man lust to be contentious, 1. Cor. 11.16.
we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

Verse 9.
6 Ismael mocked Isaac and Sarah spyed it. The son of the flesh, Mocking and
mockers be odious.
the son of the promise. See in a figure the condition and order of the
world. The ungodly are mockers, gibers, flowters and flirers, at such as the
Lord has looked upon in more mercy, then he has upon them, and it is no new
thing. Patience must pass it over, and God will pay it home as he did this.
This mocking they take to be but a small fault, if any at all, but the Apostle
says it is bitter and cruel persecution. Peruse the place, Galat. 4.29.

Verse. 8.
Dislyke soon spyeth a fault.
7. That Sarah spied it, and not Abraham, the reason might either be in her
more usual being which the children then Abraham was, or in her affection,
which was not so good to Ismaell, as Abraham's was: he being Father, and not
she mother. Now we know it well, that mislike quicklye spyeth a fault,
when affection to the party is somewhat darker eyed.

8 She craves of Abraham, that both mother and Child may for this cause be
cast out, Verse. 10.
and though it grieved Abraham in respect of his Son, yet God in the end
joined with Sarah, Mocking punished.
and admonished Abraham that it should be so. It notes unto us how mocking and
scoffing flyring and gyring, pride and vanity, and the contempt of Gods
promises, never scapeth Gods judgment, but is both observed and punished some
way or other, first or last. Nay mark it more, which in deed is more, the
Childs fault is the mothers smarte also, Child's fault mothers woe also.
and she likewise must be cast out by Gods own sentence. For happilye she saw
and heard these mockes, and rebuked them not, but cockered and dandled such
wicked beginnings in her young impe: but very sure I am in our days many
foolish mothers do it, and are so vainelye pleased with their children, that
even their faults please them also. But let them mark this example, and
provoke not God. He is as able, and let them fear it, to cast both them and
their children out of his house for ever, as here Abraham was, these two out
of his.

9 The Text says, Verse. 11.
This thing was grievous unto Abraham. And we see in it, Grief betwixt the
best cupples.
what greefes faull out now and then betwixt the best couples. The one desires
and earnestlye seeks, what greeueth the other to the very heart. But what
then, Matrimony cease not to be the holy ordinance of God, though these
troubles in the flesh, 1. Cor. 7.
as the Apostle calls them intercurre.

The second part.
1 When God commands Abraham that he should do so, Ve. 12. etc
A notable glass for parents.
then mark how straight Abraham leaves, and forsakes all private affection
to child or mother, and obeys Gods commandment. So so must it be with us,
if Abraham his spirit be in us. And what an example should this be to all
Parents to govern their minds by. Abraham was godly, Ismael his own flesh,
and child, yet he executes the Lords will upon his own child, to his smart,
and upon the mother also, preferring Gods will before them both, and forsaking
them, rather then Gods commandment. What shall or can our doting affections
answer to this example? Murders, adulteries, blasphemies, and swearings, are
suffered by us, with many mo, and no correction done. No it is to be feared,
many of us had rather shake of all Gods commandments, then once make our
children smart a day. But be wise, be wise, and regard such good examples as
this, when we meet with them.

Verse 14.
2 It is said, that Agar wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba. As notable an
example for servants well placed.
A lively example of Gods justice upon servants, that being in good place
cannot be thankful to God, and dutiful to their masters, but will so behave
themselves, that they loose that place. Such wander many times up and down, to
their great grief and shame, and want both in back and belly those comforts
which they had very easily and largely, if they could have considered it. Nay,
which is more, their wandering and want, many times brings heavy and doleful
ends, to their ignominy in this world, howsoever they escape in the world to
come. Wherefore let all such as are well, and live well, be they servants or
other, remember this example of Agar, thrust out from so good a place, and now
desolately, and heavily, wandering with her poor child up and down the
wilderness.

Verse. 15.
3 And when the water of the bottle was spent, says this story, Affliction
follows afflict on when God will, and ever greater and greater, and the last,
worst.
she cast the child under a tree, and went and sat over against him a far
of, about a bow shoot, least she should see the death of him. First observe,
how affliction follows affliction, and one grief in the neck of an other,
when once God begins to exercise us. She lost her place, she wandreth in
the wilderness with her child, comfortless and desolate, the water of the
bottle is spent, and no more to be had, when the child cries for drink, and
is ready to dye for it: and lastly, she gives her child up to death, as she
thought, getting her far of, as unable to hear the cry of it. The least of
all which, was a bitter pange to her that tasted it. Let it school us if the
Lord so deal with us, we are not privileged, we have no immunitie. If the
cross come to us, as a thing judged fit for us of our God, we may not set him
a stint, and say thus much will I bear, and no more: but leave him to his own
good pleasure, expecting, and enduring even one upon an other, as thick, as
ever it shall please him to send them. Taking hold of his promise by a lively
faith, that he will never lay more upon us, then he will make us able to
bear, 1. C^^. 10.
but will give the issue with the temptation, that we may endure it. And
praying to his Majesty upon that promise, that for his mercy sake he would so
do. Nay, mark more here in this woeful Woman, that her last cross is the
greatest of all, namely the casting of her Child down under the tree, that it
might dye for want of drink, and going from it to be out of the cry. (...)
O fathers and mothers, but mothers especially, that know what love of children
means, consider of it. What heart had this woeful woman think ye, when she
laid down her child out of her arms, nay when she cast it down, as the
Terte says, like a woman all torn in pieces, and distracted almost with the
woe and wound of a payned heart? How did she look upon it, how did she
take her leave from it, when the Child cried, lyfted up his wa^rie eyes upon
her, stretched out hands and arms to go with her, and not to be left there
without her? What wringing gripes, what twitching pain, when she turned her
back upon it to go away* What depth of woe came her tears from, when she
set out the cry and wept so dearly? O heavy mother, if there were every any
in this world. O pitiful parting betwixt a mother and her Child. O sorrow
upon sorrow, and the last the greatest by a thousand degrees. Whose stony
heart bewayieth not, as we hear it, this ruthful case, of a poor Mother and
her Child?

Learn we then carefully, as I said before, both how cross follows
cross, and how still greater and greater, and the last the worst of all, if it
please God so, and let us harden our selves for it, in his holy fear, and not
be over tender. Secondlye observe we again the diverse passions of love
herein, either of parents to children, Diverse effects of love in friends.
or friend to friend. Some cannot be drawn from them either day or night,
when they are like to dye, and it is a great love, and a good. But here it is
otherwise, for the mothers heart cannot abide to see the child dye, and this
also because she loved it. So are many where they love entirely. Thus differ
our diverse natures even in one thing, and we have our diverse reasons upon
diverse circumstances. Blessed is the party, whose affections draws nearest
the Lords alowance, and an holy patience. Lastly consider it, and that not a
little how in this bitter agony, and most heavy plight, Agar rayleth not as
some do.
yet she neither opens her mouth against the Lord, nor against the means
of her woe Abraham and Sarah, no not against Sarah, that was the first and
chief cause indeed, to stir up Abraham to put her away. No curssing, no
banning, no rauing nor railing, is heard out of her. A very great commendation
of her, and a very great want in our days, in some, that think themselves no
common Christians, for that thing almost happens not cross to their minds,
but the very air almost is infected with their bannings, be it never so
small, and of no account. Their soul is acquainted with bitterness
altogether, and their tongues cannot but take like course. What would these
do, if they were as greatly grieved as Agar was. Nay whether would they have
sent Sarah, especially if they had been in her case.

Surely, surely, neither Abraham, nor Sarah, nor God I fear me, should have
escaped curses many and great, but for Sarah, she should have been curssed to
the deep pit of Hell ten thousand times and further, if sin there were any
further torment to be had for her. But learn. O si^ie and furious Spirits,
even by Agar here, an other lesson, follow it and use it with careful
hearts, if you mean not to brue for your selves in hell, what you wish to
others.

Verse. 17.
4 But what now of Agar and her child, in this depthe of distress and
danger? When gre^fe is at ^till then God is at hand. O sweet comfort.
O mercy and comfort, mark it if we be alive. When the grief is at the
top, and the case at the worste, when the world and all worldly means are
given over, then God is nearest, present, and at hand, and sends his Angel
to succoure this comfortless Woman and her Child, to his eternal praise and
her greater joy then ever tongue can tell. The Lord heard the voice of the
Child, says the 17 verse, and the Angel cried from Heaven to her. Who will
despair of God and his help whilst life is in him, that hears, and sees,
and marketh this? Shall it ever fall out, that the seed of Jacob shall want
relief, when Ismaell the mocker is not neglected? Cannot God forget his
promise, and let Ismaell dye, and can he forget all his promises in Christ
Jesus sealed, 2. Cor. 1.
and delivered in the blood of his Testament? yea and amen in him, immutable
and inchangeable forever, and cast away the care of us? O far be it from
our souls to think it, and our hearts to fear it. This is our warrante with
many more, when our case is worste, he sees and pittieth, hears and helps,
and will never forsake us.

5 See it again, how warelye the Text speaks, saying, Verse. 17.
God heard, and the Angel spoke. It does not say the Angel heard the voice
of the Child, and so cried. Least we should have left the Creator, and fled
to the creatures in our distresses. Call upon me in the day of trouble, says
the Psalmist, and I will here thee, I, I, Psalm. 5^.
and neither Angels nor Saints. They shall help as GOD appoynteth them, I
mean the Angels, but God hears and pyttieth, and directs all.

6 When it is said, The Lord opened her eyes, Verse 19.
and she saw a Well of water to give the Child drink of. It teaches us
all, that except God open our eyes, we can neither see nor use the means
which are yet before us. The Child grew and dwelte in the wilderness,
sorrow was turned into comfort by the Lords mercy, and touching outward
things, God caused him to prosper. His mother took him a wife also, in his
time, to note the authority of parents, and obedience of children in that
matter, and those days.

The third part.
Verse. 22.
COncerning the covenant betwixt Abimeleck and Abraham, True piety purchases
true reverence.
which is the third general head in this Chapter, you see the occasion of it
in the 22, verse. Namely because they saw God to be with Abraham in all that he
did. See we by it, how the godly are feared, even of men far greater then
themselves, for their holy walking before the Lord, and his gracious
countenance to them again. Mark. 6.20.
So we read of Herod, that he feared John, and reverenced him, because he was a
just man and holy, not for any worldly pomp or outward strength that he was
able to make, to hurt him by, for his coat was heary, his girdle of a skin:
and yet stracke the virtue of his life, and majesty of his calling through the
golden Robes of Herod to his very heart, and made him afraid of him. Great is
the power then of true virtue, and would God we would mark it, as also the
dignity of the calling of the ministry, if it be maintained.

2 The kings request being honest, note also how easilye Abraham yields his
consent unto it. Ever a virtue in good men to be gentle and courteous, and
easy to be entreated, for lawful things. The contrary, a foul vice,
wheresoever it is morositie and frowardness even in every thing.

Cost is not ever well spared.
Lastly that Abraham gives sheep and beenes, etc. learn we not only, how
lawful, but how wise a thing it is, and commendable, both to get and
maintain peace with our cost sometimes, and that it is not ever by and by well
spared, that pinchingly and peltingly is spared. But it is even verified in
that many and many a time, penny wise and pound foolish. Thus this chapter
ends, and we may end also with David's remembrance concerning wisdom, that
the fear of God is the beginning of it, a good understanding have all they
that do thereafter, Psa. 111.10
and the praise of it endures for ever.

Chap. 22.
General heads in this chapter, these cheefely. The commandment of God to
have Isaac sacrificed. The obedience of Abraham. The deliverance yet that God
gave at the pinche.


1 OF particulars this first, that it is said after these things, Verse 1.
God did prove Abraham, etc. That is, (...)
after so many trials now already passed and spoken of, yet God tried him
again, and harder then ever before, namely in the sacrificing of his own and
only son. What should we learn by it, but this, that there is no time
limited, no age freed, no person exempted, no not Abraham in his oulde age, but
whilst life lasts, so long shall Gods exercises be incident unto us. And even
still the later the greater peradventure, if so God think it good, yet all for
the best, for either they make our faith and virtue appear, and so God is
glorified for his graces given unto us, and others are helped by our example,
or else our infirmity shows it self to the greater humbling of us, and
driving us to prayer, for greater strength, Remember also the great honor that
Abimilech the King had showed him presentlye before, and now mark what
follows the death of his Son, for any thing he knows. Thus is the life
of Gods Children, a mixture of sweet and sour, and a continual interchange
of sorrow and comfort, comfort and sorrow.

2 Let us observe the degrees or amplification of this cross of Abraham, by
some circumstances that are laid down, The circumstances that amplify this
trial.
as first, that Abraham must take him and sacrifice him his own self, and
with his own hands, a great matter, and far more then if he had given him
over to an other. Secondly of the person to be taken, who was he, thy son
says the Text, and not thy servant. Thirdly thy Son, and not thy wives Son
alone, as some sons be. Fourthly, vnicum thy only Son Isaac. Fiftlye,
whom thou love, all circumstances of great moment, and greatly to be (...)
of us, that we may know in what sort God, God will be bold with us his
creatures, and workmanship, when it pleases him. We must not think it
strange, to be exercised even in those things that are dear unto us. But
whatsoever they are, still to remember, that he which loves any thing more then
God, Luc. 14.26.
is not worthy of him. Sixtlye that he must go with him three days journey
ere he offered him. For the old saying is acerbissimae mora quae trahit paenam,
and misericordiae genus est cito occidere morti destinatum. Bitter is the
delay, when punishment must follow, and it is a kind of mercy to kill
quicklye, who appointed once is to be killed. Certainly, the griping thoughts
and twitching passions, that Abraham felt in his mind during these three
days, made this trial of his far greater, then it had been, if presentlye
he should have smit that blow. Lastly, that he must offer him for a burnte
offering: O depth of trial, able to have swallowed us up, a thousand of us:
both to lay his hands upon his dear Son, and then to burn him to ashes,
when he had done, his own self making and tending the fire, till all was
done, and putting piece after pe^ce into the flame, when any was without, and
with his own eyes to see all this, and to look upon it. Here is a trial, to
tell us what God may do, if it please him. This he did to one far better
then any of us, and yet we must be nice, and tender, and dayntie, and if GOD
touch us but with the ache of a finger, or a toe, we straight think he
deals hardelye with us, and he has forgotten his love. But O learn,
learn, and see this.

The second part.
THen Abraham rose up, says the Text, etc. Verse. 3.
Here we see the most wonderful obedyence that ever we read of, A ra^e
obedience.
joined, or rather flowing from a notable faith and both of them held ^ppe with
the ordinarye proppes, no doubt of Gods truth and omnipotency. The nature of
which, is either to vphoulde other. For his truth vphouldeth his omnipotency,
and his omnipotency his truth. And this his obedience is set out even from the
beginning, to the lifting up of the very knife.

2 We may here observe, How the commandments of God seem so hard, ^r to
whom.
what makes the commandments of God seem so hard unto men. Surely not so
much the nature of the commandments, as their nature to whom they are given,
which being crooked and corrupt, marvelously fights and rebelleth against
the same stronglye. For say to an angrye, furious, and hot bludded man, thou
must forgive, and love thy neighbor, bless him, when he cursseth thee, do
good to him, when he does hurt to thee, etc. Out he cries, it is
impossible, how can a man obey such a law? But say to an Abraham, that is,
to one that is borne again, and regenerated by the Spirit of God, in such
sort as Abraham was, who has now God reigning in him, in steed of oulde
corruption, offer thy only Son, beeloued and dear to thee, even with thine
own hands, and burn him when thou have done, for a burnte offering, and you
see here, he will do it without grudging, or gaynesaying. So sure is it,
that if the Lord have altered our nature, His yoke is easy, Math. 11.
and his burden is light.

Well therefore, may we say it is with us sinful men, as it is with sick
folks, who wonder at the stomachs, myrthe, and cheer, of the whole, and
think it a very hard matter to do so. But where is the hardness? Is it in
the thing, or in the weakness of the sick?

So I say is it, when we think any part of Gods law so hard and hard,
as many do.

3 In that it is mentioned, he rose early, to accomplish this business, therein
has the Holyghost made manifest, not only his great obedience, but his
wonderful alacrity and forwardness in the same, a strange example in so
hard a matter. But what can not Gods spirit effect, if it be powrefull in
Man or woman.

Friends earthly affections must be warely prevented
4 He makes not his Wife privy for any thing we can see in the Text, and as
we may conjecture, for fear she should hinder him by any womanly weakness or
motherlye tears, from his bounden and purposed obedience. Which if it were so,
fitly does it admonish us to do the like, when we justly can think, that our
friends affections will any way tempt us or totter us against the Lords
commandments.

5 Abraham took the wood of the burnte offering, and laid it upon Isaac his
son, Verse 6.
to go toward the place of death that God had appointed. A figure of Christ.
Behold a lively figure of Jesus Christ, bearing his own cross toward the
place of execution, even as young Isaac does here the wood to burn himself
withal, though as yet he knew not so much, and in the end God prevented it.

Verse. 7.
6 Behoulde the fire, and the wood, says Isaac to his father, How to answer in
things yet hidden.
but where is the Lamb for the burnt offering. O prick and wound to the
Fathers heart no doubt, when the Child thus spoke. But he was resolved, God,
not natural affections must now be obeyed. Therefore he takes courage to
him in a godly determination, and conceyling all still from the Child,
answers him, My son God will provide him a Lamb for a burnt offering, and
so went on with the Child still. In which answer of his being of Gods
providence, in a case hidden and secret, as yet, we are notablye taught in all
distresses, what to hope, and what to say: Surely even as Abraham did to his
Child in this place, Dominus parabit, The Lord shall provide. If the wife
say with Tobias wife, what shall we do, we are poor, where shall we have
bread for our Children, where this, and where that. O be content, The Lord
shall provide, is a good answer, a fit answer, and the answer of father Abraham
in this place to his son. Lord give us faith, and thou never prouidest more
notably a Lamb to save young Isaac here, then thou will also provide
necessaryes for us to save our lives, till the time appointed of thee.

7 But now the matter can be no longer hidden: for they are come to the place,
and the deed must be done, Verse 9.
Abraham therefore builds an Altar there, and couched the wood, and bound
Isaac his Son, and laid him upon the Altar upon the wood. Though the Text
speak nothing of any speech of Abraham to his son, yet like it is, that ere
he bound him, he showed him Gods commandment, where unto his son readilye
submitted himself. What Abraham said when he bound Isaac.
Josephus takes upon him to tell us more, and supposing so strange a thing
could never be done without some dialogue betwixt the Father and the Son,
he says it was in this sort.

First the Father spoke to his Child and said: O my son, dear and beloved,
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1 cap. 13.
with great care and diligence have I hitherto brought thee up, whom with a
thousand desires I wished before I had thee. Thinking nothing more happy a
comfort for me, then if I might live to see thee a man, and leave thee in my
place, the possessor of all that I have when I go. But behold, it seems
good to him now, that gave thee to me, to take thee from me again, and that
I should loose thee. Which since it is so: O my gracious Child, endure this
sacrifice: for I yield to God for my own part, who seeks this service of
us, for his continual favor toward us, both in peace and war. Thou art
borne by nature to dye a death at sometime, and now thy death must not be
common, but of thine own Father, to the Father of all flesh thou must be
offered in Sacrifice. As it seems, his mercy deeming thee unworthy to dye,
either by sickness, or war, or any other calamity. But taking thy soul
from thee in the midst of prayers and holy service to his Majesty, he will
place thee with himself: where as one mindful of the end wherefore I have
brought thee up, thou shall underprop mine age, and be my comfort, not of
thy self and by thy self, but thou shall leave unto me God my defense and
comfort in thy place. Then answered Isaac the worthy Child of so good a
Father, and said unto him.

O my Father, I am content unworthy ever to have been borne, if striving
against the will both of God and thee my Father, I should not willinglye endure
that determined by you both, which if none but thy self would have my dear
father, I would not deny thee.

Thus (says Josephus) spoke they each to others, and then all things being
ready, up went the knife to give the blow, had not God of his infinite
goodness stayed the hand. But O mercy memorable for ever and ever in the
Lord, who will not the parting of such a father and such a child as yet, but
staying the matter, alters the grief into all joy, and delivering the
father his child again, sends them both home together with as cheerful
hearts as ever had any cupple, no question in this world after any danger.
Lamentat. 3.27.
What two examples be these for us to mark? The father showing us what it is
to be used to the yoke from a man's youth as he was, surely it makes hard
things easy, and even the very greatest things to be better performed then
ever they would, if such exercises often had not been. The Son teaching us
what grace is effected by such gracious education as no doubt this Child had.
And both of them laying before our eyes, such a pattern of obedyence to
Almighty God, even to the loss of life, as never we should forget, but
beseech God with daily prayers, that we may come as near unto, as any case
of ours toward his Majesty, shall require ever.

The third part.
Verse. 12.
IN that God forbids now at this pinche, this sacrifice of Isaac to be made
by his Father. We may well consider how careful the Lord is, least by any
example of any commanded thing by him, others should take occasion to do the
like, without like warrant from him. Which happilye in this case would have
been done, if he had not stayed Abraham's hand, but suffered the matter to be
accomplished and effected. Men would peradventure have rashlye judged such
sacrifices to have pleased the Lord greatly, and so have often done wickedly.

2 Let us mark here, when the Lord came to deliver here. Verse. 10.
Not till the Knife was up, and even ready to strike. Read the note upon
Genes. 21. ver. 17. I^^. 11.
It teaches us for our selves, even then especially, to look for his help,
when in man's eyes we are but gone. Yet must we trust no further to his help,
then we make our attempts by his warrant. For we see he did not the like to
Ieptha.

3 The Angel calls, and forbids, Verse. 11.
when as God could have stayed him by a secret power if he would. Why can
Angel stays Abraham.
And why was this? Surely to instruct Isaac further, that what his Father did,
was by Gods commandment. Secondly to show him what singular care and favor
God had over him, and toward him, who so notablye would deliver him by an open
Angel from Heaven. And thirdlye, that all the world might learn by it, that
they must have very good warrante, either to begin, or leave of, any thing
belonging and done to honor God by.

4 Now I know, says the Lord, etc. Verse 12.
When he knew before very well, what heart was in Abraham toward his
glory. But thus would God commend unto all the world, the adjoining of
outward works to inward faith. Consonant unto which is Paull the Apostle,
when he requires a faith that works through love, Romans 10.9.
and tells us that as well With the mouth we confess unto righteousness, as
with the heart believe unto Salvation, also our Savior himself who requires
to the inward acknowledging of him in the heart, the outward profession of him
before men. Math 10.
Iam. 2.27.
This is that which S. James means, when he says, Abraham our Fathe was
justified by works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the Altar. See thou
not says he, that the faith wrought with his works, and through the works
was the faith made perfect, How says does justify and how works
etc. That is, Abraham by this means was known and declared to be justified,
and his faith being effectual and fruitful by works, was thereby known to
be a true faith, and not a dead faith. For S. James speaks not of the causes
of justification, but by what effects we may know, that a man is justified.
True is the distinction therefore even of the Schoolmen themselves. Christ
does justify a man effectiue effectually, by working his justification, faith
does justify a man apprehensiue, apprehendinglye because it takes hold of
Christ, who is our iustifier, and works do justify also, but declaratiue,
declaringly, because they show that a man is justified, as has been said. So
Christ, faith, and works, do all justify, but diversely. True also is it
that Bernard says, works are via regni, but not causa regnandi, the way to
the kingdom, but not the cause of reigning there.

Verse. 12.
5 I know says God, but what does he know? That thou Abraham, The
fountain of obedience to God.
says he, fear God. Then behold the fountain of all obedience, the fear
of God, and the witness again of the fear of God, true obedience, which
being true, as it is most true, woe and bitterness to the inhabitants of the
earth, if the Lord be not merciful for our obedience being turned into
daily, fearful, and most careless rebellion, where is our fear of his
Majesty become? Surely the Fountain is dammed up and stopped, and therefore
no fruit can flow therfrom. Let every man priuatelye apply this, and say
with himself, I think I fear GOD, but if GOD give judgment of my fear by
my obedience, as he did here of Abraham, how will all prove, etc,

Verse. 12.
6 Because thou have not spared thine only son, says God, God accepts
will for work.
and yet he was spared. But this is the nature of our good God, to accept in
mercy our will for our work, and a ready endeavor even for the deed it
self, if he would not suffer us to go any further: but this, when the word
goes before to guide the will and not else. For those Baals priests being
destitute of the word, though they lanced themselves never so deep, yet
neither in will nor work pleased the Lord. And it is a good place also of
Paul, not sparing the body, etc. Coloss. 2. verse last.
So then with this cave at let us gather great encouragement to serve him, who
will in respect of our ready mind acknowledge that we have not spared this or
that, when in deed yet it is spared though not by us. Can we fear or doubt of
reward if we do it when ready will is thus regarded? Or does that doctrine of
God condemn good works, which thus assures us good will is respected? yet
ever beware to exclude Gods mercy, and to put in place of it the works merit.

7 Consider what I shall now note unto you, and regard it with me from your
hearts. Is Abraham's willingness to offer his Son, a token of love and great
affection to the Lord? So says the Lord here, and so he takes it, even as a
work that was done for his sake, and which but for his sake could not have bin
obtained at Abraham's hands for either gold or silver, by all the men in the
world. O hearts of ours then that they could feel. O eyes of ours that they
could see. What affection was it in the Lord to us, not to lay only his own
and only Son beloved and innocent upon the altar of the Cross for us, and
to heave up the knife as ready to do it, but in deed to do it? O love of
loves, what love was this, and what affection to us was this? Abraham was
commanded of our God who could command. Abraham should have sinned if he had
refused, so should not God. Therefore if the one show love in Abraham a
creature, what does the other in God the creator? Well might it be said with a
vehemence, So God loved the world. Ihon. 3.
So I say and so as no tongue is able to speak of it, nor pen write, nor heart
think. The Lord give faith and thankful feeling evermore.

8 Abraham thus stayed from sacrificing his Son, yet failed not of a
sacrifice in his room, but lifting up his eyes, Verse. 13.
he saw a ram caught by the horns in a bush, God will provide for his
service if we truly purpose it.
him he took and offered. Now remember we what Abraham said to his son
before, that the Lord should provide him a Lamb. Was it not so? Did not God
provide this ram to supply young Isaac his place? No question he did, and no
chance but Gods guiding hand brought him thither, and fastened him there. What
should we learn then by it, but this, that if our hearts be set in deed to
serve the Lord in our place and calling, certainly he will never suffer us to
want the thing that shall be necessary and expedient for us thereunto. A great
comfort and a true.

Verse. 13.
9 Abraham takes the ram, and yet none of his own: but Abraham was assured
no doubt that it was Gods doing, and being so, he makes no scruple to accept
of Gods offer and providence, 1. Kin. 17.4.
no more then Eliah made question how the ravens came by the meat which they
brought him. We cannot follow Abraham, except we had his warrant.

10 Abraham calls the place, the Lord sees, or provides, Verse. 14.
showing therein his care to continue the memory of Gods mercy, not of his own
fact, though in deed it was most notable, for if he had, he would have given
some other title that should at least have glaunced that way, but he does not,
and so should we ever seek the Lords glory, and not our own. Surely if we
honor him, he will honor us enough etc. Mo things might be noted in this
Chapter, but let these suffice.

Chap. 23.
Two things in this Chapter especially. The death of Sara, verse 1. and 2. Her
buryall 3. to the end.


IN mencioning so precisely the age and death of Sara, we may note the singular
account that the Lord made of her, Verse. 1.
and if we mark it well, we shall see it a prerogative above all other women.
So would ye Lord by all means encourage us to serve him.

2 In that a woman who by nature is not strong, GOD strong, though we be
weak.
in such troubles and griefs many times as she had, such remoues and travels
through foreign countries should live so long, how notes it the power of God
greater then any weakness, and how should it comfort us against any infirmity
of body whatsoever.

3 When it is said that Sarah died, though she lived so long, The tale that
shall be told upon all.
remember ever the tale that shall be told of all flesh first or last, he is
dead, she is dead. Thus you hard in the fifth of this book of a great sort that
ever they dyed were their years never so many. Again it teaches us that
there is both a better life and a worse death then here is in this world,
otherwise what prehemine^ce had Gods children over the wicked, since they dye
as well as they?

4 But where dyed she? the text names the place, Verse. ^.
in Kiriah-Arba in the land of Canaan. Thus did the Lord place and set down in
that country certain pledges and pawnes, to assure the rest that he would in
time give that land unto them as he had promised, and they should possess it.
So may we now be assured of the kingdom of heaven, that for so much as many of
our brethren and sisters are already there placed, and have taken possession
before us, surely we also shall follow, and he will give that land, even that
heavenly Canaan and new Jerusalem for ever and ever.

5 Abraham lamenteth his dead, but not the estate of his dead. So did Christ
our master sorrow for his friend Lazarus. So are we permitted by the Apostle
keeping a measure as men and women that are not without hope. Ioh. 11* 1. Th^^^
^* Syrach ^
So does the wise Syrach counsel us, and so has all laudable custom ever
allowed. This moderation appeared in Abraham, for in the very next verse it is
said, Abraham arose, etc.

6 He talked with the sons of Heth. (...)
Where we see and learn, that so we should give place to sorrow, that in the
mean while we regard also things necessary, as ye burial of our friends and
such like: otherwise, our passions be impatiences, and as (...) the Lord
greatly, so all wise men will mislike us worthily.

7 He tells them he is a stranger, etc. a great token of his rare humility
and lowliness of mind, though he were in many respects a very great man. Then
he seeks nothing amongst them, but for his money, as good a testimony that
way again of a contented mind, though he possessed nothing amongst them.

8 Nay say the Hittites, my Lord thou art a prince of God amongst us, Verse. 6.
take therefore our chiefest places and bury thy dead in, a very great
kindness and curtesye on their parts again. And let us mark in it that
humanity and bounty bear a most glorious show even in heathens. O how can
such virtues then disgrace Gods servants and professors of a better doctrine
then ever heathen knew?

9 Abraham bowed himself unto them, and yet they were heathens, Verse. 7.
Pride and disdain.
to show, that he well esteemed both them and their kindness. But we have
not so much good nature many of us to our own brethren that are of the
househould of faith with us, what love soever they show unto us. Pride and
disdain and scorn are the flowers of our garland, and yet none so good
Christians as we, if we might be our own judges.

Verse. 11.
10 Diverse offers are made him in great good will without any money, Why
Abraham would buy and not take of gift. Read 2. Sam. 24. verse 24.
but Abraham would not so accept of them. He will buy for his money, but not
take it of gift. And why so? happily because he would not receive at man's hands
as beholden to him for it, what God had so often and so assuredly promised to
give him. He would not prevent Gods gift in any part.

Lastly, you have here the name of current given to money, to note the use of
it, not to be hoorded up and lie in a corner, but to pass from man unto man
according to his name. Verse. 16.
We read that money was first leather, Money why called current.
then brass, then silver, then gold: but what says one? I pray you note it.
Quibus gradibus creuit pecuniae materia, iisdem decreuit antiqua mundi
simplicitas, probitas, and integritas. Look how money increased from baser to
better, by the very same steps did the world decrease from good to worser: for
the world was first golden, then silver, then brass, now leather or lead, or
worse if any worse thing you think good to name. Money is better and men
worse, the chest stored with better substance, and the soul filled with worse
sins, yea even with all sins that so sinful a world can bring forth and
infect withal.

Chap. 24.
In this Chapter especially consider these things. The counsel and
commandment of Abraham touching a wife to be taken for his son. The
obedience and care of his servant in that behalf. The contract or matrimony
it self.


MOre particularly mark in the first verse that Abraham is both old and rich,
Verse. 1.
and let the use of it be this to assure our doubting minds, God can (...) at
all times.
that God is able to sustain us, when ripeness of wit, valor of body, and
all natural power to work, labor, toil, and draw with the world are gone.
Yea not only to sustain us, but with very great abundance to bless us, as
here he did Abraham. And therefore tie not God to years, nor his mercy ever
to the measure of your wit. But fear God in youth, serve him in age, and be
assured that neither youth nor age shall want the benefit of his merciful
providence. Away with that speech, that if we be not grown at 20. wary at 30.
and rich at 40. there is never hope either of strength, wisdom, or wealth,
for God is free, and not tied to times.

2 But how came Abraham by his riches? Verse. 1.
the text answers the Lord had blessed him in all things. Gods bless^ng
makes rich.
Thereby giving the wealth of Abraham to the Lords mercy, and not to his own
industry. So it is said elsewhere, Benedictio Dei facit diuites, and benedictio
Dei super caput iusti. Prou. 10.
The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and the blessing of the Lord is upon the
just. Earthly wretches ascribe all to their own labors, policies, and
fetches, but such unthankful hearts were there ever.

In a strange Country God can enrich.
3 Pass it not over also unnoted where or when God made him rich, surely in
strange countries, and when he was a very traueler and passer from place to
place, not stayed nor placed any where. Even then in this wandering time which
the old saying is does not gather moss, yet God was able to bless him, and
to make his store increase. Surely in such places it had bin great power in God
to let him still pass amongst them with life, though he had left him and let
him be poor. But the Lord would even this also: and therefore where, where, is
not God able to do for his if they please him?

Verse. 2.
4 Abraham said to his eldest servant etc. Then we see in Abraham's house,
Degrees of servants and order in Abraham's house.
orders and degrees, respects and regards diverse of such persons as served him
according either to time or qualities, or some circumstance justly moving
thereunto. This we may follow in our days, wise men do it, and God disliketh it
not.

Verse. 2.
5 The putting his hand under his masters thigh, notes unto us the form and
manner of private oaths ministered privately in those days of superiors to their
inferiors: Putting his hand under his thigh, what.
for publicly equal persons did otherwise. Or if you will, it shows the
servants obedience toward his master, and his masters power over him.

6 If we consider the titles that Abraham gives unto God, here they set out
the terror of his majesty, Verse. 3.
and the might of his power, What men should think of, that take an oath.
as also that to him which is about to swear, nothing i^ more fit to be
thought of, then the power of God to punish falsehood, if it be auoutched with
an oath in his name. The forgetting whereof, makes many a man and woman cast
themselves and their souls headlong into great dangers.

7 That exception that you see the old man take here against the daughters of
the country, Verse. 4.
and his express commandment for a wife to be taken to his child out of the
number of the faithful, teaches us notably if we have Abraham's spirit in us,
Religion chie^ely to be respected in marriage.
to give Religion and the true fear of God the upper hand of all honor,
friends, wealth, and glory of the world whatsoever, in all matches and marriages
that we shall make either for our selves, or our friends, children, or charge.
Confer it with Genesis 28. Deuteronomy. 7. v. 3. 2. King. 8.18. where the like doctrine
is taught.

8 Pass not over again in this talk of Abraham about the marriage of his
son without noting, Parents authority in childrens marriages.
what power the parent then had over the child in guiding his choice, and not
leaving him liberty directly without cause to stray from his liking, oppose it
against the licentious rage of children in these days, whose wit and only wit
in this case must be followed, say parents to the contrary by grave experience
whatsoever they can. Yet stands it fast even in this matter as in all other,
he that despises me, shall be despised of me, and he that despises parents,
despises God who has said, thou shall honor thy father and thy mother etc.
Now shall children think that honor of word, cap, or knee, is due, and the
greatest matter of all others either to their own good or parents comfort,
belongs no further to them then they list? It cannot be. Therefore who so in
this matter takes not parents good advise and consent, he despises God, and
the curse does rest upon him without repentance.

9 In the 5. verse the servant reasons with his master, and puts a case.
Consider in it I pray you and learn, Verse. 5.
how it is not enough only to beware of forbidden evil, when a man takes an
oath, but care also must be had least in things commanded we offend, not
knowing the full drift and scope of the Commandment. And for this cause does
this servant thus question with his master.

10 Beware says he, that thou bring not my son thither again, Verse. 6.
meaning into his own country out of Canaan And why think you? surely least he
should lose the inheritance promised him there by God. Why was ye matter now in
any likelyhod? truly no. Abraham's great faith.
Abraham was but a stranger in Canaan yet, neither had any more possession then
the sepulcher that he bought there for to bury his wife in. But by his faith
which wauered not one jot in Gods promise, he possessed even the whole land,
and therefore he would not suffer his son to be removed thence to the woman,
if the woman would not come to him. O that we had such faith to believe what
is promised us, and to expect it with assuring hope, then should our hearts be
free from many cares that now oppress them, and we possess to our good
content what yet in man's eyes we have no hold of.

11 In the 7. verse, Abraham makes mention of the Lords calling of him out of
his own Country, Verse. 7.
into that where he now was, and so stays himself upon that, that by no
means he will doubt but God will go forward with his mercy begun in this and
by this his calling. So, so, and even so should all we be in that calling
whatsoever unto good that God voutsafeth us. As for example, if the Lord have
called us into the land of light by hearing the word preached unto us, Note
well.
or any other good means whatsoever, neither should the world, nor wants of
men, neither any thing in this life, make us return to the land of darkness
again. So of Magistracy, or Ministry, or such like, the calling of God
should be our strong stays to go through with it against all assalts to the
contrary. But especially this is a place, and an example for them that for any
earthly preferment in marriage of their children, can be very well content that
they should be carried from Canaan even again and again to Mesopotamia, that
is, from the grace and light of God which he has given, and from the place
where he has promised to give an inheritance into the mists and clouds of
old ignorance again, and all damnable superstition. Abraham here abhors
it though his son should lose his wife thereby: and surely as he should be
our example to follow ever, so shall he be their condemnation that will not do
it.

The arguments of Abraham's faith.
12 Mark again in this verse the arguments whereby Abraham strengthens his
faith. First he aledged the deed of God in these words, qui eduxit me, which
brought me out. Secondly his promise, qui loquutus est and iurauit, which spoke
unto me and swear. And why does he not allege his own doings, and say,
because I obeyed him, and left mine own country for him, or because again I
offered to kill this son of mine when he bad me, and to offer him up in
sacrifice to him or some such like? surely because the children of God were
never acquaynted with bragging of their own works, and putting God in the nose
with their own merits. Some do it, and alas will not see how they offend in
it, but men and women possessed with Gods saving spirit, never did it, neither
will do it. Abraham knew merits in him were no such props to his faith, as
mercies in God, and therefore silent in the one with comfort he aledgeth and
remembers the other. So let us do if we have no calling but the common
calling of Christians. And if we be further either Magistrates, or Ministers,
or such like, then consider also how fitly we may do it. For as Abraham had
the deed of God in bringing him out, so have Magistrates and Ministers, in
giving them that place. And as Abraham had his promise, and his oath, verily so
have they, that he will be with them in the cause of justice, 2. Chro. 19.6.
Matthew. 28.
and in their ministry to the very worlds end. Be it concluded then in
our souls for ever, that the Angel of God shall be with us, as here Abraham
speaks, so long as we live, to honor God by a faithful service, and not our
own selves by some subtle seemings, for God sees.

13 I cannot but remember you of it also, how when the servant puts the case
the woman would not come so far, Abraham does not bid him tell her what
wealth she shall have, what riches and treasure, and that his son should
have all, or so forth, but he answers by his trust and assurance that the
Lord would move her and bring it to pass if it were his liking, and therefore
he says, the Lord shall send his Angel, etc. Thus ever ever does Religion
persuade one way, and earth, and flesh, and the world, and other way.

Verse. 8.
14 But if she will not says he, then etc. Where we see how fully doubting
minds are to be instructed. Doubting ^indes should be fully taught.
Often times do we promise good unto men in the name of the Lord, and we hope
it shall come to pass, yet wisdom would that we should more fully teach and
say as here Abraham does. But if she will not etc. That is yet if God will not
thus and thus do for causes known to his own wisdom and not unto us, then
this and this shall be your estate, etc.

15 Only bring not my Son back again says he, repeating again what he
had once given in charge before, and we noted it. O constant heart, does to
abide himself, and to keep his posterity in a strange country, being once
called thither, although with wealth he might return, and with his own
kindred peradventure live more quietly. What a thing in a godly man's heart is a
place appointed him of God. How is he not fickle and fugitive only for greater
worldly good, without any direction from a better cause? Yea how must not a man
like without God his liking, nor carue for himself a portion of this world
where himself likes, but where the Lord will be content, remaining constant,
and with the same contented, till the Lord give a going out. Abraham had his
griefs here no doubt, and probably may we think the Cananites were not to
him as his kindred, nor Canaan as his own Country. Yet so would the Lord.
And we see before our eyes that the heart of Abraham answers to the Lord,
Psalm. 27.
O my God, I am content to do it, and his tongue charge his servant again,
bring not my Son back, etc.

Verse. 9.
16 Then the servant swear, says the text. That is, after he had inquired,
questioned, talked, and was fully instructed concerning his masters will, and
the end of his oath, then he swear. A very good example to teach all men how
an oath is to be taken. But alas, where is this conscience, and care, and
feeling, with fear to abuse this duty? Where is he that searches and
secketh to know the matter, and the depth of it, how far it may charge him
what he is requested to swear unto. Yet thus does Abraham's servant here, and
let us note it.

The second part.
THe servant thus instructed and sworn, Verse. 10.
prepares to his journey, and took ten Camells, etc. Teaching and showing
this wisdom, that a thing is not only to be done, but even all such things
also as may be sit to the good bringing of it to pass, are likewise to be
cared for and taken with us, as here this servant did.

2 His making of his Camells to lie down as it here is mentioned, Verse. 11.
may remember us how a good man regards even his beast. The time and the
place may show the servants diligent care to observe and regard all good
oportunities, to come by any entrance or success in the matter he goes about.

3 His prayer to God that he would direct him, Verse. 12.
shows his faith and bringing up in Abraham's house. Also, how he trusted not
in his own endeavors, though yet he used the best, but only his confidence
was in the blessing of God, who is able to effect and hinder what he will.

4 Whilst men's daughters came to draw water, says the text, and afterward in
this book we shall read, Verse. 13.
that Jacob found Rachell keeping of sheep. The simplicity of education in the
days of the Patriarks.
Both these declare unto us the simplicity and playnnes of those days,
touching education of their children. I beseech you where were these golden,
silken, pearled, and idle Dames that our days yield, when waterpots and
sherpehooks were thought no hurters of women's hands by the very parents
themselves. I urge it not for imitation, but for moderation.

5 The servant names a mark, Verse. 14.
whereby he desires of God he may have notice, which the woman shall be, that he
should choose for his masters son. Grant says he that she which says
drink, and I will give thy Camels drink also may be she, etc. I pray you mark
the mark that he wishes in his masters wife. Is it not a sweet and courteous
nature, A mark for to choose a wife by.
rather then a gay gown and a lofty look? Is it not a lowly and loving mind
rather then any wealth and pomp? Surely it is, for he wishes this, and
leaves out those. And peradventure touching the last, the servant had hard it
out of the mouth of long experience, that Diuite faemina nihil intollerabilius.
There is nothing more intolerable then a rich woman. Except God govern, let
me add I pray you: for his grace makes many old sayings to fail of
generality. Yet something there was or is that such proverbs arose in times
past, and are still called to remembrance in our days upon occasions. Surely
all be not Saints that go for Saints, before strangers it may be feared.

6 That thou have ordained. Mark this word well, and in it observe the
judgment that this servant had of Marriage, Verse. 14.
namely, Marriage goes not by hap.
that there was no hap nor chance in it, but that every one is served according
to the ordinance of God, either for comfort or cross. Is it not all one with
that which Solomon says: House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers,
Pro. 19.14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord? How does this good judgment then show
unto us the good order in Abraham's house for knowledge and instruction. He that
walks in the sun will be sunneburned says the proverb, and surely where
good instruction is in a house or town, the people will savor of it. Would
God our servants might thus savor of the talk they hear at our tables or
otherwise as this man did. But alas what know I? nay what know ye your selves
of your selves? without doubt this, that if carping and gawling of others, if
swearing, and filthy speaking, if mocking and censuring of the way of truth, if
Papisme or Atheism be a color worthy carrying, our servants may learn in our
houses and of us to carry such colors: but as for Religion and a sound judgment
in the several branches of Gods book, alas, alas, it is not to be had with
many of us, nor amongst us.

A good heart of a servant to his master.
7 By the word mercy in the same verse, appears the nature and heart of an
honest and faithful servant, that he would not only have things fall out to
his master, but in mercy to fall to him, that is all for the best, and his
comfort if it may any way be more then other.

8 Now what success had this prayer of a true servant with God? I pray you
mark the 15. verse. Verse. 15.
Ear he had left speaking says it, behold Rebekah came out, etc. See then
the gracious goodness of God, and how open his care is to one that is careful
of the credit committed unto him, be he servant or what else soever. Even
before he had left speaking the Lord answers this servants desire, and
sends by his hidden powrefull providence this maid Rebekah to come to the
Well to him. Now if we consider what he went about, and what the Magistrates
and Ministers here appointed in earth amongst us go about, is there any
comparison? Then with assurance may they go on in their places, that God will
regard them and give them his blessing, when he thus dealt with this servant?

9 In that she came forth with a Pitcher to fetch water, the servant having
prayed as you saw before in the 14. verse, Verse. 15.
note the wonderful providence of God, how it rules every action, and
suffers nothing to go by chance as many dream. For was there no time to fetch
water but now, when the servant lay by the Well waiting for Gods direction?
Yes many times might she that day have stored her self, God disposes times
and seasons.
had not God directed even to that time. And what God will must come to pass.

10 She goes down, fills her pitcher, and away again says the text. Here
is then no tarying, Verse. 16.
no gazing at passers by or strangers, no prittle prattle, nor telling of
news, but modesty, silence, and ready dispatch of that which is gone about. A
good example for youth if it were carefully followed.

11 But the servant seeing her make such speed, runs to meet her, and
prayed her that he might drink of her pitcher. 17 etc.
She says unto him drink Sir. Fit behavior for a maid.
In the servant note still no fore-flowing of his business, but having
commended his suite unto God, he begins to try the very first that came to
see if his mark before mentioned might be found in her. In the maid mark all
gentleness and courtesy of nature with speech convenient, neither a fool to
say no thing, nor yet ouerbould to talk at randon. When she had given the
servant drink, then see I pray you how no doubt by Gods very direction she
uses those words that the servant had prayed God before might be a mark for
him to know the woman that God had appointed for his masters son by. I will
(says she) draw water also for thy Camells. By which the servant knew it
was his Mistress that should be, Gods gift and appointed match for his Master
Isaac. Then he wondered to consider Gods mercy and providence fitting things so
quickly and graciously upon his prayer, The manifestation of God his providence
is wonderful.
and bringing so forward the cause of his coming. And in deed the
manifestation of Gods providence is wonderful: for which of us could once ever
have thought that such things should have come to pass as now we know and see?
Happy is that heart that is contented with Gods will, and prayseth his name for
well and woe.

Verse. 22.
12 Then the servant took forth a golden abilement etc. Where we may see, how
although he was persuaded that this was the woman whom God had appointed for
wife unto his master, yet does he use ordinary means, as gifts of gold, to
procure her to consent. Therefore we see the children of God do never reason
thus, if God have appointed the matter, it skilleth not what I do, but they use
the appointed means, and leave Gods counsels to himself. Our Savior fled
into Egypt from Herod's tyranny, Matthew. 2.
and yet God had appointed that he should not so dye. Act. 27.
And in the Acts of the Apostles, they took broken pieces of the Ship, and so
got out, yet foretold that they should not perish, with many such examples in
the scripture. Again we may note it here, Attire in women.
that such golden attiring as this and Jewels, are not simply condenmed in all
women. But it is the manner, or measure or calling that makes things not
alowable. Confer this with Peter and Paul forbidding brodered heir, etc. as
also with the third of Esaias, and interpret one by an other. Master Cranmer in
his book of the Sacrament says, those places of Peter and Paul be denyalls
but by comparison, and not simply. But I need not to speak in this matter. We
are too apt to take more then is allowed, when men are but careful not to
restrain what is allowed. Both are extremities, and the middle way is the good
virtue ever commended.

13 The servant bowed himself when he saw how all fell out. Verse. 26.
And we are to mark in it how Gods children should not only pray in their
wants, but also be thankful in their wealth, Thankefulnes to God.
for so does this servant. He begged Gods assistance, and now that he evidently
sees it, he voweth himself, and blesses the Lord for it. But God forgive us
our unkindness in this behalf: for if ten of us be cleansed, nine of us never
return to give thanks.

14 In the 31. verse, and so on, Verse. 31.
it pleases the Spirit of God to note Labans kindness and good intertainment
of this servant, A notable servant. The like is read of Popilius a Roman, that
he refused all intertainment of King Antiochus, until he hard of him that he
would be ruled by the Senate, about which message he was sent. Discretion in
doing a message.
when once he had heard of him by his sister, and no doubt it is ever thus
done, to commend unto us curtesy and gentleness, and to bring us in dislike
with currishnesse and hardness. But when meat was set before him, the servant
will not once taste of it till he have done his message: more careful a great
deal of his masters business then of his own belly. Where are such servants
in these days.

15 When you come to the servants tale, I pray you note how he leaves out
that which happily might have offended them, namely, how Abraham his master
gave him in charge in no case to bring back his Son amongst his kindred
again. It shows such a wisdom and discretion in a good servant when he
does his message, as is ever to be followed of all that read it. And it
shows also, that although no untruth be to be auoutched, yet neither is all
truth ever and at all times to be declared.

16 When the servant had thus showed how all things had hitherto fallen out
even by Gods mighty and merciful direction, yet leaves he liberty to the
parents and friends if you mark it, to dispose of their child and sister as
they would. Verse. 49.
So see we in those days how the godly abhored to wring men's children from them
by indirect means, if the parents were unwilling to bestow them for.

17 In the answer of Laban and Bethuel unto the servant when he had ended his
tale, The understanding and affection of the godly when a thing is said to them.
mark the nature or: manner of the godly, both for understanding and
affection: Touching the first, you see they taste a good tale when it is told
them, and discern God in his works. And touching the second, they seeing the
matter was of God, gave answer thus: We can say unto thee neither evil nor
good, behold Rebekah is before thee, take her and go. Both these are very
special graces, where God does grant them, but rare graces we must needs
confess in our days in comparison of the greater number. For how many savor
nothing whatsoever you say out of Gods book unto them, but are in this matter
even void of all capacity, though in worldly causes quick enough. Note.
Then for affection how many wilfully strive in mind against that thing that
yet in conscience they are convinced to be the will of God. So that where is
the man or woman almost we may say among many, that hearing Gods will told
them, and made rather more manifest then this was here by the servant, is
stricken, moved and touched with it inwardly, yields unto it; and says: Sir,
I can neither say good nor evil unto you, this thing is of the Lord that you
tell me, I see his will, and far be it from me to resist him, no my heart is
ready, and I am content to do it? etc. Yet thus do Gods children as here you
see. Let us follow it then and follow it ever when a good tale is told us.

18 Then the servant bowed again toward the earth unto the Lord, wherein still
mark the constant piety of the servant, who still, still is thankful and
boweth to God. Again in the verses following note the custom of those days,
to give gifts to the Bride and to her friends. Honest mirth after pains taken.
See also how it is lawful to be honestly merry when once our business is done,
and charge discharged: for now the servant eats and drinks which he would
not do before etc.

Verse. 54.
19 In the morning the servant would be gone, abhorring to loyter and linger in
his business* as all good servants do. (...)
But (...) tarry a little with (...) said (...) go: which may discover a (...)
fre^nds* if (...). For what do many of us when we hear the word of God
declared to us by some pla^^^ evidence, so that we are moved with it? I say
what do we? Surely even as these friends did over night, go take Rebekah, etc.
That is, we consent and yield, and we are all in a heat and haste, to promise
all obedience to that which we hear, and a man would think we were won
for ever. But after a while what do we? Truly even as you see these friends,
in the morning, we are well cooled, or rather evil cooled, our heat and haste
is past, and now the maid must tarry ten days, that is, now we will
delay and defer, what before we promised and purposed with all speed. So
the longer the worse, when it should be ever the better, if we were not evil.

20 But the servant says again, Hinder me not seeing the Lord has prospered
my journey, etc. Many servants if they had been in his place, would have
tarried and feasted, and taken good cheer, and excused the matter well enough,
that the maids friends were loath to part with her. But so would not this most
careful and trusty servant do: but having sped well, he longs to be with
his master to ease his mind also, which is a special good care in a good
messenger: for aegre tristia, sed cito laeta sunt nuntianda. Slowlye is evil,
but with all good speed, glad things are to be told, says the old saying.
Again because God had prospered him he would be gone, making Gods mercy a
spur to his faithfulness and diligence, and not a stower of him, as no doubt
many would.

21 Then they called the maid, and asked her consent therein, leaving this for
the godly ever, and all to mark, Verse. 57
that as children owe a duty to parents, to ask their consents, Children
ought not to be forced to mary.
so even parents also owe this to their children not violently to force them
against their liking: for who so marries, marries for himself, and not for
his parents, and good reason then the heart should love, whom the life must
endure till dying day. Now love is not forced, neither ever can be, but God
gives it reciprocally, if the match be his. No love, no match of Gods making,
let parents think, and it is his prerogative to join together man and wife.
If man will join by force and violence, whom God has not joined by consent
and love, what a boldness is that in him that does it, and how, will God not
endure it, but turn it to his woe. Yet children again may not be ouerbould
because of this, but like if they possiblye can, where their parents better
experienced then they are, justly like. For if they do not thus, giving all
possible place to their parents judgments, surely they do not honor father
and mother as they should.

Behavior for marriage, when an answer is required
22 The maid then asked, says she will, which was not any lightness in her
or easiness overmuch to be entreated, but it was a religious yielding to that
without foolish delays, which she evidently saw was the Lords appointment for
her. It should school us in these days to do the like, and never to use
niceness and folly, under pretense of modesty, when the matter is discussed
already by mutual euiction of either heart secretlye within, that the Lord
will have it so. Such dilly da^ly is fitter for Heathens that know not GOD,
then for sober Christians, who have vowed obedience in all stayed gravity to
the Lords good pleasure.

Verse. 59.
23 The honest and orderly sending her away, with her nurse and maids are
commendable practices even with us. But especially mark in the 60 verse the
blessing they gave her when she departed. Verse. 60.
Our care performs all things rather then this, and yet this as necessary as
many others. She rode upon Camels, and was not to tender, but our wanton ways
will work us woe, if God do not change us.

Verse. 62.
24 In the 62 verse, note how Isaac not yet married (for his wife that should
be, was but now coming toward him with his servant) lived from his father,
and kept house. Now adays rich men's children either marry ere they know how
to use a house, A good po^licie for parents.
or neither marrying, nor keeping house, live to spoil and spend what others
carefully have got together. But wise parents may learn of Abraham here to
see, how they will frame in their life time, and then as they like them, leave
them more or l^sse.

25 One thing is mentioned here of Isaac, Verse. 63.
which is worthy memory whilst we live. Namely that toward the evening, O
nota^le custom.
he went out into the field to pray. It shows us the custom of those
godly Fathers of whom he learned it, now and then to go forth, and all
privately alone, to send up to God the abundance of their hearts, fraught with
his fear, to meditate of his mercy continually tasted, to pray against faults
continuallye committed, and after many holy debatings of his favors in them,
to turn home again comforted and even refreshed, that with their GOD so good
and so kind, they have had some conference, as became his Children. O we,
we, sinful and wretched, how many are our walks for vain pleasure, and
how few or none in this holy order.

26 As Isaac was thus walking in the Fields, he lift up his eyes, and saw the
Camels coming, Verse. 64
and Rebekah she looked, and saw Isaac walking, and asked who he was, the
servant aunswering, that it was his master: she lighted down, covered her
self with a veil. etc. Both her lighting and veil, tokens of her modestye
and humility. The marginall note is sufficient for this, if you join unto it
the 1. of Sam. 25.23. where Abigael meeting David, hasted and lighted also.

27 The servant declares all Gods dealing in this matter, and no doubt it both
contented and moved Isaac: whereupon he brought her into his mothers tent, he
married her, If God take away one comfort, he gives an other.
well liking of Gods choice, he loved her, a token of Gods match, and he was
comforted with her after his mothers death, to teach us for ever this good,
that if GOD take one thing, he will give an other, to the perpetual praise of
his infinite mercy, and the great encouragement of his children to continue in
his fear. What a sort of instructions now has this Chapter yielded us, and
yet neither in this nor in any, is that half noted that might be noted. So
plentiful is the spring of this heavenly water, yea such a sea of knowledge
and comfort is Gods book. This much is more then we think of ever: and thus
much remembered by this occasion, and practiced better, shall yield us joy, when
all worldly follies shall fail their followers. We have here but a time, and
how short or long who can tell: spend this well, and we live for ever: spend
this ill, and we dye for ever. Life and death, differ very much, mirth and
misery, weal and woe, joy and pain, I judge, we judge not to be like, but
ever and never are pearcing darts, if we have any feeling in bliss to live,
or curse to remain, obeying or disobeying the Lords good will. The Lord make
us careful, and so I end.

Chap. 25.
The chief heads of this Chapter are these. Abraham's second marriage, Abraham's
death. Jacobs birth. Fsau his selling of his birthright.


TOuching the first, it is a warrant of the lawfulness of second marriage,
Second marriage lawful.
against any profane mind, that wilfully disaloweth it. Romans 7.3. 1. Cor.
7.8. v. 39.
And the Apostle is as plain, when he says, as long as they live together,
the man and the woman are each bound to others, but if either be taken away by
death, the suruiuer is at liberty to marry again in the Lord.

2 Remember how God said, that in Isaac should his seed be blessed, yet nows
comes Keturah with six sons on a heap, Ver. 2. etc
such events fall out to try the children of God, whether they will cleave to
the word or no.

3 Abraham makes his will and Testament, in his life time, disposing his good
in such sort as quietness may follow amongst his children, when he is gone.
Verse. 5.6
To make a will is wisdom.
So was Ezekias commanded to do by the Prophet, and it is a thing that every
wise man will be careful of whilst he has time. The neglect of this has
spent whatsoever was gathered by him that dyed.

4 Abraham dies, and it is the way of all flesh, as has often been said. He
dies in a good age, says the Text, Verse 8.
and full of days. Long life is good, and yet life will weary any body at
last: a fulness of time will come to them, that most love this world, though it
be long first: for Senium viuendi taedium adfert. Oulde age will wax weary of
life at length.

5 Isaac and Ismael his Sons bury him. Verse. 9.
A duty that parents do owe their children and children again to their
parents, To bury them, is a debt of all friends.
husband must do this for his wife, and the wife likewise for her husband it
is the last courtesy and kindness to be showed, and it is not a matter of
little regard with the godly. They know there will be a meeting again, and
therefore they lay up as it were the bodies of their dead friends, as men lay
up their jewels, till such day come. Isaac and Ismael were no great friends
once, but yet no iarres hinder them, for this common duty to their Father. We
are more crooked and wayward, many of us if lust do urge us in this point. Our
displeasures private hinder us greatly from common good, and our anger lasts
from age to age, to our great reproach.

6 Abraham is buried with Sara his wife, Verse. 10.
Lying of friends together in burial.
and if they that loved and lived together while they were here, be also both
laid together in that bed of earth, that all must come to, when they be dead,
it is a thing that may well be done, and deserves no just dislike of any.

7 And after the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac, says the 11 verse,
Verse. 11.
and how sweet is it to all parents, if they mark it. For since God is not
the God of Abraham alone, but of all that fear him: This comfort may you have
in your souls ever, that when you be gone, yet he remains and lives for
ever, to bless and prosper, to defend and comfort your children after you,
that are now your care.

Verse. 16.
8 In the genealogy of Ismael, having twelve princes descending of him, A
comfort ^or all sac^otlesse children.
see what God can do for a poor boy that was sent out with a bottle of
water, and as it were left to the wide world, and to his fortune, as some
speak. O powrefull God, what cannot he do, and whom cannot he exalt if it
please him? Servants and all succorlesse children look at it.

Verse. 21
9 Rebecca was barren long, and had no Child, both to her own and husbands
grief no doubt. God takes his own time to give children.
But so it pleased God then, and so so now it pleases him often also, to
school his children, by withholding their wished comforts from them a time.
Isaac had a promise, that he should have seed, and in his seed, the familye
and line greatly increased, yet God will have him wait for it, and tarry his
good pleasure in patience, which we must mark. Isaac prays for his wife and
the Lord is entreated to show us what cupples should do one for an other in
this behalf, and how well the Lord likes it, when they do it.

10 Then she conceived, and being with child, she felt them strive in her
body together, Verse. 22.
and marueiling at her case, she went to the Lord to ask him. The only
refuge of the godly.
Noting thereby to us, that there is no refuge to the godly ever in their
distresses more then this, to get them to the Lord, and to learn of him some
comfort for their case. But how did she ask of the Lord? Surely there is no
certayntie laid down unto us, and therefore as we cannot be resolved with
any certainty, so is the silence used an evidence that there is no necessity:
the matter is not to us material. Austen says, whether she went unto the
altar, that Abraham had built, or Melchisedeck was yet alive, or some such man,
or any other way that I cannot remember and think of, says he, this is
certain, the Scripture is true, and she asked God. Others say this was before
Abraham dyed, and that she asked of him, and had her answer as follows:
Abenezra Bona ventura de politia. cap. 2.
others say happilye in a dream she was told, or by some inward revelation,
or by some angel,

11 When the children came to be borne, Esau is borne red and hearie* So uses
nature sometimes in men's bodies, Verse. 25.
to bewraye their future manners, qualities, and conditions, Why Jacob borne
later
Jacob is borne the later, whom God could have made first, if it had pleased
him, but he would have it known, that he was chosen merely of grace, and not
as more excellent, because the elder. He held his brother by the heel: which
heel signified his posterity, over whom the Israelites ruled, not by nature,
but by God.

12 Isaac loved Esau, and Rebecca loved Jacob. Verse. 28.
Such diversity in affection of parents to their Children, we see daily.
D^uers^^^^ of affect^on to children, even in godly parents.
Sometime with reason, and often without. Here a reason is added of the
Fathers love, to wit, because he loved venison, which Esau often killed for
him. But of the mothers no reason is given, happily she loved Jacob more,
because God had chosen him before Esau. Whatsoever it was, certain it is, she
loved him whom God loved. But something was in Jacob that pleased her we may
probably think, Romans 5.
for this is the difference of Gods love and man's, that the reason of his, is
ever in himself, and not in the party being a sinful man, but the reason of
man's love, is in the merit of the party, less or more ever.

13 Sell me thy birthright now, etc. Verse. 31.
As if he should have said, often have thou offered it, now perform it, and let
me have it, How may Jacob be excused for the (...)
and thou shall have to refresh thy hunger withal. But was this a brothers
part, to pray as it were upon his brother, and to lie in wait for a vantage.
Surely if he had been but a stranger^ humanity would have relieved his
hunger, either gratis, or for less then a birthright, much more his brother.
How then may Jacob be excused here? The answer of good men is, that in an
extraordinary thing, we may not use an ordinary measure, judging of it, as of
other things, that are ordinary. The Lords purpose was to derive the
birthright to Jacob: this occasion and opportunity falls out, Jacob takes
it, and let us leave all to God, and make no doctrine either of rebuke to
others, or imitation to our selves by extraordinary facts.

Verse. 32.
14 Lo I am almost dead, what is then this birthright to to me. A very bad
speech of an earthy mind, that measures all by the belly, and thinks
nothing of use, that profits not that way? and we cannot better conceive of
this speech, then by the like. Suppose a Christian in distress seeks
comfort somewaye of a Turk. He shall say, if thou will forgo thy faith and
profession, thy title and interest in Christ and religion, I will relieve thee.
The Christian shall think and say. My distress is great, and what good does
my faith and profession now to me, How world lie men think of spiritual
graces.
can my title and name now relieve me? can I live by the name of Christianity?
is either meat in my belly, or money in my pursse by religion? No I may dye for
hunger, and lie in prison for want, for all my Christianity, and therefore
better is it for me to take goulde and silver, meat and drink, pleasure and
comforts of this life, and be out of this want, then to cleave and be wedded to
my faith still, away then with this that helps not* and welcome that that
never fayles. Forgive me the penny, and I shall want nothing. Were not this a
profane speech of an untaught mind and man? were not this a most horrible
contempt of a most holy profession? Then think of Esau by this. What says he,
is this birthright to me, now that I am like to dye for meat, as if he should
say, give me for my belly, and let it go, that feeds me not, and so forth.
Now if this be ugly before our eyes, as I am sure it is, then learn we by
it, Godliness is gain, and not contrary.
never to measure spiritual things by worldly profit, to back and belly and
pursse, etc, but think of spiritual things in their kind, and know, that he
that fears God, shall want no manner of thing that is good. 1. Tim. 4. Psalm.
84.
Godliness has the promise of the to come and of this life also, that is, of
all necessaries here as shall be best. Seek first the kingdom of God; and
the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be cast unto you. With
many and many such promises.

15 Swear to me, says Jacob, and why swear? Verse. 33.
Of like because he knew the instabilitie and uncertainty of Esau, With
worldly men we must deal thereafter.
now in this mind, now in that, never constant in the word spoken. Therefore
he makes him sure, that he shall not start, with an oath, which doubtless very
Esau made religion of, to the condemnation of many amongst us, that think
they be better then Esau, and yet care as much for an oath, as for their
ordinary speeches: we may learn by Jacob, with worldly men to deal somewhat
worldly, that is, to make surer of them by such lawful means as we can, then
we would of others, whose consciences be better, and constancy in a word
spoken, far otherwise then this man's was.

16 Then he swear and sold it. Preferring, Verse. 33.
as worldly men do, an earthly commodity, before Gods spiritual graces, The
birthright what it was.
which the godly do not. The pre-eminence of the birthright was this, Habebant
ius Sacerdotii and regni in familia. They were Priests, and kings in the
family after the fathers death. Genesis 49.3.8. etc.
They had a pre-eminence above the rest, in the division of the fathers
inheritance, Deutro. 21. They succeeded the father in all dignity,
principallitie and honor. They had authority over their younger brethren, so
that they rose up at their presence, and ministered to them. Spectabat etiam
vitam aeternam. It had also his reference and respect to eternal life. All
which being great things, this profane man made little account of, but sold
his title to them all for an easy price, according to a sillye feeling of
spiritual grace. Hebr. 12.16.17.
Beware we by him as the Apostle warns to the Hebrews, that we be not like
him. Read the Apostles words your self: Many among us can skill more of
Sheep and Cattle, Corn and Wine, Farms and rents, then of spiritual
regeneration, and death of sin. Such sayings savor not ought unto them, but
remember Esau, and I say no more.

Verse. 34.
Lastly, when Esau had sold it, and Jacob gotten it, then falls he to his
meat freshly, Wicked men of what remorse.
that Jacob set before him, and contemned the birthright. See I pray you the
remorse in wicked men, when they have offended. They eat and drink, laugh and
are merry, this is the care they take, and feeling that they have. A fearful
dullness if we think of it: not only to do wickedly, but to be so far from
repentance afterward. Yet is this usual with many men, David's heart smote him
when he had offended, and it was Gods grace and spirit in him: so shall it be
in us. A stony heart is a plague of God, 2. Sam. vlt.
and a fleshie heart his good blessing. The one for his enemies, the other for
his children. This feeling heart, and tender sense, when we have shipped, the
Lord give us ever, to a true repentance, and rising up again.

Chap. 26.
The heads of this Chapter these. The famine, verse. 1. The exile of Isaac and
his accidents, to ver. 15. The hatred of the Palestines against him, to 16. The
covenant betwixt the king and him.


Verse. 1.
1 TOuching the first, we remember, and the words remember us also, The trials
of Gods children are alike.
that God tried Abraham this man's Father before, even with the same affliction
in a strange country, and now he tries his son after him with the same.
Thereby giving us occasion to learn, that even such temptations as others
before us our Fathers and brethren have tasted of, we also must expect and
prepare our selves for. The cup of affliction, is not appropriated to some
few, but made ready even for the whole number of Gods elect, as the Father of
wisdom shall judge it sit. Now if others also have drunk with us both
before, and shall after, then false is that peevish persuasion, that Satan so
feign would fasten in our minds, that none but we taste of this cross, or in
this sort and such like. It is not so, but as here, what Isaac is tried with,
his father also endured before, so what we abide, others in like sort have
abidden, and it is no more token of Gods displeasure to us, then to them, but
his messenger in love, to invre our faith both to them and us. The Apostle
Peter is very plain, and let not his words depart from before your eyes, day
or night: 1. Pet. 5.9.
whom resist, says he, steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same, the same
afflictions (mark it) are accomplished in your brethren which are in the
world. Both of which place and matter, I have much more spoken in the last
petition of the Lords prayer, to your comfort I hope, if you will there see it
and consider it.

2 The Lord appears to Isaac and says, Verse. 2.
go not down to Egypt, etc. Gods care for his ever su^e.
where we see the care and providence of the Lord for his chosen ever, whom
though he exercise as it pleases him, yet he never leaves destitute of his
comfort. His eye sleeps not, nor his love faints, but ever he is ready to
supply an other way, what wants someway to his children. Genesis 41. He
admonishes Pharoh of a famine to come, by his servant Joseph? and why? But
that so he might provide for his servant Jacob, a place to be fed in 2. Kings
and 8, you have an other notable example of this mercy. Let the Lord then work
his pleasure with us, sure we are by these examples, he will not fail us, but
provide for us, as shall be best.

3 Dwell in this land, and I will be with thee, etc. Verse. 3.
Note the blessing of God upon men, Dwell where God places thee.
when they are where God appoints them. If we carue for our selves, be it
unto us according to our bouldnes. But if we tarry Gods leisure, and follow his
calling, and his direction, surely it shall be to us there according to mercy: a
good place to stay flitting minds: no way respecting the Lord in their
changes, but their own pleasures or selfewill.

4 Many blessings he promises here to Isaac if you mark them, Verse. 4.5.
and why? Because Abraham obeyed my voice, says he, The profit to children of
parents piety.
etc. teaching us plainly, that there is no more effectual means to provoke
God to mercy toward children, then if their parents before obeyed Gods voice.
This is it that God cannot forget, neither will forget, Read 1. reg 11.34.
for his goodness sake. But even unto thousands of their seed that serve him,
and keep his commaundemenes will he be good. O parents mark it, and lay it to
your hearts. You see the fruit of your coming to church, of your hearing the
word, receiving the Sacraments, and of leading your life according to the way
prescribed, it seals up the Lords favor, not only to your selves, but to
your children after you, to a thousand desents. This cannot raking and scraping
up worldly pelf do, with neglect and contempt of all I have named, but even
quite the contrary, and therefore I pray you mark it.

Verse. 7.
5 What might be noted here in his denial of his wife, has sufficiently bin
touched in the remembrance of this matter in his Father before him Chap. 20.
whether you may resort again, Verse. 8.
Verse. 9.
and compare the Father and son together: making this note with your self
that fear and distrust is found in the most faithful, and therefore no cause
we should utterly despair for our own wants.

Verse. 10.
6 Abimelechs judgment of adultery, in the 10. verse, will condemn many
careless sinners in this kind, that make not the like conscience to offend
thus, that this man did. These cursed days make but a sport of this sin so
foul, in the eyes of very Heathens. But let us beware, and lay it to our
hearts, how in all ages, men that have not been past all honesty, have been
persuaded that Gods vengeance should light of wedlock breakers.

7 Abimelech then gave charge as you see, for Isaacs safety, and his wives
also, Verse. 11.
threatening death it self to him that should touch them. See Gods mercy to
take away his fear, that for his wife he should be killed, and not only so,
but to raise him up such a friend of the king, as here we see. O what is not
God able to do for his faithful servants, and what is he not willing to do
also for their comfort? Let us cleave to God then, and he will cleave to us,
let us trust in him, and he will never forsake us.

8 Isaac thus having found grace with the king, Verse. 12.
that he might be safe, fell to labor, and sowed a crop. The Lord was present
in that also, and gave him of his labor increase an hundred fould. So the
Lord blessed him among these strangers, and is that arm shortened, that it
cannot now bless our labors in our several callings and trades, if it
please him? We know it is not, and therefore rather we want Isaacks travel,
It is not lawful (says the heathen Xenophon for any that sow not corn, to
pray that they may have good corn: this very nature spoke.
who lay not on the one side, and looked to live, but labored truly, and sowed
his seed, or else we want his good heart toward God and religion, and therefore
the Lord serves us thereafter. Judge your selves, as you best can, and amend
what you find to be amiss: with sowing, not with sleeping Isaac got his
increase, and yet not with sowing neither without Gods blessing, but the Lord
blessed him says ye text ver. 13. and so makes him the author of this
fruitfulnes in ye land, as ever he is. His mighty increase also otherwise, the
text does show you, and mark it well, what God can do.

9 So he increased in very deed, that the Philistines had Envy at him. Thereby
we finding the saying true, Verse. 14.
that poverty breeds pity, and plenty, spite: yea thereby we seeing the
guise of this world most plain before us, that if a man want he is contemned,
and if God bless him he is envied, for envy is a grief at an others well
doing. And there is no poison like this poison, for all others hurt some
others, and not themselves, but envy rather wastes and wears our own
selves, then hurts others. Actius Sincerus said well of it, when being in
company where question was made, what was good for the eyes to quicken the
sight, and some said Fennel, some Saladine, some glass, etc. He said Envy
was better then all those. Noting thereby, that envy and spite, is ever busy,
to spy quickly, rather with most then least: what remedy but patience, and
patience against spite, shall ever have victory at the last. Xenophon said to
one that spoke spitefully of him, Tu didicisti maledicere, and ego conscientia
test maledicta contemnere. Thou says he, have learned to speak evil, and I
in the testimony of my clear conscience, to contemn thy spite. So say we,
and so do we, and the game will be ours in the end. Pacientia vincit omnia, non
collu^tando sed sufferendo non murmurando, sed gratias agendo. Patience
overcomes all things, not with struggling again, but with suffering, not with
murmuring, but with giving of thanks. Socrates was merry, when he answered one
that asked him, why he put up an injury, and cauld not the party into law:
What? if mine Ass take up his heel and hit me, must I go to the law with
him by and by. Noting what patience is rather to be used of wisemen.

Verse. 15.
10 The Philistines stop up his wels, etc. This being their malice, let it
harten us, if ever we find the like, and teach us, that it is as true of
malice as of love, that if it cannot go, it will creep: that is it will show it
self as it can, and if it cannot do all it would, it will yet do peeuishly
all it can.

Verse. 17.
11 Isaac upon this changes his dwelling, and we may learn by it, that
quietness is to be sought above profit.

Verse. 20.
12 In digging of these pits that here you see, mark their names: the first
is dug, and he calls it Esek, that is contention or strife, because they
strove with him for it. Then dug he a second, Verse. 21.
and called it Sitnah, which is hatred. But at last, He dug a third, for
which they strove not, and therefore he called it Rehoboth, because the Lord had
made him rowme. So then after Esek and Sitnah, strife and hatred, at last he
came to Rehoboth, Verse. 22.
rowme and rest, let us hope the like, after trouble, peace, Nube solet pulsa
candidus ire dies.
after strife, rest, and after pain, pleasure, to the praise of Gods mercy,
that in time shall moderate what is amiss.

13 God appears to him, and comfort him, saying, fear not, Verse. 24.
etc. See, and see again, the care of God for a true servant of his. These
crossings and striuings you have seen, and how grievous they were to a poor
stranger you can consider, more far then the like would have been among his
own friends. God therefore speaks and cheereth him up, leaving us this to
remember ever, that he sees our greefes, notes our wrongs, marketh our
strifes, and in most need he will ever comfort us. O sweet mercy of a gracious
father, how may it cheer us: he is not kind for Isaac alone, but for all them
that trust in him, and that have we found I am sure all of us, if we will
remember, and f^ll shall find if we will regard him. His time he knows, and
we may not apoint him, Read Habbak. 2. v. 3.
his time he will keep, and we may not doubt him, our pinche he spyeth, and
we shall feel him.

14 Yet see more both of mercy and power in the Lord to his Child. Verse. ^6.
That unkind king that reuersed his love toward Isaak and thrust him away,
the Lord makes seek to him again for favor, and to fear his virtue. So
can God do, if it please him, Read Act. 7.35.
with any of us, when we are most trodden down and abused, by any enemies that
we have. But let us not appoint him: what he does is ever best, only let us
see what he can do, if it be good for us.

15 Isaac when they came, expostulateth with them of his wrong yet he forgiueth
it, and feasteth them liberally. Verse. 27.
A good example for our eger wraths, that will never be appeased. If one of us
be touched, we carry deadly hatred to our grave with us, Verse. 30.
and have rooted it also in our posterity, that they may carry it. Thus did
not Isaac, and God was with him.

16 Concerning Esau in the 34 verse. It bids us mark, who they be that
marry against their parents mind, Verse. 34.
and also with wives of a false religion: Surely Esaus not Jacobs, that is,
ungodly children, not godly children, that have grace in them. Again, how
bitter it is to a godly parent, to see the degeneration of his child, and to
harbor or countenance daughters in law that fear not God. Thirdly, it is
very worthy noting, that albeit this matching of Esau in that Country with
men's daughters, as we may probably think, not mean, might have been some
wordlye strength to Isaac, who was there a stranger, yet being not in the
Lord, he detesteth such means, and wishes in his heart no such affinity,
but in faith relyeth upon the sure God.

17 Let us not pass it over unmarked, how though Isaac had wealth at will, and
flowed in abundance outward, yet wanted be not in his howsehold crosses. But
Esau marries against his will, Verse. 34.
greeueth the heart both of father and mother. So must it be, and so shall it
be, for this world is not heaven. The Lord only knit us to him in all our
crosses. Amen.

Chap. 27.
In this Chapter we have, The stealing of the blessing from Esau by Jacob. The
manner of the blessing. The behavior of Esau afterward.


Verse. 1.
1 IT is said, that Isaac was old, and his sight was dim. Isaac dim of sight
why?
Wherein we may note both a general providence of God, and a particular. A
general, that commonly men in age and time should by course of nature wax
dark of sight, that thereby they drawing toward an other world, might be
weined from earthly matters, and be occasioned more to meditate, by want of
bodily sight upon things that are not seen. A particular, by this means to
draw this man to do that which otherwise peradventure he would hardly have
done.

Verse. 2.
2 I know not the day of my death, says he, etc. and who does know it. No
man knows the day of death.
Ideo latet vltimus dies, vt obseruetur omnis dies. Therefore is the last day
unknown, that we might be in a readiness every day. Nothing more certain
then the thing, nothing more uncertain then the time, and such like sayings
many. Upon this occasion Isaac will make ready for death, and dispose of his
matters according to this uncertainty. So let us do upon the like cause. For
you see we know no more the day of our death then he did. Verse. 4.


Liking of some meat more then others, allowed of God.
3 He loves venison. And to our comfort it teaches us, that using moderation,
and remembering thanks, the Lord is not offended with our fancies. 1. Tim. 4.
He has sanctified all meats to the use of his children, and nothing is
unclean that the Lord has created. And if further we like this rather then
that, even so also is the Lord pleased, and giving us liberty to use our
liking, blesses with his mercy that particular to us. O gracious God.

4 Rebecca heard when Isaac spoke to his son. Verse. 5.
Some note of the curiosity in women's natures, Cur^^si^^^ of wom^^
they will be harkening over often when they are not called to be of counsel,
and it is a tickling desire in too many to know all that that is spoken, be it
purposely wished otherwise. Sara before a good woman, yet harkning behind the
door, and now here Rebecca heard, and of like by some such privy harkning.
All women be not thus, but many grave and wise, to content themselves within
their bounds, such as be so may well amend it, and be greatly commended.

5 Now having thus ouerheard her husband, Ve. 6. etc.
she enters into talk with her son Jacob to prevent the old man, A
partial Mother.
and to derive this blessing from his brother to himself. Wherein we see the
picture of a partial Moth^^, more addicted to one child then an other, when
yet both of them are alike derely bought to her. Touching the subtlety she
uses, Her subtlety not allowed.
I do not see how it can be justified, for she should have tarried till God had
performed his promise by some direct course.

6 Jacob obiecteth what danger may happen, and thereby we see the common saying
true, Plus vident oculi, quam oculus, Verse. 11.
More see two eyes then one.
more see two eyes then one, and especially if ones mind be vehement upon the
thing in question, for earnest desire to obtain a thing dazeleth the judgment
often, that it sees not hidden evil and inconveniences. Therefore if ever I
should use my friend, I would surely use him, and crave his due consideration
to join with me, when I find my affections hot upon any thing to effect it
or have it: for even then sonest as I say by the vehemence of desire may my
judgment fail me, whereas my friend being swayed no way with any affection,
looks more thoroughly into the matter, and with a cleerer eye then I can, so
finding and seeing such peril and danger, such evil and inconvenience, as I
for my heat carrying me unevenly could not see. So does Jacob in this place
object what in deed in man's guess might very well have fallen out, and of
like by his mother was not either at all or earnestly thought upon.

Verse. 12.
7 Jacobs care also not to offend his father, and so procure his curse, The
fear of fathers curse.
is very worthy noting here, to the example of all children and youth which in
these licentious days of ours make little account of parents displeasure. My
father says he may possibly feel me, and I shall seem to him to be a mocker,
and one that would deceive him, so shall I bring a curse upon me, and not a
blessing. Look at this ye children that mary against parents minds, and do
many things else to their great grief. Where is this fear of your parents
curse that you see in Jacob, or that they should think of you otherwise then
well. Think you the parents curse now adays being just, is not as strong as
in those days? deceive not your self, for it is true even in these days as
ever it was, Syrac. 3.10
That the blessing of the Father establishes the houses of the children, and
the mothers curse rotteth out the foundations etc. Read the Chapter from the
beginning, and you shall see more.

8 Upon me be thy curse says his mother my son, only hear my voice etc.
Verse. 13.
You remember when the children strout in Rebeccas womb, How Rebecca says that
curse, be upon me
what the Lord told her concerning the younger, which promise of his it is to
be thought her faith respecting, and assuring her self God would bless Jacob,
as he had said, she spoke thus, fearing no curse to come to him, whom God in
mercy had chosen and regarded. Therefore this in her may be lawful. But can no
wise authorize us either in rage and heat of unbridled affections, or in
deep and dead security and vnfealingnes to use like phrase in an evil
matter, Math. 27.
as those wicked Jews did that cried, his blood be upon us, and upon our
children, and as many desperate or blind Friars do, Seminaries and Jesuits,
Priests and practisers for the man of Rome, that to encourage the people to
disobey their Princes laws, Seminaries and Jesuits.
and governments that they live under, bid them lay that burden upon them, they
will endure that danger, etc. Such seducing spirits have no promise to respect
as Rebecca here had, but a fearful fulfilling of wrath upon them for such
temeritie as the Jews found.

9 Jacob says he is Esau, and that God has brought so soon the venison to
his hands, all which was untrue, Verse. 19.
to deceive his blind father that could not see him. Jacobs lie unlawful.
The marginall note does satisfy us in it, Verse. 20.
that although Jacob was assured of this blessing by faith, yet he offended in
seeking it by lies, and the more because he abuses Gods name thereunto. So see
we the imperfections of good men, that they have bin ever, and often great.

10 The old man calls for him that he might feel him, and yet cannot
discern, Verse. 21.
so cunningly had his mother used the matter. Our easynes to be deceived.
We may mark in it how nothing is able to go contrary to Gods will and
determination. We shall feel and not know, we shall hear, and yet be
deceived, yea, when even our own mouths shall confess it to be Jacobs voice,
Verse. 22.
yet with an outward counterfeit show of Esau his roughness, we shall be carried
away if the Lord have so decreed it. Therefore let them that are to persuade
others be content, if all believe not, and let them that believe not in so
clear light, fear least God have decreed woe to them and hasten, if yet they
will be warned, from such hardness. 1. Sam. 2.25
The sons of Eli are a fearful example if they will consider it.

11 Let us consider here who is blessed, Childrens usage if they will be
blessed.
surely a son that feeds his father. And when does the father bless him?
surely when his heart is even light and cheerful in him. All which teaches us
both how children ought to seek to win the blessing of their parents, namely,
by well using them. And also that then is a man most fit to power out comfort
or blessing to others, A cheerful spirit most apt to bless others.
when his heart is not troubled, but cheerful, and smells even a sweet
savor in them whom he should bless and speak unto, for hard it is to sing
one of the songs of Sion in heauynes, but the woe of mind and smart of grief
within lets greatly the sweet stream of comfort that should flow to
others. Psalm. 137.


12 Mark how he says that the smell of his son is like a feeld Verse. 27.
that the Lord has blessed. The Blessing. Goods ill gotten.
From which gratulation all they are barred, that get their possessions, lands,
and revenues, by ungodly means, as by stealth, bribery, oppression, and
wrong, for such are like a feeld which the Devil has corrupted and sown
sin in, to their certain fall when time shall come, yet may their garments
happily smell a great way off by the art of man, but neither themselves nor
their riches by blessing of God.

13 Again consider well in this blessing what wealth and what riches the
father wishes to his form, What wealth he wishes.
and you shall see it is no pomp, no port, no vanity of apparel, nor such
things as the world now doteth upon, but he wishes him of the fatness of the
earth, and husbandmans fruit for husbandmans pains. Which though it tie not
every man to till with his own hands, yet teaches it that our godly fathers
in those better days of theirs, thought it a special honor for their children
to live by Gods blessings upon the earth, and not by other idle course and
sinister practices. Mark the blessing well, and you shall see more.

By earthly things other meant
14 In that Isaac names nothing but earthly things, be not deceived as some
have bin, to think that either himself rested in such things, or that he
wished no better to his child, for it is not so. But by and under these
earthly blessings he comprised and chiefly prayed for all heavenly and
spiritual graces promised of God, and believed of Isaac to Abraham and his
seed in Christ and by Christ. This manner of speech therefore is no other then
usually the Prophets have by things outward and subject to sense and the
weakest capacity, to understand and mean things spiritual, not seen, but
subject to faith above many times our slender capacity. So Esaias 11. and many
other places.

An allegory.
15 The allegory in this place that Ambrose makes, is not amiss. To wit,
that as Jacob the younger is here blessed in the name of the elder, and the
clothes that he has borrowed of his elder brother, give a sweet savor in the
nostrills of the Father: so are we in the name of Christ our elder brother,
with whose garment of pure righteousness being clothed, we smell sweet also
to our heavenly Father, and are accepted. This against indirect righteousness,
and for righteousness of imputation.

16 That which he says in the 29. verse, Verse. 29.
let people be thy servants, and nations bow down unto thee, etc. may be a
good proof that Isaac stayed not in these earthly things which he names, but
looked at higher matters. For how could he conceive any hope of such dignity as
th^s, saving that he was assured his posterity was chosen of the Lord, and
even for the kingdom that after followed, that it should be in his stock and
line, and belong to them? Therefore says the Apostle* that Isaac blessed Jacob
by faith, and Esau concerning things to come, Heb. 11.20.
as did also Jacob in the end of this book when he was a dying. This honor
then that here he speaks of, shot at that which was fulfilled afterward in
David and Solomon, but chiefly in Christ, unto whom all people are servants,
and all Nations bow, Philip. 2.
even the knees of all things in heaven and earth, and under the earth, Psalm.
2.
and to whom God has given the heathen for an inheritance, and the ends of
the earth for a possession, as says the Prophet. Yet true also even of the
godly is this which is said, he that curses thee shall be cursed, and blessed
be he that blesses thee: Psalm. 15.
for even in his holy tabernacle shall a place be given to them that make much
of such as fear the Lord. And whosoever offends one of these little ones
that believe in me, Math. 18.6.
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the bottom of the sea. But chiefly I say it is true in
Christ who descended of Isaac that here speaks thus, which Christ, whosoever
curses by abusing his person, or contemning his truth etc. that man shall be
cursed, and whosoever blesses him, by embracing him, and believing on him etc.
that man shall be blessed.

17 Jacob was scarce gone out when Esau came. Verse. 30.
Mark I pray you the powrefull providence of almighty God, Narrow escapes.
how it rules and governs times and seasons, days and hours, and moments
of time, to the safety and benefit of his chosen. For does Esau come before
Jacob is gone? No, first Jacob is out of his walk, and then he comes. Yet
see again the narrow escape, and let us learn by it not ever to look for
easy and great passage from peril, but be content if hardly and narrowly God
deliver us, scarce he was gone, yet gone.

Tears too late.
18 After long debating of the wrong, at last Esau breaks into tears, but
prevailed not. Let it make us wary and wise, least profaning the dignity of
our holy calling to Christ, and vilely esteeming spiritual graces, selling
them as this man did for some base price, and preferring profit or pleasure
before them* we at last bewail the same as now he does, but all too late. Let
the Apostles exhortation sound ever in our ears: Let there be no fornicator,
Heb. 12.16.
or profane person as Esau was, which for one portion of meat sold his
birthright. For ye know, how that afterward also, when he would have inherited
the blessing, he was refused, finding no place to repentance, though he sought
it with tears. Surely such men and women as having bin once zealous and great
lovers of the word, Note.
of preachers and professors of the same, with very forward affection in all
good causes, and after to please some men's humors, to purchase to themselves
this or that profit, or that they may enjoy some sinful pleasure, either
forgo all again quite, or in great measure. Let them take heed they be not
either in, or very near the prophannes of this Esau. For what do they else
then contemn spiritual things to obtain earthly, sell their birthright, that
is their title to Gods kingdom had by walking in his fear, for such sinful
reward as they gain by their change. God awake all cooled hearts, and give them
heat again, that so are slipped and think not of it. Remember Esau, and
beware Esau.

Verse. 39.
19 This blessing which Esau wringeth from his father, includes temporal
things, ^sau his ^lessing.
which are common to the wicked with the godly. And that breaking of the yoke
from his neck, your margin shows you when it was fulfilled. 2. Reg. 8.20
That which I note in it, Verse 40.
is a certain vicissitudo rerum, an interchange of things. For hardly has bin
scene or rather never, that any man, any stock, or any country, should be
ever aloft, or ever below and under. But the Lord changes giving the yoke, and
breaking it away again according to his good pleasure.

20 Again here in Esau we may note some properties of a bad man void and
destitute of any true grace, Notes of wicked man.
and learn by them both to examine our selves, and to avoid them if we find
them. First, he hated his brother for this thing, and he that hates his
brother, is a mansleyer says the Scripture. Secondly, he thinks in his
mind a secret venom of a poisoned heart, his tongue he stays, sed loquitur in
cord, he says within him some evil. Like as the Prophet says, they imagine
mischife in their hearts, meaning the wicked. Lastly, Psalm. 140.2.
he appoynteth a time when his Father shall be dead, being content to make
fair weather, and to carry murder and such murder as of his own brother till
that day. This is an hypocrites fashion ever to forbear evil for fear of
men.

21 But his mother heard of it. The Lord discovers treacheries against his.
He happily afterward bolting out some suspicion. This is the Lord still and
still, and evermore, in the behalf of his, nothing so secret to their harm,
which some way or other comes not out. Thus has thy power O Lord appeared
mightily, and by name in this Kingdom, and the protection of thy faithful
servant our dear and gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth. O Lord how have
thou opened the darkness of sin conceived against her royal person, against
this land, and the life of all that fear thy name. English treasons.
For we were sold, we were sold O Lord by many bloody minds, she thy
sacred servant first as our head and stay under thy Majesty, and then we her
poor people, living and breathing under her shadow, not to be for servants
and handmaydes, as complained that Queen Esther to Assuerus, for then they had
not bin so cruel, but to be destroyed after many miserable and monstrous
torments, with bloody sword of murdering minds, that should have licked us up,
and drunk our blood til they had vomited again for fulness with the same. And
from all this thine own self has saved us and set us free, giving them their
portions either by Sea or land, by one means or other, as they did deserve.
Out thou broughtest Esau his conspiracies at all times to this day, and saved
thy true Jacob, whom thou have blessed amongst us, and over us, to our
unspeakable comfort ten thousand ways. Some or other heard of it, as Rebecca
did here, and were instruments of wisdom, counsel, and service, to prevent
it (...) Lord we thank thee, with the very souls of our fowls we thank
thee, craving mercy, that we cannot do it as we should. O Lord continue thy
mercy for thy mercy sake, and let the soul of our Sovereign be still dear
unto thee, write her dear Father in the palms of thy hands, and regard her
ever as the apple of thine eye. Continue thy Gospel to this land, and the
light of thy countenance still in our days, blessed for ever and ever for what
is past.

22 Mark how Rebecca uses means to save Jacobs life, and yet she had Gods
oracle that he should be mighty, Verse. 43.
and rule over his brother, The godly use means, and presume not upon God his
apointment.
so that if ever any might have presumed of Gods apoyntment, she for one might:
but yet she does not, but leaving that, uses ordinary means, and sends him
away. How senseless then is it that some talk of predestination, that if it
be to be saved, they cannot be damned, and if to be damned they cannot be
saved, and therefore no means to be used: fie fie of such follies. Do as
Rebecca here does, leave God his apoyntment to himself, and take the ordinary
course to be saved, hear his word, believe his promises, and endeavor to walk
in the ways of his will, then shall God perform his apoyntment to your
comfort as he did to Jacob, the other is but tempting of God, and deceyuing
your selves. Christ himself flies into Egypt from Herod, and yet appointed of
God to live his time, which no Herod could prevent, with many more.

Lastly, note Rebeccas words to her husband, I am weary of my life for the
daughters of Heth, Verse. 46.
etc. See in them, how going about to get Jacob leave to depart the country,
Rebeccas godly discretion.
she tells not her husband the true cause, least she should grieve his heart,
but makes an other excuse, yet a just one. Such wisdom and good discretion
is commendable either in man or woman. Thus she had her desire, her husbands
mind not troubled, her sons both saved, and her self in peace and quiet. It
was the Lords goodness thus to direct her: and that Lord in mercy make all these
things profitable to us. Amen.

Chap. 28.
The heads of this Chapter are chiefly these. The Fathers counsel at his
sons departure. The fact of Esau. The ladder that Jacob saw. The vow which he
made.


1 TOuching particulars. First we may mark how a sweet and temperate nature
in old Isaac rules and ouerruleth all his affections, Anger must have an end.
which otherwise were stirred up against Jacob, when once he sees the will of
God, what it is. He is now so far from raging or railing against Jacob, that
quietly and fatherly he calls him unto him, blesses him, and gives him his
counsel to direct his match. This is a special place for grieved parents to
consider of, or friends whatsoever, that we be not froward and wilful when
children or others have offended. Anger must have an end, Grieved parents or
friends.
and the sight of Gods will must ouerrule us. I have heard of parents that
never would relent, what circumstances so ever were to move them. Their grief
may be just, but yet for all that Isaac here is a better example then they
are, and let us all think of it.

2 He blesses his son Jacob again the second time, Verse. 3.
to confirm his faith, A second blessing of Jacob.
and to strengthen his heart, that the Lord would be with him so long as he
served him in all his matters, such comfort were fathers blessings in those
days to children, which now very little or nothing are regarded.

3 That he calls him God all-sufficient. See comfort and stay of all
trauelers in strange places, The comfort of trauelers.
whose travel lies upon them either by any necessity of their calling, or
for the truth and their good conscience sake. Surely it is this, God is all
sufficient, ever able to protect and save them wheresoever they come: so must
Jacob think that goes abroad and be comfortable, so will Isaac think that
parts with him, and by the same stay his heart concerning the safety of his
son. So let us etc.

Unequal marriage.
4 He forbids him marriage with unbelievers, and it still does remember us
how perfitly those godly Patriarks hated such unequal matches either for lucre
or pleasure, as we in these days make no conscience of.

5 It may be again our learning to mark the estate of Jacob here. Verse. 5.
He is chosen, and his brother rejected, he is the blessed of his father, The
godly often banished.
and the blessed of the Lord, yet must he now go walk, he must abroad and
shift for himself, his country, and fathers house are not for him, a banished
man must he be. O Jacob we see thy case, and consider the lot very often of
Gods dear ones, God make us blessed as thou were, for to be banished is no
news.

6 When Esau saw says the text etc. Now then he sees, when he had offended,
Esau sees too late his fault.
but he should have seen before he offended. An ouerlate sight is good neither
in piety nor policy: for though the proverb said it is never too late to do
well, yet an other answers, that had I wist comes ever behind. So here
etc.

7 Esau seeks to win his parents love again, but all in vain and
preposterously, Verse. 9.
as long as he takes not away the cause of their displeasure, To please God,
the cause of grief must be taken away.
to wit, his Cananitish wives. We may learn thereby that in vain also we
our selves shall ^e^ke Gods favor, and seem religious, except the cause of
his wrath be done away by us, to wit, our sins, and hated offenses.

8 He lodged in the feelds, to wit Jacob, Verse. 11.
a stone under his head, etc. After an humbling, comm^s an exalting.
In which let us mark his estate who was afterward rich and wealthy. The wide
feeld is his house, the cold earth is his bed, a stone is his pillow etc. Where
is our faith when we see this with patience to bear the time of our humbling
and trial, knowing this and many mo examples of Gods exaltation of his
childrens worldly estate, when he sees his time. For who seeing Jacob now
would have thought he should have bin as he was after when he came back
again: yet so he was, and so able is God to any if it be his will. Only
believe in thy adversity, and despair not.

9 That night in his dream he saw a ladder upon earth, and the top of it
reached unto heaven, Verse. 12.
and so the Angels went up and down by it. The ladder what it sign^fieth.
The letter shows us the goodness of God ever comforting his, and strengthening
them, yea then especially when their need is greatest of comfort, as diverse
times we have seen before in this book. The mystery of this ladder may be
this. The ladder is Christ. The foot of it in earth notes his humanity, man
of the substance of his mother borne in the world. The top reaching up to
heaven, notes his diuin^^ie, God of the substance of his Father begotten
before all worlds perfect God, and perfect man, by which union of natures, Col.
1.20.
he has joined earth and heaven together, that is, God, and man. The ascending
and descending of Angels by that ladder, shows how by Christ the service of
Angels is purchased to us to attend us and serve us as he shall think good to
apoynt them, who only is, (I mean Christ our Savior) the ladder whereby we
ascend into heaven. I am the way, says he, and no man comes to the father
but by me etc.

10 And behold the Lord stood above it and said. The Lord, not Ang^l^ keeps
Jacob.
The Lord does speak unto him, and with a most sweet promise comfo^t the heart
of Jacob now thus cast off, as it were to go seek abroad to get a living. By
which we may first note the need of comfort in respect of weakness that the
best men have sometime, for God did not thus cheer up Jacob for no cause.
Secondly, we may note to our own comfort the readynesse of God to offer
before men ask or see the depth of the grief they would otherwise fall into.
And thirdly, that though Angels ascend up and down, yet it is God that
keeps and comfort, and no creature does, but what he is the author of. A
good place to lighten our understanding concerning their blindness that make
Angels their Gods to pray unto, and to expect help from. No says this place,
it is I, it is I, that am with thee, and will keep thee whithersoeuer thou
go, and will bring thee again into this land: for I will not forsake thee,
until I have performed that that I have promised thee. I, I say, I it is and
not these Angels that yet ascend and descend by me to do what service I
apoynt, but they are not of themselves to do any thing, only they obey my
voice, and are ministering Spirits to do what they are commanded. I am the
fountain and author of all. Leave we then this folly, nay great and grievous
impiety to our adversaries, that will not be persuaded by any thing, and
cleave we to God as the only giver of all good, knowing that Angels shall so
far minister unto us as he apoynteth, and no otherwise: for he is the Lord,
and they are but servants.

11 But it is a marvelous sweet speech that I have named, and here you see in
the 15. verse, To us this also spoken
and such as might comfort Jacob in deed with a very full comfort. If the Lord
would say so to me, I would fear nothing may some man think etc. In deed and
would it so cheer you if God should say as much to you? Look then what the
Prophet Hose says, Hose. 12.4.
when he speaks of this thing, and hereafter perform your promise, never
fear, but trust in God, for even thus says the Prophet he spoke unto us, us
I say all, and not only to him.

12 And I will not forsake thee, till etc. O Lord thus art thou in this, Verse.
15.
and thus art thou in all things that thou speak. Not for a time indureth
thy favor, The Lords love lasts.
but whom thou love, to the end thou love them, John. 13.1.
and never will thou leave that man or woman that trusts in thee.

13 Till I have performed what I have promised says the Lord. And did he then
forsake Jacob? no, I ill for ever, not for a time.
it is as much this word till, as never. I will not forsake thee till, that is,
never will I forsake thee. Often also is the word taken elsewhere for a
perpetuity, and does not limit a time, as in the Gospel, I will be with you
till the end of the world, that is, ever, and not then to give over when the
world ends, so Psalm. 72.2. and in other places. Weak therefore is their
conjecture, that think Joseph knew his wife after Christ was borne, because it
is said he knew her not till she had brought forth her first begotten son.
For the word till, there may signify a perpetuity as well as in these places
that I have named, and in others: and the meaning be, he knew her not till
then, that is, he never knew her. I will not says God here forsake thee till
I have performed, that is as I said I will never do it.

14 When Jacob says, Surely the Lord is in this place. Verse. 16.
He means not to include his infinite majesty in a finite place, How God is
in a place.
for God is every where, and may not locally be included any where. But Jacob
meant of the sign of his presence which he gave there, which is usually said
in the scripture to be his being here or there. Read the last of Esaias in
stead of many mo. And I was not aware says Jacob. Whereby we may gather this
comfort, that if the Lord be so near his faithful when they are not aware,
that is, before they seek and look intentiuely for him, how shall he absent
himself when they do look for him, yea shrike with their fervent prayers,
groans, A comfort.
and cries in his Majesty's cares, that he would come unto them and comfort
them? O he can never do it, and therefore doubt not of him, but urge him with
this example if you list to Jacob, and be full of faith.

15 Then Jacob arose, Verse. 18.
took the stone that was under his head, and pitched it as a pillar, and
powered oil upon it. Christ is the stone upon whom we rest.
This stone by some is noted as a figure of Christ, for it was one of the
stores of the place, and preferred by Jacob to this use: so Christ a man of the
nature of men, but chosen amongst them to an higher use and dignity then any
else. This stone was placed in Bethel, that is, Esaias 28.
in the house of God: and the Prophet says of Christ, Ponam lapidem in Sion, I
will put a stone in Sion, etc. Thirdly, this stone had oil powered upon it,
Psalm. 45.
and Christ with the oil of gladness was anointed above his fellows.

Di^nitie of place not (...) one.
16 The name of the place being before called Luz, Jacob now calls Bethell,
that is, the house of God. But afterward in time we read how it fell out that
by Jeroboam and others, it was made Beth-^uen, that is, the house of wickedness
and idolatry, 1. King. 13. 1. King. 13. (...). 18.12. 1. Sa. ^3.5.
And shall we think it an impossible thing for Rome to become Babell, or for
any place to be rejected of the Lord, if it reject him? Rome never had the
promises that other places had, neither ever was God more truly served there
then sometimes he was in Bethel, yet Bethel is changed, and why not Rome? If
it may be, then look not at a place what once it was concerning religion, but
what presently it is, for a change may be, and we know who said it even of
Rome, Quesiui Romam in Roma, and non inueni Romam, I have sought Rome in Rome,
and I have not found Rome, you may see his meaning.

Verse. 20.
17 Jacob vowed, so will Papists, but see the difference, he to God, Popish
vows.
they to Saints, he to perform things agreeable to the word, they contrary to
it, he makes his vow no merit, they do etc. Secondly when Jacob says if God
etc. he means not by that if to make a conditional proposition, Verse. 22.
as not to serve God but for gain, but his intent is, to show what retribution
he will make for all Gods benefits, surely even serve him only for evermore.
Thirdly consider here, that if to make God his God be commended thankefulnes,
then to make creatures our God, is condemned unthankfulness, what coulors
soever we cast upon it. Lastly in thankfulness Jacob will give tenths to God,
and of all that God shall give him, and we will be judged thankful also, and
either pay nothing, or the worst we have, and but of something.

Chap. 29.
There are laid down unto us in this Chapter generally and chiefly these
heads. The coming of Jacob to Haram, with the circumstances. His service there
with Laban. His marriages. His children by Leah.


FOr particulars, it is said, after God had talked with Jacob as we saw before,
Verse. 1.
that Jacob lift up his feet, Jacob chered with the prom^s^, so should we.
and came into the East country, which seems to note some alacrity in him
to go forward after he had had so comfortable a promise of the Lords company
with him, and guiding grace over him in all his ways. If it were so (as sure
there was good cause it should be so) we may profit by it in this sort. He had
a promise, and we have a promise, he was cheered, and so should we be with the
same, he to go into a strange country, we much more to go into our own,
Read Hebr 13. v. 13. and 14.
he to serve many paynefull hours by day and night, we to rule and reign in
unspeakable joys with Father Son and holy Ghost for ever and ever. Go we
then forward with the feet of our affections cheerfully lifted up toward
the place we seek as Jacob did here, and we shall find rest, not for body
alone, but for body and soul eternally.

2 And as he looked about, behold a Well in a seeld. The letter is plain, and
we see in it the providence of God, Verse. 2.
who directed him, and brought him to Labans house. But mystically some have
understood by the feeld ye Church, The allegory of the Well.
and by the well the word of God in the same, which is opened by the chief
shepherd Jesus Christ, that his sheep may drink, and his flocks be watered. O
that we would go to this water to drink ever, then should we be sure to find
him ready that says, Come unto me all ye that thirst, etc. But when we
leave this sweet well of Gods word, and run unto man's traditions, Read
Ierem. 2. v. 13
what marvel if we find no true comfort, to cool our heat withal.

Ve. 4. etc.
3 The dialogue that you see betwixt Jacob and the shepherds of that place,
Cu^tesy to strangers.
notes the curtesy of those days, and of that people to strangers, ever a
good thing as has bin noted before in Abraham and Lot and others. Doggednes
and currishnes graceth neither country nor people.

4 When they say, we may not water till all come together, Man's law more
regarded often then Gods.
etc. We see in them more regard and care to observe the law of shepherds, then
I fear me we can find in our selves to observe the law of the highest. For
who being willed to riot and surfeit, to quaffe and exceed, to swear and
blaspheme, to commit fornication and whoredom, answers in earnest as these
shepeheards did, we may not, the law is contrary, etc. Looser therefore I say
I fear are we to our woe one day in a greater matter, then these shepherds
were in a lesser. Would God we regarded but Princes laws and civil
constitutions as these men did their pastoral orders, then would not many do
as they do, but answer to all allurers, we may not etc.

The force of affections.
5 When Jacob saw Rachell and his uncles flocks, he rolled away the stone off
the well, he watered the flocks, he kissed Rachell, told her who he was, and
lift up his voice and wept. See the affections of flesh unto flesh I mean unto
our carnal kindred, how dull are we that we cannot thus heartily be moved with
the sight and presence of brethren in faith. Consider our coldness, and as we
know the band is better, so daily let us strive to think better of it.

6 Rachel runs and tells her father, Laban he coms running to meet him. A
pattern of the world.
Where we compare and resemble unto Laban this present world, which at the
first meets men as Laban did Jacob, and seeming very joyful for them,
intertaineth them well, but afterward churlishly alters upon them as he did.
Flattring world, how many have thou deceived, that felt nothing but honye for a
time. I say no more: I wis there be mo Labans in the world then have to name
Laban as he had, hoate at first, cold at last, friendly in the beginning,
froward in the end, be Jacob never so worthy of continued love unto him.

7 Laban will not suffer Jacob to serve for nothing, Laborers hyre.
but he will needs give him hyre, at least he makes show so, saying, Though
thou be my brother, Verse. 15.
yet should thou serve me for nothing? whereby we may learn, that if a
brother of a brother be to be rewarded, and one kinsman of an other (for so
means Laban) if he take pains in truth and industry for him: then may we
not see strangers, that are no way bound to us in nature, as the other be, go
without their wages, Sir. 34.23. Deutro. 24.14.15.
neither may we let them go to bed without their hire. And what strangers?
Surely our Ministers, that faithfully and truly teach us, we may not defraud,
our servants we may not rob of their due, neither any labourer that works
with us, for this were more injustice then the other, and yet the other, such
as Laban makes show to be ashamed of^

8 Jacob is content, all other wages set a side, to serve him 7. years for
Rachell his youngest daughter. Wherein we see, Verse. 18.
how Jacob uses lawful means to come by his Wife, use of good means to
obtain a marriage.
and not unlawful, and at the seven years end also, asks her, and does not
take her by force. Compare it with the damnable liberty of our days, wherein
gayning our purpose, Verse. 21.
is thought both obedience to God, and love to our neighbor sufficient, though
we would be loath our selves to have such measure, and both God and man abhor
us for it. That the time seemed so short, shows the force of affection when
it is set.

9 Laban accepted the condition, Verse. 19.
and the years being expired, the marriage is solemnized: of a feast at
marriages, Rites of marriages then.
we read here, Verse. 22.
and in John 2. of ma^riage garments, that is cleaner or extraordinary
somewhat, according to our places and abilities. Math. 25. Of Virgins going
before with Lamps. Math. 25, and so forth. But I remember yet what Chrysostom
notes, when he says, De nuptiis Jacob legimus, de tripudis and chorets non
legimus. We read of Jacobs marriage, but of dancing we read not.

10 When evening came, Laban deceived Jacob, and gave him his daughter Leah in
steed of Rachell, Verse. 23.
Labans deceit.
whom he could not by any light then know, because of the V^^les which
Virgins were covered with all, in token of chastity. The simplicity of those
days appear in it, which I leave to your own considerations, and think we
of the world in this place, which may well be resembled to Laban. Because as
Laban promised fair Rachell, The world like Laban
but in the end performed but bleere eyed Leah, so does the world promise
often mountains to men, but perform in conclusion little moulehils, my
meaning it is: many men gape and hope upon promises, for many matters, and in
the end are served with a iugling cast, as here Jacob was, and miss of matter
they looked for. Trust not the world then, nor all golden promises in the
same, for men are false upon the weights, and Laban is alive to deceive still:
Believe you shall have a thing when you have it, and not over hastily before
you were best.

Why Laban brake promise.
11 But why would not Laban give him Rachell as he promised? we see he
pretends custom and manner of that place, not to give the younger before the
elder, but why then had he not so ^ould him in the beginning? Verse* 26.
The truth is plain, he meant no truth, Verse. ^^.
but finding Jacob such a servant for his profit, as he could not well spare,
Ve. 28. etc
and very gladly would retain still, he wrought this craft to continue his
service to him, for seven years more. Which was performed of Jacob, and that
willingly, for his affection to Rachell. So Laban had his purpose, though by a
bad means, and little honesty in him.

12 When the Lord saw that Leah was despised, he made her fruitful, Verse.
31.
but Rachell was barren, says the text. First we see the power and strength of
affections, Whom man despises, God regards.
even in the best men many times. Here they were so strong in Jacob, that Leah
in comparison of Rachell was despised: which the Lord saw and misliked, giving
upon that a mercy to her, that he gave not to Rachell, to be fruitful and
bear. Wherein we see again, that children are the blessing of the Lord, and
his free gift, never to be had by any power but by his. Leah ioyeth in his
mercy, and acknowledges that it proceeded from God, who looked upon her
tribulation, and therefore she blesses him, Ve. 32. etc.
and gives her Children names according to her feeling of that goodness: so
should we do, and not so little regard this mercy as many do. She hops
her Husband will now love her, and keep her company, by which we see what
should be, if it be not in all men, children are a Chain to bind them to
their wives in all love and affection, and this Chain is strong with all good
men. Lastly she was contented with her number, and we also must learn to
moderate our desire by her. Many things else are in this Chapter, which rather
private reading then open speech should note.

Chap. 30.
The chief points or heads of this Chapter are these. Jacobs children by
others. Labans hardness to Jacob. Jacobs painful diligence notwithstanding.


FOr particulars, first the text says, that when Rachel saw she bare no
children, as her sister did, she enuyed her sister. etc. Where both her envy,
and unadvised speech to her Husband, to give her Children, shows the
frailty of Women when they want any thing that they much desire.

The frailty of women when they want their wills.
They are not patient and moderate as they should be, but suffer affections and
passions, to carry them headlong both into sin against God, and offenses to
their husbands. We see it here in Rachell, otherwise, a good woman no doubt
of it, and let the foulenes of the spot in her make us wise and wary, to
avoid it in our selves. It graced not her, it cannot grace us, nay it
disgraced her, and it will all to blurre and blot us. She wished not to others
as to her self, no not to her own sister: no more do we I fear me, she
praised not God as well for his mercy to others, as to her self, no more do we
I fear me, yet both she and we bound to do it. Better then is the spirit, that
not finding in it self what it wishes, ioyeth yet unfeignedly that others have
it.

Verse. 2.
2 The answer that Jacob makes to her unadvised speech may very well show us,
Saint seruers.
what answer all Saint seruers should have at their Saints hands, if they heard
the petitions that are made unto them, namely as Jacob answered Rachel, am I in
Gods steed to do this or that for thee. For the anger of Jacob being alive,
may well assure us of the like now, except heaven have made him less zealous
for Gods glory, which no man thinks. Again, his earnest speaking, Zeal.
or anger that was kindled, may teach us also, how our hearts should burn, and
be troubled and grieved in us, when we hear men ask of creatures, what is
the creators, both glory and mercy to give.

Ver. 3. etc
3 The giving of their maids unto Jacob, full fowly shows the impatience of
flesh and blood, Impatience.
to stowpe to Gods pleasure, and endure what he does appoint unto us. They had
rather have children in this sort, then tarry Gods time in patience and hope.
Jacobs act in consenting, may not be our example. Many things in the Fathers
God endured, that he allowed not simply, being not so from the beginning. The
names of the children show their affections, which imposed them, and so
sometimes still, as yet amongst us.

Verse. 14
4 Ruben goes forth in the wheat harvest, and finds Mandrakes. Mandraks.
To discourse whereof, belongs rather to Physicians, then Divines. It is an
herb, whose root has a certain likeness of the figure of a man. There is
male and female of it: that is, two sorts, differing in greatness both of
root, leaf, and fruit, which commonly men call after this sort. The fruit
of the female as is written, in quantity like a Chestnut or Wallnut. The Aple
of the male, as great as an Egg: the root forked as man is: the smell of it
very passing pleasant: for the force of it to work love, I leave it to others
to justify, that so write of it. For the efficacy of it, either of root or
apple, in helping barrennes in Women, which seems to be ascribed to it by
these sisters here, (they contending so about it) happily it is not general.
For the Herb being very could, cannot have that effect in all bodies, but
rather the contrary in some, namely in cold. But in hot countries, as in
Affrike, Spain, Italy, Egypt, and such like, where the bodies are commonly of
extraordinary heat, this may be used to bring them to some good temperature,
and consequently, if God will, to more fruitefulnesse, immoderate heat being
an enemy to conception, as well as immoderate cold is. But as I say, I leave
these things to Physicians. For Ruben that found them, I rather think he
brought them for the pleasantness of the smell, which is written to be very
great, then for secret virtue that he knew to be in them, Cantic. 7.
to such an end as we now speak of. I will tell you what one writes of his
own experience, and so leave this. Leuinus Lemnius says, he had hanged of the
leaves and apples in his studdie, An experience of Mandraks.
for the great pleasure of the smell: and in time he began to be so heavy
headed, that he could not hold open his eyes in his studdie, but must needs
sleep, and thus he continued rather every day worse then other. At last,
wondering what should ayle him, and striving with him self, by casting his
eyes too and fro, up and down, he threw them upon the Mandrakes, and
presently suspecting they were the cause, he removed them away out of his
studdie. Upon which he every day amended, and his sleepie pang was gone. So is
it surely effectual, to sleep by this experience.

5 When Rachel sought some of these Mandrakes of her sister, Verse. 15.
she angerly answered, Imperfections ^n the best.
Is it not enough for thee to take away mine Husband, except thou take my
Sons Mandrakes also. Whereby we see how either an old grief breaks out,
or else how indeed Jacob was to blame, to accompany the one so much for
beauty, that he grieved and neglected the other, who had borne him children.
Every way it shows imperfections of flesh in men and women of the best, note.

6 Jacobs coming late from the Field in the Evening, shows his painful
service, Women, kind to their husbands.
to his great praise, and the example of all servants that desire to be
compted good, Leah going out to meet him, may well be a pattern to all wives
of kindness and love to their husbands, and in her was a fruit of a loving
woman. It is some comfort to him that has traveled truly, to be welcome
home, though his fare be but silly. And froward unkindness betwixt couples
pearceth deep. Leah is dead, but this kind meeting of her husband, when he
comes from his labor, with both good face and good heart, may live and rule
in us, if God will.

God the giver of children.
7 They both conceive and have Children, Leah and Rachell, but it is said, God
heard them, and remembered, and opened the womb, all which give glory to God
for children, and not to man, nor any means whatsoever, as I have noted
before. The desire that here appears of children, may be the poor man's
comfort, that has his house full.

A good conscience in a servant.
8 When Rachell had conceived, and borne also, Jacob then asks his wives,
that he may depart, and tells his uncle He knows what service he has
done. Where we see, how a good conscience makes his master judge, yea a good
conscience fears no judge. The Apostle tells them, they know after what
sort he has been amongst them, Acts. 20.
etc. Strive we then ever for this good conscience and clean hand, that we be
not ashamed.

9 If I have now found favor in thy sight, says Laban, tarry, Verse. 27.
for I have perceived the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, Fair speech for
profit.
etc. See and note, how fair a subtle worldling can speak for his profit,
and see how palpable fair flattery is, when expeence has been had before of
no such nature. Why is not Jacob rewarded all this while for his service, being
by Labans own confession so good? Surely the better nature, the sooner abused
by kind speeches drawn along, and nothing given, least if he had any thing he
should depart. So the old saying was ever true, Bonus seruus perpetuus asinus.
If he be a good servant, keep him still under, and so shall you enjoy him
longed. So that be he good, or be he had, Servants not rewarded.
the worldly and unkind master will give little or no reward. For if bad,
then he deserves nothing says his Master, if good, then fair words must
feed him and his charge, nothing given, least he depart. He must be drawn on
to serve in expectation, that still he may serve. But such Labans are not so
wise as they take themselves. For they rob themselves indeed by this course of
many an honest heart, that both is with them, and would be with them, if such
wicked unkindness were not.

10 In Jacobs answer, note a reuer^nt expostulation, Ver. 29.30
but no exprobration, A thankful acknowledging of Gods blessing.
together with a godly observation of Gods blessing upon his service, and a
careful ascribing of glory to God for it, and let it be whilst we live our
imitation in any thing whatsoever, wherein we find the blessing of God upon us.
For gratiarum actio est ad plus dandum inuitatio. A thankful heart pulls
the Lord on to more mercy, when a proud mind to give to our selves, what his
mere mercy has given to us, drives both him and his goodness away.

11 But now when shall I travel for mine own house, Verse. 30.
says Jacob: Care of family.
wherein we see under the Lords hand and seal warranted, that with care for
others, we may lawfullye join a care for our selves, and those that be ours.
For he that provides not for his family (says the Apostle) has denied the
faith, 1. Tim. 5.
and is worse then an infidel. Yet so will Jacob care here for his own, that
he is content God shall strike the stroke, and dispose the number of Lambs to
his share at his pleasure. Such trust in the Lord, and contented relying upon
his good pleasure, becomes all men.

12 Then said Laban, what shall I give thee, worldly minds love certainties, for
fear any liberality should be expected at their hands. When a man knows his
price, think they he knows his pain, and if I pay that he can challenge no
more, I perform promise, but if I leave it uncertain, and let him stand to
my courtesy, happily my credit may be cost to, for I must content him, etc,
Thus earthly and base minds, have usually earthlye and base conceits. Still
is their hand upon their halfepenny.

13 Jacob will no certainty, but chooses a way, wholly depending upon the
Lords blessing. Verse. 32.
A notable trust in God.
Wherein, as I said before, he shows his firm trust in Gods providence. Which
trust we must follow, though the manner of covenant bind us not, being in Jacob
an extraordinary instinct, that Gods power, mercy, and favor, to him and his
truth, and honest service to Laban, might the better appear,

14 But why says Jacob, this day will I do it? was there such have of it?
Worldlings be wavering.
In respect of Jacob, no. But for Laban, Jacob knew full well rich men's
properties most commonly for wages and promises: namely to differ long, and
perform hardly then also, therefore he will take him while he may have him,
leaving him no second cogitations. But leaving us an example of lawful
wisdom, when we deal with wretched minded men, that more regard profit then
honesty.

15 So shall my righteousness answer for me, says Jacob, etc. Where we all see,
Verse. 33.
how the godly doubt not of the reward of their truth with God, Reward
infers not merit but mercy.
though their truth merit not the same, Chap. 32.10. I am not worthy says
this same servant of God, of the least of thy benefits, etc. Therefore no
merit, yet here my righteousness shall answer for me nevertheless. Why then
should a popish eye not see, that denial of merit, takes not away reward of
mercy. But happily they see it, and are not content with reward of grace,
except their works may be also meritorious, which if it be so, let them look
to it. Romans 11.6.
For such pride will smart one day, that will have Gods grace fall, that their
merit may stand. The Apostle teaching us, that grace denies merit, and merit
denies grace. And the Father also, when he says, Gratia non est gratia nisi
omni modo sit gratuita.

16 Would God it might be so says Laban. Verse. 34.
See a churl if ever you will see a kindly one. Jacob is his flesh and blood
by birth, A covetous man greedy of a good bargain at any man's hand
and his son in law by marriage, he has both his daughters, and their
children are many, bone of his bone, yet is he glad to have Jacob on the hip
for a bad bargain as he hoped, and thinking hereby to gain Jacobs service
for little or nothing, would God says he, this bargain might stand. Where he
should rather have said in all course of nature and civil honesty: Alas my
son, this will be no great gain to thy maintenance, and to the maintenance
of thy wives and children, which be mine as thy self art also, to love and
care for ever, therefore devise some better way then this, for I would wish
thee far more, etc. But as true as old is the saying: Quod facis ingrato
perit. What service a man does to an unkind master it perishes. And in
vain do the children of God depend upon worldly and base minded men for
reward. Look we to God, look we to God, who shall never fail us, as Jacob
did.

17 Then Laban went through the flocks, and separated the spotted from
therest, whereas in ye 32 verse, Covetousness breeds suspicion.
Jacob said he would do it. What now if Laban would not trust Jacob, was it not
a fine reward of his great truth, and might not a man have joy to serve such a
master. He sets them also, when he had parted them three days journey a
sunder from the rest, and with his own sons, every way as you see
preventing iugling with Jacob, which as it seems he half suspected. But what
see you and I, and all flesh, that will consider it? surely that which may be
our lasting comfort and sweet joy: namely, that the more warely and wil^ly,
subtly, and cunningly, that worldly men deal with Gods children, the more
breaks out Gods mercy toward them, and their clear truth, innocence and
honesty, to the praise of God, to the comfort of them, and to the confusian of
them that thought an evil thought of them. Care away then, when the wicked
sift us and search us, compass us round about, to spy into us, what they may
rebuke, for they work for us, and not against us. God is on our side stronger
then they, and in despite of all their peevish policies he will have his love
and our truth appear. O truth then in all our delights to be kept as a jewel,
more worth then any treasure.

18 Jacob feeds the rest says the text of Labans sheep, to wit, A quiet
mind.
with a quiet mind* well contented, and nothing discouraged with his uncles
too too suspicious and unkind dealing, he wayteth with patience and godly
comfort of heart for the Lords blessing upon his true service, and nothing
doubts but that he who inioyes the earth, and all that is in it, had enough
for him and his, and would as his good pleasure should be minister it to him.
Let all servants consider this faith and truth in Jacob, and follow it: and
remember, that though they serve men, yet they serve also the Lord in those
men, Ephesians. 6.7.
which Lord, will deal like himself ever.

19 Then Jacob took rods of green popular etc. A fact that at first seems
great falsehood, Verse. 37.
craft and subtlety in Jacob, and very unlawful. But better considered, it is
not so. For as touching the warrant of it, the next Chapter tells us plain
it was Gods apoyntment, verse 9.10.
from whom no unjust thing can proceed. Far therefore is it from being any
cover to their craft that shall be without like author by their own corruption
practiced of any. Now if any man go further and think such a means may not
well be ascribed to God, unless we will make the Lord unrighteous and
faulty, let that man consider and see how he not only touches Jacob in
credit who ascribes it so, nay the spirit of God who cannot lie, and who
directed the pen of Moses to lay this down, but further, he denies the Lord
that equity and right which he see^h and confesses and grants to man. For
what if a judge condemn one that has wronged or robbed a man, to pay him four
fould, is it injustice in him? no, and why then if the Lord condemn Laban to
answer Jacob a portion for the wrong he has done him, shall he be unjust?
May not the Lord give unto his servant his own blessing without injustice? Or
is God so bound to Laban to bless his flocks still that he may not alter his
hand without a fault? And what else does God in this place, but suffer Laban to
enjoy whatsoever he had gotten by his blessing upon Jacobs true service and
for Jacobs sake before, without taking thereof any thing away. Only hereafter
he will not dispose his blessing as he had done, but for Labans ill dealing,
will translate it from him to Jacob. Is this unlawful for the Lord that is
bound to none, to use his liberty? God forbid: and this is all that God does
here. If you say, O but the means seems cunning. I pray you consider
whether man be to apoynt Gods means or no, saying thus shall thou effect thy
will, and not otherwise. If not, then both leave Gods blessing for the cattle,
and liking of the means free to his own wisdom, and take ever his will to
be a rule most sure of all right. Then is it a question whether this was
miraculous, or natural, or mixed, partly miraculous, and partly by nature, and
it is concluded that it was mixed, it being nothing prejudicial to the power of
God to use a means, although ever he does not, but sometime with, and
sometimes without. Without means the Lord wrought when he gave Manna to the
Israelites, when he divided Jordan, when he made Aarons rod to bud, and such
like. So healed Christ many other by the power of his word, without any means.
With means, when he appointed a plaster of figgs to Ezekias, when Naaman
washed in Jordan, when Christ used clay and spittle, and such like. Also in the
means that God uses, it is to be noted, yt sometimes they are in nature
somewhat auayleable to such an effect, sometimes nothing at all, but rather
contrary. Auaylable as oil and water to heal etc. Nothing auaylable as clay
and spittle to give sight etc. This fact of Jacobs in setting the rods in this
sort, was of ye first kind namely in nature somewhat auaylable, for great is
the power of imagination by conception either of reasonable or brute beasts
which imagination is affected and moved by sights very much, and (...) was here
by these party colored rods For these rods wrought not this effect because they
were looked upon, but because the inward senses were affected by them, and the
imagination made as it were like them. Now if any will say, there were some
seal in this, if imagination and generation belonged to one and the same
faculty, or to one and the same part of the body, but none now as it is,
imagination belonging to the mind, Animae.
and generation to nature, imagination also being in the brain, and generation
in the members of body appointed there unto much distant from the brain: that
man must remember that yet they are the actions of one and the same creature,
and being so, there is a simpathy and mutual affecting of parts of the same
body, though they be diverse and much distant in place one from an other.
Experience you see in the parts of generation, which are affected, moved and
stirred with unclean thoughts and conceits in the mind, as is also the
thought and mind by those parts, if seed do abound in them to stir up lust.
And therefore still no marvel but natural and by course of reason, possible,
that the mind affected with a sight, and an impression thereof entered into the
imagination, should also have an operation and an effect in the womb below to
frame and form the thing therein conceived after that sort. This was ever
allowed of Philosophers, Physicians, and all learned, and examples many related
in authors of the same. Galen tells an experience of a woman that had a most
fair child, neither her self nor husband being so. And how? only by an
intentive beholding a fair picture. Hyppocrates speaks either of the same or
the like, and says, the woman being accused and condemned in all judgments as
dishonest and adulterous, she was quit by him, who commanding a search to be
made what pictures she had in her house, and one being found of a very fair
young man, Hyppocrates assured them of her honesty, by a learned discourse of
the power of imagination in these things. Quintilian in his controversy wherein
he defends the Matrone that brought forth a black More, uses this argument
to clear her with. In Spain it is well known, that by setting before the eyes
of their Mares the fairest horse they can possibly get, they have found it
specially profiting to their desire. Ciuit. 18.5.
Austen gives this very reason wherefore in Egypt there is never wanting a
white spotted Ox, which they call Apis, De Trinit. lib. 11.
and worship for a God. In an other place he much speaks of the great things
that are wrought hereby, except some gross corpulence or hard matter hinder
in the female. By all which you see it appears plainly, that together with ye
working power of God, which in this was chief, and ever is, yet even in nature
and reason this laying of partycolored rods to affect ye imagination of the
females at the time of their heat before their eyes, was effectual, to bring
to pass a like colored young one to Jacobs gain, whose bargain was to have all
such, and only such.

20 There is another question in this place yet, and that is concerning the
time when Jacob laid the rods in. And some have said he observed a time of
the day, namely the morning, and not the evening, others a time of the year,
as about September, that they might Lamb about March, and not at March, that
they might bring forth about September. The latter is better., and more
agreeable to the text: yet they that houlde the first, would seem to rely
much upon the benefit of sleep, which has gone before. As if by reason
thereof, the morning should be better both for a stronger conception, and also
for a more quick affectation of the power imaginatiue. What is true we may
think of, if we will, and that is this: The most kind of creatures (that be
for man's use) sleep in the night, and feed and labor in the day, Therefore
the morning generation is after sleep and before meat, the evening, after
meat and before sleep. Wherefore in the morning the seed is better
concocted, and the brain wherein the imagination is more quick, free, and
clear. For sleep especially furthereth concoction, riddeth away the vapors of
the brain, and gives vigor and strength, to sense and motion. Therefore the
seed by reason of better concoction, is more fruitful, and the imaginatiue
virtue by means of the late refection of the spirits by sleep, and clearing of
the brain, more forcible and effectual. Contrariwise, at night the meat
lying unconcocted, the head is charged with thick vapors from the stomach,
and the imagination wearyed with long watching. And so consequently, the seed
neither so fruitful and strong, neither the imagination so effectually moved
and smitten as in the morning. But as I said, it is better to refer Jacobs
deed, to the stronger and better parts of the year, which he carefully
observing, to lay or not lay the rods before the sheep, he had both more
and more strong, Laban fewer and weaker. And this I hope may suffice, both for
this place and this Chapter.

Chap. 31.
In this Chapter we may consider generally. The causes of Jacobs departure.
Evil words. Change of cou^tena^ce. Gods commandment.
The manner of the same, together with Labans following. The covenant betwixt
Jacob and Laban.


PArticularly. First, these words that Labans sons speak, Jacob has taken
away all that was our father, etc. together with the countenance of Laban,
Verse. 1.2.
that was not toward him as in time past, and let us note these things in them
and by them.

First and foremost the nature of this worldly trash and pelf, how the love of
it seuereth and sundreth near and dear friends, makes them dislike greatly
one of an other, and remove dwelling so far a sunder, Worldly goods part
friends.
that seldom or never they meet again. A most woeful effect of such a cause,
and a most horrible corruption in us, that should ouerrule such earthly
affections.

Secondly, how nothing contenteth a covetous mind as long as he sees an other
man thrive by him. He would have all, and without he will never be pleased.

Thirdly, how like to the father the children be, all of them mutterers and
murmurers against Jacob, for the blessing that God voutsafed him.

And lastly, how hot youth bableth out that which cooler age covers and
keeps in. Laban as bad in heart as they, but yet he keeps his tongue and
dissembleth, so cannot the young men do, their blood is too warm, and wily
craft has not yet possessed them.

Verse. 2.
2 That Labans countenance was changed toward Jacob as the text says we see,
Face shows what heart thinks.
Quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu. How hard it is not to bewray in
face what lodges in heart against any. Vultus index animi. The countenance
declares the mind, and so here.

3 When Labans face is changed, th^n Jacob of like be thinks him of his
Country, (...)
though not presuming to attempt any return without better warrant. And we
may thus profit by it, even to consider how good it is sometimes to have men's
faces change, that we may thereby the rather look unto better things, as to
the Lord, and the light of his countenance, to heaven our country, where no
snubs be etc. which happily we are too cold in, as long as man's favor carries
us along in ye liking of this world. Why does David say it was good for him
that he had bin in trouble, Psalm. 119.
but that he felt the change of man kindle in him a sweeter thought of that God
and his great mercy that cannot change, but yesterday, and to day, and forever,
is the same. Why says he again so earnestly, but it is good for me to hold
me fast by God, by God I say, and to put my trust in him etc. saving that man's
tott^ring love, and too fickle friendship smote his heart with a deeper
consideration of the comfort thereof above all earthly things whatsoever. No
doubt again but it was good for Joseph that Putiphar turned upon him as he did
without cause, for he saw thereby what man is, and what God is, and how broken a
reed he trusts unto that makes flesh his arm, and thinks all shall be well
with him, because such and such give him countenance. Alas alas who has not
bin deceived by man's fickle favor, and thought all was sure, when and whilst
he had that, and rather might many things fall out, then such persons change
their love without just cause. But their experience at last has bin even as
Jacobs was here, that neither truth of service, and performance of p^ynefull
savor by day and night, neither neerenes in blood before marriage nor any
increase of knot by marriage, neither any blessing of God given unto pains, nor
any thing whatsoever, could bold that love that was never true, but for
respects, or that man or woman that never made conscience indeed of deserts, to
yield them due comfort according to their quality. But well well, let it be
too late to call again yesterday, yet it is not too late to day to see the
word of the Lord before us, and to mark this example of Jacob, how he found
a change in his own uncle, without any just cause, and to beware our selves of
being over far carried hereafter with that which is so uncertain in it self.

Verse. 3.
4 And the Lord said unto Jacob, turn again unto thine own country, When
man forsakes, God releeueth.
etc. See the sweet mercy of Almighty God to his true servant. When man
sowreth, he laugheth upon him, when man hates, he loves, and when man looks
away with a face quite altered, he looks upon and unto his true Jacob, with
the eyes of his old mercy and loving kindness, rather much increased, then
any one iotte lesned and diminished. O comfort, a true one, and a great one:
for thus I feel it. When the potentates of this world list to wax big
against a poor child of God, and to swell with dislike against him, they also
add this vanity, to that grievous iniquity, that they think he shall never
be able to bear their displeasure, but he is even in their hands to be used as
they will, and what will they? Surely they intend to beggar him and all his, to
crush him, and break his back, to grind his face, and play Rex with him at
their pleasure. And other mad men are also of that mind, and begin to say,
alas how shall he do, such an one is offended with him, and his countenance is
changed upon him. Surely he is undone, and cast away, with other like speeches
to that end. But let these Nimrods, that so will tyrannize over any poor
Jacob, and such faithless fearful men, as so bewail the oppressed, look
upon this example here, and consider it well.

Did Jacob perish, when Labans face changed, and all his children with him,
has Laban power to sink him and crush him, and do what he will? No, but
when all these changes are in man, then God steppeth in and looks upon him
that man will not see, speaks unto him, directs him from them so unkind
regarders of a true heart toward them, and wholly takes him into his own
protection, to his own care, that neither they nor any for them shall hurt
him, and Jacob shall live in an other place under his blessing and mercy,
better then ever he did there amongst them. O God then ever be thou our God,
we beseech thee dearly, and we care not what changes man shall make upon us
unjustly and unkindly.

5 Then Jacob sent for his wives into the feeld to him, Verse. 4.
Rachel and Leah. Whereby we may note, Husbands should confer with their
wives.
how in matters concerning them, it is a good man's part to confer with his
wife, and not to do all upon a brain, in a kind of proud and unkind
authority over the woman, who though she be in subjection unto her husband by
law of sex and marriage, yet is she his fellow and companion and helper also,
even by advise and counsel many times. Sweet then is the conference of man and
wife together about common causes concerning them both, and let it be liked in
our eyes ever by this example of Jacob, Read before upon Chap. 18. verse 6.
that intending a remove from so unfriendly a friend, sends for his wives to
him, and talks with them. His speech has in effect bin considered before by
his parts, and we shall not need to stand upon the particulars again, only
your self read it and consider it: marking in the 6. verse, how a true
servant that has conscience in him serves, namely, with all his might, this
is opposite to that eye service which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 6.

6 Come we therefore to the answer of his wives, V. 14. etc.
who with one consent said unto him, Wives ought to cleave to their husbands.
Have we any more portion and inheritance in our fathers house etc. Do
whatsoever God has said unto thee. By which ready and full consent, we see the
duty again of godly wives, namely, when their husbands do impart unto them
his purpose grounded upon just causes and sufficient warrant, then not to hang
back, to cross him and grieve him, and not to yield to him, but rather with
these gracious women here to say, what God has put in thy mind that do. We
are ready, and we will obey. Thy lot shall be our lot, and the Lords good
pleasure all our lots. Again let it not be unconsidered, how Jacob finding
just fault with their father, and upon true cause complaining of him, the women
yield unto truth, and neither cleave to their father against their husband, nor
forsake their husband for to justify their father. Here is no such crossing
partiality, but as God has made them wives to Jacob, so they cleave unto him
kindly, and prefer him before all the world.

7 By which willing consent to forsake father and friends, country and all, A
type of the Church.
and to cleave unto their husband, may be happily resembled the nature of the
Church the spouse of Christ, which is ever to forsake all and to follow him.

Verse. 19.
8 Rachell departing, stole her fathers idols, which he called Gods, Weakness
in the best.
a great fault in a good woman: but weakness sometimes is in the best, and it
may not be justified. This itch of superstition though good men endeavor, yet
can they not ever utterly extinguish in their dearest, but in long time, if
ever.

9 Jacob thus gone and removed away with all that he had, three days after
Laban hears of it, Verse. 22.
and pursues hotely with all his power. What he meant to do we cannot tell,
because God has not told us, but of like he was fiery enough, and conceived
dislike before, would now prick him forward mightily. But what do we see? truly
that which with unspeakable comfort we may well note and ever remember, A
sweet comfort.
to wit, how God cools him and tempereth him before he comes unto Jacob to
overtake him, charging him in a dream for his life not only to do no evil,
but not to say so much as an evil word to Jacob. Take heed says God, take
heed. Can a man conceive of this care and mercy in God toward Jacob as it
deserves? O how true said the Prophet David, Psa. 144.15
yea rather blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God etc. for so
it is in deed. If God be with a man, little needs he to care for unjust
rages after him and against him. The Lord has a snaffle to put in their ^a^^es
that pursue his dear ones, and they shall do no jot more then he will. I^
ever you saw a worlding curb^d, you see it here. Not a word, much less a
deed must pass against Jacob, save what is good. Thus restrained the Lord
Saul, and made him a Paul in his hetest pursuit of the godly. Thus ever has
God done, and ever shall do as shall be best. Comfort your hearts then beloved
ever with this example, and fear not man: but fear, and love, honor and serve
to your dying day this God that can, this God that will, and now does so bridle
an enemy.

Verse. 27.
10 In the 27. verse, you see what Laban says, if he had known of Jacobs
departure, (...)
he would have sent him away with mirth and with songs, with tymbrel and with
harp. Thus is his tongue changed by the Lords warning, but God knew his heart.
There were many presumptions by former facts how he would have liked his
departure if he had bin made acquainted with it, but it is best now to say the
best, and gracious is that God that can pull such words out of a man
displeased, and force him to speak nothing but fair where he will have it
so. Let all snuffers and browbeaters of honest men consider this, and see if
they can do what they list.

11 I am able to do you evil says Laban, Verse. 29.
but God has forbidden me etc. How the godly and wicked differ.
Where we may see a difference betwixt the godly and ungodly men. The first
speak and boast of justice and equity, saying, this or that is due to you by
right, and to your offense, but the second boast and brave it ever with their
power and might, saying this and that I am able to do, as Laban did here, I
trust we are resolved soon whether to follow.

12 In calling those idols his Gods, saying, Why have thou stolen my gods,
Verse. 30.
he bewrays unto us what all idolaters and superstitious persons do and
think, whatsoever they say, namely, The gods of idolaters.
even make and use, repute and take such things as they worship besides the
true God, for their gods. And what skilleth it for the name, when there is
proof of the thing.

13 In Jacobs answer, carry your eye to Labans objections which were 3. First,
that being his servant, he fled away secretly, Verse. 31.
secondly, that he took away his daughters and their children, Jacobs answer
to three objections
being so near to him in blood without his priuitie, and thirdly and lastly
why he stole away his gods, unto all which Jacob answers, but diversely, for
to the two first he says plainly it was because he was afraid, and thought
that Laban would have taken his two daughters from him: wherein we may note ye
open simplicity and vprightnes of Jacob, in telling the truth even as it was
indeed, without such colors and cunning as me^ use in these days. To the third
he answers by a stout denial, referring him not only to search all that ever
he had, but offering the party to death with whom any such thing might be
found. By which unadvised speech he rashly ouershot himself, Rashness in Jacob.
Read Genesis 44.9.
and would have bin as sorry as ever was Ieptha when his daughter met him, if
Laban had taken him at his word, and found the gods with Rachell, Jacobs
dearest wife. We learn therefore by it, that hasty speech may work much woe,
and therefore be we not over rash. We know none so well as our selves, and
therefore good to be so bold to promise innocence for none but our selves for
fear of reprofe. But yet this is, As one is themself so they think of others.
and this was, and this will be ever, that as every one is true and good
himself, so easily thinks he others to be such, but often deceived, and so
was Jacob here. Yet as God would it was not then found out, for Rachell made a
cunning excuse, as you see in the text, that her father should not search under
her, where in deed these idols were though unknown to Jacob. Read 1. Sam.
19.13. somewhat to the purpose.
Such wits have women often times upon a distress, to shift away a shame,
which in deed were better never deserved, then with any devise, though never
so fine avoided.

Verse. 36.
14 Then Jacob was wroth, says the text, and chid with Laban, Some anger
lawful.
a just anger that has a just cause, and is not immoderate. What grief to a
true man to be made a thief, and to be burdened with practice that his soul
abhors. Yet this you see falls out sometimes, and by name now here to
Jacob, which must work a stay of mind in us if a like thing happen. Exo.
32.19. Number. 16.15 1. Sa. 20.34.
Moses was angry when he saw the calfe, and when Corah rebelled, Number. 16.15*
Jonathan for his fathers rage against his friend David, and many more examples
of lawful anger has the scripture, so that all anger is not forbidden, but
only such as has sin in it.

15 In the expostulation that Jacob makes, if you mark it and read it, From
38. to 43.
is notably laid down the faithful usage of a good servant, and the unkind
requital of a bad master. A good servant is not flitting every day and
changing, Properties of a good servant, and a bad master.
but 20. year in a place sometimes as Jacob here. He wastes not any ways his
masters good under his hands, but so cares for and regards all things, that
his master prospers by his faithful travel, in the day he is consumed in
the heat, and with frost in the night, and his sleep departs from his eyes,
for thus speaks Jacob of himself. An unkind master is described thus,
cruelly he requires of the hands of his servant whatsoever is lost, without
regard of circumstances: he changes his wages often and ever to the worse, and
at last he sends empty away, whom in all conscience he should reward very
liberally. Thus you see is Laban charged here, and let us be ashamed of such
qualities.

16 Then Laban answered, These daughters are my daughters, etc. Now see a trick
of this world again, Hollow slattery.
when a man is brideled, and dare not hurt, then to pretend favor and love,
and to smooth the matter as though he never meant hurt, which is not so. This
iugling the world has not lost yet, but God sees truth, and loves truth.

Finally, a covenant of love Laban will have made, A quiet end of all troubles.
because his conscience accused him of evil deserts. Jacob is content, and
letting anger go, makes them good cheer. Laban swears like an idolater, and
Jacob aright, consider you both: of a rough beginning, there is a smooth
ending. Laban takes his leave, and departs quietly, and all is well. O able
God, and careful God for thy children ever, make us thy servants faithful and
true, that in all storms we may find thy favor, and of all fears no worse
an end then in thy mercy may be to our comfort, as this was now to Jacobs.

Chap. 32.
The chief things of this Chapter are these. The meeting of the Angels. The
meeting of his brother Esau. And his wrestling with the Angel.


FOr particulars, let us remember that but even now was ended Jacobs fear of
Laban, and his bad measure that he was ever like to offer to him and his, A
succession of fear to the godly.
had not God restrained him, and now followed presently at the end of that the
fear of his brother Esau, whom he must meet. What shows this unto us, but
the continual succession of fear upon fear, trouble upon trouble, and trial
upon trial unto the godly, to the true teaching of us what to expect, Finis
vinus mali gradus est sutur^.

God comfortable, and in fit time.


and wherewithal not to be dismayed if it happen, for it is the lot of Gods
dearest.

2 We see here a multitude of Angels meet Jacob as he sets on his
journey. Where first mark the thing, and then the opportunity of it touching
time. For the thing it self, it truly confirms this doctrine, that God
gives his Angels charge over his elect to attend and defend them as shall
seem best to his great, mercy and infinite wisdom, so says the Apostle, are
they not all ministering spirits, Hebr. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation? so
says the Prophet, the Angels of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear
him, Psalm. 347.
and delivers them: yea, he has given them charge over every one that
puts his whole trust in God, Psalm. 91.11.
and commits himself wholly to his protection in all temptations, to keep
such an one in all his ways. And they shall bear that person in their hands
that he hurt not his foot against a stone. 2 King. 6. Act 12. Ezeck. 19.
Examples in Elizeus, in Peter, in many mo. It derogateth therefore greatly
from the mercy and care that God has for his to say every man has but one
good Angel and one bad, for every man and woman fearing God has many as Jacob
had here, and even so many as any way shall be needful in his wisdom that
ever knows what is expedient and fit. Secondly for the opportunity of this
vision, you see how great it was, even then when Jacob was setting forward to
meet with his brother Esau, of whom, he was very greatly afraid, not only
for himself, but for those with him that were as dear to him as his life.
What they taught Jacob by thus appearing unto him, we may all very easily
conceive surely even this, that though he were weak, yet was he strong, strong
I say by God, and the might of his power, who should never suffer him to
miscary, whilst he had an Angel in heaven to send with him, but would so stand
on his side against Esau, that all should be well, and with safety passed
over. O this God, this God of ours, do we not see him? Since this book began
have we not seen many testimonies of his love, and care not only to help and
comfort, but even in the nick to do it when there is most need, and when his
child's hear is down in the body by some occasion. Never any more notable then
this to Jacob here, and therefore let us mark it, and of them all conclude
how blessed the man is that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose trust
is in the Lord his God.

3 The next thing we may mark, is the counsel of Jacob under Gods blessing,
taken of him to pacify his brother, The godly use means.
and to have a good meeting. First he sends messengers to him, V. 3.4.5.
to signify his coming, least by stealing by him he might justly offend.
Secondly, he deuideth his people and cattle as you see. Thirdly he prays.
Fourthly and lastly he sends a present. In all which we may note two things.
First, that the godly have never bin despisers of means, though their trust in
God, and assurance of his help were never so great, but wisely and with good
policy and discretion they have disposed themselves to use the same as God
directed. Secondly, In wordly things. My Lord Esau.
that it is lawful to use submission in some sort to the wicked, and that
religion stands not in stubbornes and frowardnes, and disdainefull, proud,
and undutiful speeches, as some imagine.

4 These messengers thus sent of Jacob to give his brother notice of him,
Verse. 6.
return again and tell him that Esau comes to meet him with 400 men,
whereupon says the text, Verse. 7.
Jacob was greatly afraid, and sore troubled, How hard it is for the best to
cleave steadfastly and strongly to God.
not knowing what Esau meant by bringing thus many with him (which of like Esau
did only for pomp and to show his power) but fearing the worst, as nature is
apt in the very best. The thing that we are to note in it, is, how hard it is
even for Jacob, yt is a very extraordinary man* to cleave steadfastly unto God
in peril and danger, and to overcome by faith such false fears as will muster
themselves before his eyes. We saw before how God had comforted him by yt host
of Angles that met him, yet now even now again when he hears this news,
the infirmity of flesh appears, and Jacob is sore afraid. Know we then our
mould what it is, and if so notable a man as Jacob, after so many
encouragements, have yet imperfection of faith, set we it down that great is
our need far far unlike Jacob to pray for faith, that the Lord may
increase it in us ever more and more. See again in Jacob ever as we go the
life of man, fear after comfort, and comfort after fear, ebbings and
flowings, risings and fallings, so we go along, and so we shall end.

5 That he falls to prayer after he had divided his companies, The right use
of means.
see both the right usage of lawful means, and the true comfort in all
distress whatsoever it is. The right usage of means is with prayer, and the
right use of prayer is with means if God offer them: these, one exclude not an
other, but both join together as loving friends, and thus joined and jointly
used, the Lord gives his blessing to the best. The true comfort in all
distress, we see here is to fly to God by prayer, to cast up our eyes,
hands, and hearts to his holy Majesty, that has written his faithful in the
palms of his hands, and cannot forget them. This now is Jacobs refuge chief
and most comfortable. O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac,
look upon me etc. We know how he sped, and what promise we have at this day
if we knock, therefore use we the like in our distresses, and expect in
comfort his assistance.

6 In the Prayer it self, consider how sweet it is in the child's woe, Verse. 9.
for him to be able to remember that his parents were godly and in favor with
the Lord. Parents piety a comfort to the children.
Then conceiueth he comfort, that he which loved the stock, will not cast
away the branch, but graciously respect him, and therefore to his comfort he
cries O God of my father, such an one and such an one that went before me,
look upon me, and have mercy upon me, thou wast his God full good and full
kind, evermore, show mercy now to his seed according to thy sweet promise,
and so forth. A great cause to make parents godly if there were no other, that
their children ever may pray as did Jacob, Prayer has her strength from
promise.
O God of my father, etc. 2. Consider how he groundeth both prayer and hope,
upon word and promise, saying, Lord, which saydst unto me return etc. So let
us do, and not first do rashly what we had no warrant for, and then pray to
God for help, wherein we have no promise: yea it you mark it, he repeateth
this promise over again in the twelfth verse, it was such strength unto him to
consider it. Thirdly not merit, but want of merit is his plea. Jacob plea death
no merit.
I am not worthy of the least of al thy mercies, etc. Which beats down all
Popish pride, and bids them learn, that sur^ly if Jacob wanted worthiness,
and worthiness of the least, they are no Jacobs but far behind him, and
therefore much more unworthy mercies many, and mercies great which yet God
bestows. Secondly, it mightily comfort us against that fiery dart of the
devil, wherewith he often trobleth some weak ones, namely yt they are
unworthy vile and wretched, and thus and thus unworthy, therefore they may not
pray to God nor expect from him any favor. Ah wicked spirit auant: Note this
comfort.
for do we see here Jacob driven away from God with any unworthiness, no no: but
in the humble confession thereof, notwithstanding it all he comes to God, and
so do we comfortably and boldly. For though our unworthiness be more then
Jacobs, yet is it not the measure only that God hates but the thing, and if
here we see the thing no reason to drive from God, where it is acknowledged,
surely no more is the measure neither where that also is confessed and bewailed
truly. Lastly, consider here he alleges his weakness as a reason to move God
to mercy: for I fear him says he, least he will come and smite me and the
mother upon the children. Verse 11.
What a comfort is this that we should have warrant in the word to urge God to
mercy by reason of our wants? Satan persuades us we must run away by reason
of our wantes: but you see he lies, and the contrary here is our comfort. Yet
see this further. Jacob was comforted many ways as you saw before, that he
should not fear, yea by an host of Angels that met him, and yet he fears.
This was a great infirmity of frail flesh in Jacob you must needs confess,
and yet so far is Jacob from being daunted with this to keep from God, that
even because of it he goes to him, and not hiding it nor fearing the
discovery of it, lays it before the Lord as an argument to move him. How then
shall we do quite contrary to what we set here, and say O I dare not, I dare
not, I am so weak and ever fearing that God will not hear me. Move him as
Jacob moved him, and say as Jacob might have said. Truth Lord I have had many
comfortes and helps of my faith to drive all fear far from me, and to
assure me of thy care, and yet Lord I fear still, thou may say therefore to
me O thou of little faith I will no more regard thee, but Lord such is not thy
sternnes to thy children. What moved thee therefore first to yield me comfort,
let it move thee still I most humbly beseech thee, for they both still remain,
to wit thine own goodness and my imperfection. Thine remains, and mine is not
yet gone quite as it should, Lord then help me for yet I fear. Thus shall we
follow Jacob rightly in this place, and let him thus profit us.

Ve. 10. etc
Rich marchantes consider this.
7 I cannot omit this godly remembrance that Jacob here makes of his first
estate when he came into the country, and of his estate present now when he
does return. With my staff says he, came I over this I orden and now have I
gotten two bands. A notable meditation morning and evening for rich
marchantes, wealthy lawyers, and men and women of all degrees. whom God has
exalted from little too much, or from less to more any way: and would God we
thankfully might think of it often

8 By the way also we may consider the difference of times and manners of men.
Weapons.
Then Jacob traueileth into Mesopotamia, with a staff or rod in his hand and
safe enough. Now if we will go but to the next town, swords and spears, and
gunnes are necessary, or else we smart for it: so changed are times and men in
them.

Verse 13.
9 Then Jacob makes ready a present for his brother Esau, Presents and gifts,
appease anger.
the fourth and last of his Counsels as I noted before. The greatness of which
if ye mark it, shows us how dearly peace in the land of Canaan is to be
bought, and what we must be content to depart from for the same. Understand by
the l^nd Canaan, our own country and home where we have been born and brought
up, learned and lived in the light of the truth, and how precious in our eyes
should the peace thereof be? What Sheep and what Goats, what Camels and Coltes,
what kine and what bullockes, what treasure and substance of any condition,
should we willingly part withal, still to keep that? Understand by Canaan, the
truth of the figure everlasting heaven, and what ought we to part withal to
purchase that? Surely not with as much as Jacob does here, but with all that
ever we have, even life it self, if so the case require. For he that loves
house or land or any thing more then that, is unworthy of it. So then possess
wealth, that we willingly part with it, if the keeping must part us and our
heavenly country.

10 All things thus ordered and the presents dispatched away, night is come,
Verse 24.
Jacobs wrestling.
and having gotten over his wives and children and all that he had, over the
ford Iabbock, Jacob himself is left alone, when there comes a man and
wrestleth with him. The text says a man, but it was God in the form of man.
Which wrestling as it was a very extraordinary thing and strange, why it should
be to such as do not understand it: so was it a notable thing and full of
instruction to us if we do understand it, and consider of the Lords dealings
and purpose herein, both with Jacob and others his faithful evermore. The
doctrine and use of this wrestling.
First then this wrestling warned and forewarned as it were Jacob, that many
struglings remained for him yet in his life to be run through and passed
over, which were not to discomfort him, when they happened, for as here, so
there, he should go away with victory in the end. Secondly, it described out
the condition not only of Jacob, but of all the godly also with him, namely,
that they are wrestlers by calling while they live here, and have many and
diverse things to struggle withal and against, some outward, some inward, some
carnal, some spiritual, some of one condition, some of an other, which all,
yet through God they shall overcome and have a joyful victory in conclusion, if
with pattence they pass on, and by faith lay hold upon him ever in whom they
only can vanquish, Christ Jesus. Thirdly, it was God, not man, yet man
appearing, and God hidden, to tell and teach us yt in all our assaults, trials,
and confl^cts, it is God yt we have to do withal, and yt enters ye lists to
wrestle with us, to the end our strength may appear, although not God but man
or some other means appear unto our outward eyes: which thing is a matter of
great moment to al faithful to be remembered ever: for we shall thereby conceive
great comfort and less fear, knowing yt no evil can come in the end from such
an adversary, whereas the ignorance or forgetfulness of this makes us run
too violently upon the outward causes or causers and so to offend. It mightly
stand Job that he saw it was God yt wrastled with him, and did not barely
respect the second means. Fourthly, it discovered the strength whereby Jacob
both had and should overcome ever in his wrestlings, even by Gods upholding
with the one hand, when he assaileth with the other and not otherwise: which is
an other thing also of great profit to be noted of us, that not by any power of
our own* we are able to stand, and yet by him and through him conquerers and
more then conquerers. Fifthly, it is said, that God saw how he could not
prevail against Jacob, which notes not so much strength in Jacob as mercy in
God ever kind and full of mercy. Compare it with a speech not unlike unto it
in the 19. of Genesis where it is said, I can do nothing till thou be gone,
etc. Gods cannot, Ge. 19.22.
is his will not, for love that he has unto his children, and liking to be even
overcome by their faith. Sixthly, he touched the holow of Jacobs thigh and it
was loosed, so that Jacob haulted. Whereby we may see how the godly wrestle
with temptations in this life and overcome, surely sic vincunt vt vulnerentur,
so they overcome, that yet now and then they get rappes, and wipes. David was a
notable wrestler, yet sinful flesh gave him a foul venye or two, though he
rose again like a good wrestler by true repentance, and had the victory
against that fall. So all the godly by one imperfection or other, we see they
get wipes, though in the end all is well by the strength of him that gat no
rappe unto sin, Christ our dear savior and true ouercommer. Seventhly, that
the Lord says to Jacob Let me go, it wonderfully commends Jacobs tollerance
of the Lords wrestlings, till himself gave ever and would depart: and to us it
gives this doctrine, that when ^od does try with us by any temptation and
cross, by any assault and spiritual exercise, we should not be content only
for a day or two, or while we think good, but even so long endure his good
pleasure, till himself do give over of himself, not prescribed nor appointed
by us: which because it is a great matter for our frailty to do, therefore we
may boldly pray that the Lord would in mercy consider our strength, and
according to his promise lay no more upon us then he will make us able to
bear: but give the issue with the temptation in due time to his glory and our
good. Lastly, that Jacob says, He will not let him go except he bless him:
It teaches us to be strong in the Lord when soever we are tried, and even so
hearty and comfortable, that we as it were compel the Lord to bless us ere
he go, that is, by his merciful sweetness to comfort our hearts, and to make
us more and more confirmed in all virtue and obedience toward him, yelding us
our prayer as far as it may any way stand with the same, with force and
violence as it were offered on our parts to the Lord, he highly esteems and
richly rewards evermore. Thus did the woman of Canaan wrestle with him and
would not let him go, till he had blessed her in her daughter. Mat. 15. 1.
Sam. 1. Cant. 3.4. 2. Kin. 4.30
Thus did Anna wrestle with him for a child and let him not go, till she had
him: and so many others faithful men and faithful women in their several
cases. And thus do you see how profitable a thing this wrestling of God with
Jacob is, if it be well considered. Many are the conflicts of all them that
will serve God with a good conscience, and God knows what yet hangs over
any man or woman's head, that they shall tugge withal before they dye.
Whatsoever it is turn to this place and consider these things, follow and
fulfill as the Lord inableth you this course, and Gods truth for your warrant,
you shall wrestle well, and to your great comfort in the end.

11 Jacobs halting, some have resembled, if you list to hear it in this sort.
Verse 31.
First that it should be token an halting posterity that should come of him,
for many of them. Others have said, The Allegory of Jacobs haulting.
that his good leg notes the godly who walk uprightly before the Lord, and
his bad leg, the wicked that ever hault and are not sound. Others, that his
good leg notes the spirit in man which is strong and willing, the bad leg,
the flesh which is frail and weak, etc. That the Jews eat not of that part,
was a ceremony of that people who had many more. Much better should they
abstain from all halting in Gods service and true religion, then from the part
that was touched, Read Heb. 12.13. 1. Re. 11.21
but that flesh and blood is more busy in matter of show and outward
observance, then in matter of weight, and inward truth. Thus let it suffice to
have profited by this Chapter.

Chap. 33.
The chief matter of this whole Chapter, is the reconciliation of the two
brethren, Jacob and Esau when they met. Which how it was in the discourse
thereof we shall see.

Verse 1.
WHen he saw his brother Esau coming and with him 400. men, In peril nor
amazement, but counsel is convenient.
he divided the children to Leah and to Rahel and to the two maids. Wherein
we see thus much, that a wise man is not so smitten out of his wits with a
danger when he is in it, that he cannot tell what he does, as many men are,
but he governs his fear and keeps it within limits, he casts about in
good discretion and ability of mind what is best to be done, he concludes
quickly, and executes speedily his determination, and so all being done that
he can, for his part he commits the whole to his gracious God, to bless and
give success to as his will shall be. This let us mark in Jacob here, and by
it hereafter stay such amazements as many of us use to be subject to in a
distress when it comes.

Verse 2.
2 He put the maids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children
after, The godly have their affections.
and Rahel and Joseph last. Which if it were done in respect of security and
safety to one more then an other, we see then in the godly how affections have
place. To the maids he wishes well, and to their children, but to Leah
better, and to Rahel best of all. Thus are good men, men, and subject as I say
to humane affections in their measure. But if he put Rahel hindermost, because
she had but one child, then sauoreth it of order as was said before. The
former for my part I rather think, for we have seen before his exceeding love
to Rahel, and in ye former Chapter this reason was given of dividing the
people, That if Esau come to the one company and smite it, the other company
shall escape. Verse 8.
Therefore evident as I think what he meant to Rahel when he set her last.

3 Then he went before them himself, Jacobs going before all, showed his
faith and love.
and bowed to the ground seven times until he came to his brother Esau. His
going before, a notable argument of his faith. For God having said unto him, I
will be with thee, in the assurance of this which his heart believes, he
marches forward. His love also appears to his charge that followed him. For
what part they take he will take, and that first and foremost, yea he will
interpose himself betwixt them and the danger, that he may auert it from them
if God so will. A pattern of a good shepherd, of a good parent, of a good
master, and in deed the office of a courageous Captain. His bowing as it was
a token of his submission to his brother in worldly things, so may it resemble
the estate of the Church in this world, stooping and bowing subject, and under
their pomp and state in this life, who in the next shall be most miserable for
ever and ever. The glory of the wicked is here, and the godly are under, the
glory of the godly is in the next life, and then the wicked shall be under.
Have we patience then and tarry the time till it may appear what we are. 1.
Ioh. 3.2.


4 Then Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, Al hearts in Gods hand
and fell on his neck and kissed him, and they wept. O the power of God to
turn all hearts which way he will. Now be we judges our selves whether it be
not true that Solomon says: The Kings heart is in the hand of God, and as the
rivers of water he turns it whether soever pleases him, Pro 21.1. Pro.
15.11.
yea hell and destruction, are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the
sons of men. Where is that of Esau now, the days of mourning for my father
will come shortly, and then will I kill Jacob? The Lord, even the mighti^ and
merciful Lord, has wiped it out of his mouth and heart, out of his mind and
purpose, and out of his might and power. And here is a change far fitter for
a brother. Glad was Jacobs heart when he saw this I warrant you, and glad were
all his people. Blessed be God that can so cheer his children ever, and so
sits in the hearts of their threatners that they cannot move, but as he
will. Who will not trust in this God in all his distresses, that he shall work
for him and change hearts to his best comfort evermore. Is he the God of Jacob
alone, are all his promises come to an end when Jacob is helped? No, no: we
also are his, and he is ours, dearer to him then his own life when time was,
and for us therefore also shall he thus work in the hearts of men as shall be
good for us if we cleave to him. What can a thundering scolding enemy do to you
or me more then Esau could do to Jacob. If you will think of nature, God is
stronger then nature, and therefore can effect more. Be it unto us then in the
Lords blessing, ever an increase of our faith this example. Something again as
a means consider of Jacobs humility, who bowed himself so to his brother.
Does not God bless it to a good effect? Sic vent os^ vincit, dum se submittit
arundo, impulsu quorum robora celsa cadunt. So overcomes the reed the
winds, by bowing to them, when the mighty Oaks are overthrown that bow not.
Humility then in religion, August.
as pronuntiation in Rhethoricke, the first point, the second point, the third
point and all in all. Where pride is, there is shame, Pro. 10.2.
but where humility is, there is wisdom says Solomon. And surely, It is
better to be of an humble mind with the lowly, Pro. 15.19.
then to divide the spoils with the proud, etc.

5 Then Esau asked him of the women and children, to whom Jacob answered, Verse
6.
They were his children whom God of his grace had given him. Children the gift
of grace.
Therein acknowledging children to be not only the gift of God, but the gift
of his grace to as many as have them, which is a great comfort if it be well
marked to all fathers and mothers of children. Again before a bad man, yet he
speaks religiously, and Esau makes no jest at it as bad as he was. We
frame our selves too much to company and profane spirits in our days, scoff
at any thing that sauoureth of religion.

6 Next he asks him of the droues which he met: not that he was ignorant,
Verse 8.
for the servants that carried them had told him, but yt he would take occasion
to thank Jacob for them after some show of refusal. Jacobs suing for favor by
them has been touched before and showed to be lawful. Esau his speech that
he had enough, shows the pride of rich men's hearts, Verse 9.
bragging still of their plenty. Jacobs fair praying, the policy of the holy
Ghost to stay anger. Mollis responsio frangit iram. A soft answer breaks
wrath, it has been often noted. When he says He has seen his face as the face
of God. His meaning was, Verse 10.
that in that change of countenance from that which he feared, he saw
evidently Gods face, that is his work, providence and mercy, and therefore
his heart ioyed in it. His terming of his present to be a blessing, has this
reason, because gifts were given of the godly that gave them willingly, Verse
11.
with blessings and prayers and wishes of all prosperity with them. 1 Samuel 25.
Abigael. 1. Sam. 30. David.
Contrary to the course of many in our days, whose presents and gifts by the
same reason may be called cursings, because with them (hand and heart going not
together) they wish evil, as the devil choke him, or such like.

7 Thus Esau is appeased, and his wrath departed, Many worse then Esau for
anger.
means have prevailed, and he is not obstinate. We have men and women within
compass of our knowledge, whose wrath can never be appeased by any means that
either the parties themselves or any friends for them can make. No subjection,
no submission, no words, no deeds, can stir them a jot. And yet they would
be loath to be called Esaus, much more impatient, if a man should say far
worse then Esau. But they see themselves whether indeed it be not so: when Esau
is entreated and they cannot, to that which God and grace and the peril of
damnation persuades unto. God is love, and without love, without God, and
consequently, cast away for ever.

8 Jacobs care of the cattle to drive as their pase will endure, Verse 13.
A pattern of a good Pastor.
most fitly shows the duty of a careful and good Minister, ever to have an
eye to the weak ones in his flock, that cannot endure what the stronger can,
and so to regard all as he ouerdriue not any. Better it is that the able go
more softly, then the weak and feeble over fast: for the one has danger the
other none. Let hasty spirits consider this, that never knew what bowels in
deed a true Pastor has to the whole, Note.
and not to some few singled out in a partial affection, and for some show of
that which indeed is not in them. They are all the Pastors care, and he must in
conscience drive as the weakest may endure, not hurling and hasting to the
ability of some, and utterly overthrowing the greater part. A good Physician
of the body does not desire to cure hastily, but surely and soundly: and why
must the Physician of the soul his praise, consist in haste? You may conceive
a fault though I paint it not. Ne sut or vltra crepidam. Let the shoemaker go
no further then his shoe. Tractent fabrilia fabri, And let Carpenters meddle
with Carpenters work. The Pastors office is above their reach, if they loved
not to have an oar in other men's boats: and he that has called him to it,
counted him faithful and put him in his service, has endued him with
discretion, and assisteth him with a conscience to consider his charge, who be
strong, and who be weak, what might be done, and what is convenient and
profitable to be done, with the discharge in singlenes before his eyes, that
is the shepherd of shepherds, and chief Bishop of our souls, Romans 14.
Who art thou that iudgest an other man's servant, he stands or falls to his
own master. Thou art not the Pastor, and therefore have neither his bowels,
nor knowledge. His course and reasons thereof have an other judge. Jacob may
not have more care of bruit beasts, then Ministers must have of Gods people,
but he will not ouerdriue the very weakest, no more must the Minister if he
mean to save and not kill. Haste has made waste, that I can tell, and more
leisure would have been better speed. Remember Jacob here.

Verse 20.
9 And lastly, still see the practice of faithful men ever when God has been
merciful to them, Jacob thankful after deliverance.
and delivered them out of danger. Now Jacob builds an altar in the true
thankfulness of his soul unto God for this great mercy and deliverance of him
from his brother Esau. And he calls it the mighty God of Israel: giving to
the sign the name of the thing which it signified, which is usual in the
scripture. Thus would he publish Gods goodness in his safe-being, with all his
after all dangers. Would God it might kindle some heat in our hearts and
consciences, to consider our selves, the dangers that we have been in in our
days, the dangers of the land wherein we inhabit, the dangers of our
dear and nurcing mother, her most excellent Majesty for our sakes, because
she loves us with a true love, not keeping the body only in an earthly
safety and well being for earthly commodities, but chiefly procuring our
souls comfort, and defending the same unto us against all malice of mighty
powers. The dangers of wife, children and friends, and now our safety and
deliverance from all our fears, our quiet sitting under our own Vines,
without noise of Drum, sound of Trumpet, neying of Horses, roaring of Canon,
clattering of Armor, cries of the slain by day and by night. For this has
the Lord done for us, and whatsoever it is in our eyes, surely it is wonderful
even through the world. All nations see our happiness, the wicked gnash their
teeth at it, the godly have sent us their gratulations, and they bless GOD for
us. But where now are our Aultars? That is, where are our thanks and most
grateful songs of our deliverance? We have found mercy as Jacob did, yea
far more, for greater Esaus have come against us, then did against him, not
with four hundredth men, but many thousands, to captiuate us for ever as their
slaves when they had slain their fill. And yet we live, and by God only who
has straungely revenged us upon them that would thus have eaten us up. Yet
with Jacob we build no Aultars. That is I say again, we give not thanks for
the custom of our time, as he did after the manner of his. At the first
peradventure we did, but it was soon at an end. Now we are fallen into a dead
sleep again, and both God and his mercy is forgotten. Our danger also as if
it had never been. But in the Lord I beseech you, let us awake again, look
upon Jacob here what he does, and every man and woman follow his example.
Build God an Altar, not in earth with lime and stone, but in your heart of
most kind and thankful remembrance for all his mercies to the land, to our
dread sovereign, to our selves, our souls and bodies, to our wives and
children, to our neighbors and friends, and infinite ways that we cannot
name. Bless his Majesty for them, and let not the remembrance die, till you
dye your self. A thankful heart is all that the Lord seeks, and it is all
that in deed we can do to him. The child unborn has cause to thank him,
and much more we that enjoy his mercy at this present hour. The Lord touch our
hearts that they may feel, that Lord loose our tongues that they may speak,
and the Lord enable both heart and tongue to continue praises unto his
majesty, not for a day or tws, but whilst breath goes through our
nostrelles, and we remain. O our God of mercy, blessed be thou, blessed to
day and blessed for ever: blessed with heart, and blessed with soul: yea
blessed with the soul of our souls: for we were dead and now live, yea as
sheep appointed to the slaughter after strange tortures and torments before,
so were we: but the snare is broken and we are delivered: we released, and our
enemies crawling in the bottom of the sea. Thou have done it O God our God,
and to thee be praise for ever and ever for it. Amen, Amen.

Chap. 34.
The chief heads of this Chapter are these three. The defiling of Dinah the
daughter of Jacob. The fraud and subtlety of her brethren, The cruel murder
they committed for that cause.


COncerning the first, the text says, Dinah went out to see the daughters of
that country. Verse 1.
That is, she went a walking to gaze and see fashions, Women's needles going
abroad.
as women were ever desirous of novelties, and given to needles curiosity.
Shechem the son of Hamor Lord of that country saw her, and presently took
her, lay with her, and defiled her. This was the fruit of her needles ietting
abroad being a young woman. A profitable example to warn all youth honestly
minding and meaning, to beware, and to keep within: for it is safe, it is
sure, it is credit so to do. Liberty and loosenes has spoiled many an one
as it here did her. Which the wise Syrach well knowing, Syrach 7.24.
wills all that have daughters to keep their bodies and not to show any
cheerful face to them, that is, not to be fond over them and ready to grant
them what liberty witless youth may wish to have, but rather to marry them
with all good speed, and then is a weighty work performed. Solomon endued
with such deep wisdom, notes it as a property of an unchaste woman and
given to filthy delights, Pr. 7.11. etc
that her feet cannot abide within her house, but now she is without, now in
the streets, and lies in wayt at every corner. 1. Tim. 5.13
The Apostle Paul again as a thing that greatly disgraceth any woman living
lays it down, to be i^le and to go about from house to house. For this will
make them also pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are not
comely. David compares a good woman to a vine upon the walls of the house,
because she cleaves to her house, and keeps within even loath to be gotten
out except the occasion be good and just. Others have compared her to the
snaile, that has ever her house upon her back.

2 Observe the consent of parents regarded here even by the Heathens. Verse 4.
For Shechem beggeth of his father that he would get him this maid to wife, that
is, Consent of parents
that he would procure Jacob her fathers consent, and give his own also. Of
which having spoken else where at large I stand not now. But shame it is for us
to be worse then Heathens.

3 This evil news is brought to the old man even to Jacob I mean, Verse 5.
(...)
that his daughter Dinah was thus taken up and defiled. Whose woe what it was
for so great a wrong, let parents judge that know parents hearts? Nevertheless
his soones being with his cattle in the field, Jacob says the text held his
peace till they were come. Thereby declaring that a wise man rusheth not by and
by into actions according to his grief, or when his affections are hot but
staieth himself, moderateth his heat, and ouerruleth his passions til quieter
mind may better deliberate of a due course. This is gravity, this is wisdom,
and this is str^ngth that greatly adorneth any which has it. The want of ^^is
has caused great repentance when it was too late, and daunted the credit of
very many for stayed government of themselves. Jacob I say held his peace.

Verse 7.
4 When his sons came home they also hear the matter, and it grieved the men
says the text, Whordom of good ones ever abhorred.
and they were very angry, because he had wrought villainy in Israel, and
lien with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done. See how we ought
to be affected to this kind of sin, which filthy flesh so ioyeth in.
Jacobs sons abhor it, detest it and loathe the very thought of it: so
should we, they consider circumstances that increase the foulenes of it, as
that it was in Israel, that is amongst a people professing God, that it was
with Jacobs daughter that is such a noted man's daughter for piety and
religion, etc. so should we, and ever knowing sin to be sin, yet to know
that circumstances make sins greater and greater. This argues love of God,
love of virtue and feeling of sin, which ever are arguments of Gods holy
spirit in us. Compare this detestation and religious anger in Jacobs sons
against this sin, with the iestes and gibes that fleshly wordlinges make of
it, and with the pretty excuses that our holy fathers in Rome do use. Si non
cast tamen caute, if not chastely, yet charily, etc.

5 From the 8. verse to the 13. you have Hamer his Oration or persuasion used
to Jacob and his sons, Ver. 8 etc
to obtain their good will that Dinah might be married to Sychem. A fond father
over his child.
Read it and mark it, and you shall see nothing but a fond speech of a fond
father to satisfy the lust of a loose son, who both as he was his father,
and as he was the governor and magistrate of the country, should sharply have
punished such behavior in his child. But peradventure it was cat after kind.
Such father in his youth, such son in his. Howsoever surely the truth is
tried, that blanda patrum segnes facit indulgentia nates. A mallie father,
makes a wicked child. Read the two and twenty of Deutrenomie.

6 From the thirteenth verse to the 18. you see the subtle course which the
sons of Jacob devised to be revenged for the villainy done to their sister,
and in her to their whole house, Religion made a cloak.
their making religion and the ordinance of God a cloak to cover their craft,
and a means to compass their desire by. No new practice you see, neither yet
for age worn out either of memory or practice in our days: who would have
thought such deadly wrath had lodged under so reasonable words, or such
bloody murder under the show of a marriage. Deep is the heart of man we
see, and goodly shows have dreadful treasons, and cruel massacres often
under them. Even aliances therefore and offered knots of great good will beware
betimes.

7 The conditions agreed upon betwixt Hamor and Jacobs sons. Verse 21.
The consent of the residue of the people wanted, which Hamor their governor
to obtain, assembleth them together at the gate accustomed, and there by a set
Oration, Private respects covered with cloak of public good.
shows them what good should grow to the whole Country in general, and to
every one in special, if they would harken unto the condition of being
circumsised, that thereby there might grow aliances with these strangers in
marriages with them cross either with others. Pretending cunningly (which is
the thing I mark) the public good, when wholly it was a private respect that
he had, and a particular pleasure that he shot at. Here is the policy
then or rather subtlety, which now in our days we see so rise. If malice
possess us and wish a revenge, if covetousness have caught us, and would have
a benefit, or whatsoever it is that we would effect, still the pretense is a
public good, thus and so shall the Church be profited, and thus and so shall
the land be enriched, if our devises may have place, when indeed they tend
to as much good to either, as this persuasion did to the Sichemites, being
the means whereby cruelty took place, malice and wrath had opportunity and
the fearful destruction of them all was brought to pass and compassed. Trust
not therefore over hastily such goodly promises and painted shows of public
good to bring in an innovation which as this, Innovation dangerou^ often
may have danger under it and yet not doubted.

8 The silly people consent unto Hamer his speech, whereby we may learn how
dangerous a temptation the promise of gain and profit is to the ignorant
multitude. Verse 24.
(...)
This wins and bewitcheth them, this gains and gets them to do any
thing, yea with this both eyes be dimmed and ears so stopped, that subtle men
may work their wills, and had I wist come ever too late.

9 Mark again what power to effect either good or ill, is in the persuasions
of great me^ to their inferiors. Verse 24.
They carry them headlong to destruction if so they will, Great men's persuasions.
and they carry them comfortably unto good if so they will. Happy be the
governors that persuade but well, and so answer not with their own for the
blood of many. Again mark here what often else may be seen, that when the
Lord determines to punish, men have no power to foresee the peril Injustice
be takes the wisdom from the wise, and counsel from the prudent.

10 Thus the inhabitants being enticed to admit of circumsition for an earthly
commodity and respect, the third day when they were sore, Simeon and Levy the
sons of Jacob, with swords drawn come upon them and kill every male
amongst them. A bloody fact and a great murder in man's eyes worthy of great
blame, that for one man's fault so many should dye, offering them recompense by
admitting their condition, and so deeply deluded by so holy a show. Both father
and son are slain, that filthy lust may have worthy recompense and sweet
meat sour sauce.
But altogether we may not esteem it by this, but somewhat consider the
revenging hand of a just God in it, who will never suffer the wrongs violently
offered to his chosen people to escape unpunished if they cleave to him. The
mighty worldlings may imagine they shall do what they list with us, and
proudly wrong us, imboldned by their might and our weakness, but they shall be
deceived, as is seen to their terror and our comfort in this example. That
Simeon and Levy were so forward-summe in nature we may justly think of. For
Dinah to them was full sister both by father and mother, where unto some
others, she was but only by father. Leah was her mother, and the mother of
Simeon and Levy also. Again we may see in this example that saying verified,
Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achiui. For the sins of governors the
people often smart: and therefore happy people that have a good governor. It
is a treasure that of many is little co^^^dered, and a blessing that God is
never worthily thanked for.

11 Then came the other sons of Jacob upon the dead, and spoiled the City.
Verse 27 etc.
See therein anger how it rages and increases, being once incensed and
stirred up. One man by example kindles an other, and violence upon violence
will increase still, The rage of an offended mind.
if we stay not quickly. If you mark now the state of this City, how the
children be fatherles, the women comfortless, no house without bloudshead,
murder, and death, their goods spoiled in City and field, their bodies
captiuated which remain alive. O heavy woe: Stand in awe and sin not.
would not the heart of any man or woman tremble to offend the Lord, to feed
the flesh that sinfully lusts with such deadly delight, and careless to
scorn what so fearfully punished we see of God? How happy Hamor, if his
sinning son had never been borne, how happy the son, if he had turned his
eyes from evil, and brideled his lusting heart with virtue and honor. How
happy all both old and young, both great and little, men and women, with babes
and sucklings, if God had been feared and sin abhorred. This is sin in the
eyes of the highest, a crier continually for his wrath, till at last it come.
The Lord give a feeling, that we truly hate what hurts and harmeth in this
sort.

12 Then said Jacob to his sons, Ye have trobled me, etc. Pitifully bemoning
the danger which this desperatenes carried with it, both to him and his, had
not God been good, Verse 30 etc.
whose mercy in deed only affected, that the countries about did not rise up
in arms against him and destroy him quite. The Lord knew how Jacob abhorred
this course, and yet how perfectly he hated the sin of his daughter,
wherefore in mercy he provided for him, stayed all evil that might be against
him, and kept both him and for his sake, his, that might else have perished
well enough. I note it to my comfort, and the comfort of many, that may in
their houses and several families, Faults committed in families, sore against
the will of the rulers.
either by children or servants, or friends, have that committed which their
souls abhor, and they little know of. God is gracious to regard the
innocent, and to turn from his faithful servants that which evil committed
might procure unto them, as he here did from Jacob. Then mark again in
these sons of Jacob, whether for their merits God so increased them and made
them his people, The Jews not chosen for merits.
or it only was mercy and no merit. And remember withal, what by Ezechiel God
says unto them, I mean to the people descended of them, and of like merit
with them for this that we speak of. Ezec. 16.2. etc.
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, and say thus says
the Lord God unto thee. Thine habitation and thy kindred, is of the land of
Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. And in thy
nativity when thou wast born, thy nauel was not cut, thou wast not washed in
water to softe^ thee, thou wast not salted with salt, nor swadled in cloutes.
No eye pitied thee to do any of these unto thee, for to have compassion upon
thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the contempt of thy person
in the day that thou wast born, and when I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, and I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, thou
shall live: even when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, thou shall
live. Mark you this repitition, Even when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto
thee, thou shall live. That is, even when thou werst sinful, wretched and ugly
to be looked on in thy self, yet in mercy I regarded thee, turned my face from
thy due deserts, and said, Thou shall live. Now if there were no merit in
this first people, why the Lord should choose them before all others, but that
mere mercy regarded them in their blood, what merit might be in us Gentiles
wild olives, and behind them far in circumstances sundry of great importance,
that we should swell and be puffed up. Read the whole Chapter in Ezechiel, and
think in your soul how much rather the Lord might complain of us generally
or particularly as there he does of them. And what should have humbled them,
let it humble us, what should have made them ten thousand times thankful.
Let it make us not only that way but every way dutiful to our lives end.
Moses was a Leuite, and yet he writes this of his father Levy, an argument
evident, The scrip^ture written by inspiration and not flesh and blood.
that flesh and blood did not rule in the writing of the scriptures, which
hardly is drawn to lay down any shame or blame of their auncesters, but that
Gods spirit the God of truth and verity, guided and governed the pen of the
writer, as best was seeming to his wisdom.

13 Shall he abuse our sister as a whore, say they? No: yet may not thereon be
concluded, Verse 31
that against a fault any manner of proceeding is allowed. The fact was wicked,
Youth (...) and rash.
yet the punishment should have been orderly, and with their fathers advise,
who chiefly was wronged, and whose wisdom and discretion would better have
guided his sons, then they any way could direct him. But this is youth, hot
and fiery, rash and unbridled, never forecasting what may ensue, but egerly
harpyng upon a revenge. They never think of their fathers estate and their
own in that country, that they were but strangers there, that they were but
few, and that extreme danger might arise both to their father and them by
this rage. No no, the heat of youth does first perform, and then repent when
it is too late. Whither did Cain his outrageous anger carry him? Surely his
brothers blood was nothing, when fury and anger had taken place. Saul against
Jonathan, Achab against Naboth, Asa against the Prophet with many more, 2. Chro.
1^ 10.
declare well the effects of anger, when once it is kindled and incensed.

Theo-dosius, after his slaughter of seven thousand at Thessalonica in his
anger, by the persuasion of Ambrose, Theodor^ lib. 5. cap* 16. and 17.
laid down a law, that whosoever after should be condemned to death, should
have execution thereof deferred for thirty days, to the end, that if anger
had any way made the judgment too sharp, this respite and time, might again
moderate it according unto justice. For vt fragilis glacies, Ovid.
interit ira mora. As I se in time does melt away, so time makes anger to decay.

Lastly, if you mark this answer of Jacobs sons, it may show what naked
excuses we content our selves withal, Naked excuses.
rather then we will acknowledge that we have done evil. Again, how
unprofitable speech is to an angry man til the mood be past. Anger so darkeneth
the mind, that reason can have no place. No, reason to a mind incensed with
anger, is like a keye to a lock that is iumbled, that is, it can do no good.
And as a thief choseth often the darkest night, and the fisher the water that
is troubled: so satan to work many mischiefs in, chooses a heart when it is
troubled with anger. But let thus much suffice of this Chapter.

Chap. 35.
The chief matters of this Chapter are these two. The remove of Jacob away
from Shechem. The death of certain of his dearest friends.


COncerning his remove, the text says, that then God said to Jacob, Verse 1.
that is to say then, even then when his heart was troubled and full of fear,
The care of the lord for his.
for the bloody tact of his sons in Scechem. Where see, the vigilant care of
the Lord over his in all their distresses, does he ever forsake them that
faithfully and heartily cleave unto him? No no, he is at hand and ready even
before the trouble happen to be comfortable to us, because this is essential
in him, and not accessory.

Verse. 1.
2 Mark how he bids him go to Bethel and there build an Altar unto God,
that appeared unto him when he fled from his brother Esau, Genesis 28.
why if you remember or look the place Jacob there promised, that if God would
be with him in the journey, and keep him, and give him bread to eat, and
clothes to put on, so that he might come again unto his fathers house in
safety, then should the Lord be his God, and that stone which be there set up
as a pillar should be Gods house, etc. And has Jacob been all this while in
the country, and not been yet there to perform his vow, and to give the Lord
thanks, who so graciously had granted his desire? O great slownesse in so good
a man, and very worthy blame exceedingly. See then and mark it well, (...)
how slack the best of us are to pay in prosperity, what we promise in
adversity, even with great zeal. We say in sickness if we may recover we
will do this both to God and man, and in other perils we promise much: but
alas, where is all, when once we are well and out of danger. Has Jacob
dullness, and have we none? think of it, and by his fault in this place that
must be called upon, and spurred up by God himself: let us amend what is
amiss. Then mark again in this remembrance made by God, the manner of it. Go
up to Bethell Jacob says he, and make there an altar, etc. This is not, why
have thou not done it, and because thou have forgotten me, I will forsake thee,
or any such like sharp rebuke. Sweet again, is this if we consider it. For
Jacob was now in sorrow, his heart being wounded both for his daughter that was
defiled, and for the cruelty of his sons, with the peril also that his
whole family was in. In which grief of his, the God of mercy would not add
grief unto grief: but sparing him kindly, admonishes him gratiouslye with
sweet words, A sweet example.
not so much as once quipping him for his fault, with but half a sharp word.
A pattern ever to be followed of us, one toward an other, that we bruise not
the heart already broken, but too much, that we ins^lt not one over an other
for slippes and wants, but kindly quicken up, when a hard speech would crush
too much. O sweetest GOD, how sweet art thou to slagg^sh sinners when they
do faull, and shall we not labor to be like them, etc.

2 When Jacob had received this word of the Lord, he wills his household to
put away their strange Gods, plainlye noting that there were such amongst them.
And knew Jacob this and reformed it not? Surely the best men then have their
affections, and even good Jacob is not here without them, Rachell his Wife is
most dear unto him, and for her sake either he sees not, Good men often have
affections too much.
or he feels not with that heat, or both seeing and feeling he lingreth
reformation ouerlong. She had stolen her fathers idols as you heard before, and
what others they had gotten in the spoil of the City it is uncertain. Prone
is our nature by natural corruption to such abuse, and if Jacobs people so
well instructed, will yet be halting O what are we? This cleaves to our bones,
and the very marrow to be superstitious and delighted with evil. The Gods that
be seen best like our humors, and what hands have made we repose trust in, but
fie of this folly if we be alive, and not dead in heart to God and grace.

3 What then did God abhor the household of Jacob, and refuse it to be a
Church? No, howbeit that family was thus blemished, and the wife of his love
that slepte in his bosom thus all too spotted: yet ever were Jacobs sacrifices
acceptable unto God, Note this well.
and his family cared for as his Church. Note we thereby, not to love
idolatry, or to mingle the wheat with the chafe, ne yet to extenuate Jacobs
fault, nor to follow him our selves in not reforming. But note we this, and
note it again, that particular blemishes in some of a Church not yet amended,
deprive not the whole either of name or nature of a Church, neither make the
good things therein done according to the word, (as were Jacobs sacrifices)
of no effect: much less do they reach out danger of death and damnation to
all that hold fellowship with that Church, either not knowing, or no way
approouing what is evil. I could urge the place harder if I would.

4 In bidding them cleanse themselves and change their garments, The use of
clean clothes on holy days.
let us note how outward ceremonies help inward duties, use them as
helps, and not make them our rests, th^nking all is done when the outward
thing is done, but know, that clean garments call for clean hearts much
more, and cleansed bodies, bid cleanse our souls much rather: else are we like
the Massing Priests that washed their fingers so solempnely, and neglected
their consciences altogether, or like the hypocritical Pharisees, that
scowred so carefully the outside, and forgot so negligently the inside.

5 Then they gave unto Jacob all the strange Gods which were in their hands,
Verse. 4.
Obedience to doctrine, etc.
etc. where see a very notable example of prompt and ready obedience to the
word. Blessed therefore he that had them, and blessed they that so willingly
hearken unto him. Such Jacobs to bid, and such people to obey, would long and
long continue these happy days of peace and freedom unto us, with a gracious
Governor and Sovereign over us, in whose days we may truly say, mercy and
truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
But why are they so zealous and ready now, having been so dull hitherto? Surely
the danger they saw themselves in, by that outrage committed, was a great
means of it. Perplexities profitable.
And therefore well may we mark how profitable for us sometimes are fears
and dangers, troubles and perplexities in this world. Then are we awaked and
quickened that before were heavy, and then we both hear the word, and obey
it with alacrity and readiness. Take then the cross away, and take our great
good away, as we plainly may see.

But the text says, Exo. 32.20
Jacob hid them under an Oak that was in Sichem: when as we read that Moses
took the golden calfe that Aaron made, and burnt it in the fire, ground it to
powder, and strawed it upon the waters, and made the children of Israel drink
of it. A zeal indeed against Idolatry and superstition. For answer
whereunto it may be said, that good m^n have their wantes, and Jacob himself
in this was not so provident as he might have been. Yet with comfort we see
that even this measure of virtue and piety in Jacob was accepted of God, the
want pardoned and cast out of sight. With comfort (I say) we see it, being
thereby justly encouraged to do good, and to hate evil, seeing there is
mercy with God in sweet kindness^, to accept what is well, and to turn his
face from what is wanting. Away therefore with all discouraging thoughts, and
very sour conceits, of no acceptance with God, where any blemish or
imperfection is. For even in this example if we had no mo, it is proved false.

6 When Jacob thus had reformed his house, he took his journey from Sechem
toward Bethel, Verse. 5.
and the text says: The fear of God was upon the cities that were round about
them, so that they did not follow after the sons of Jacob. It is the Lord
then that cools and quenches the rage of men against his children, yea it is
the Lord that is able to mussell the mouths of the Lions of this world, It is
the Lord that staieth intents against his.
when they bristle themselves beside his liking, to commit any violence or
fury upon the godly. Let him say nay, and they cannot stir: let him say I,
and they run a pace.

The Devils themselves cannot touch the Swine till they have leave of him: and
are porcorum setae: numbered says the ancient father, and his chosen children
forgotten? No, no, there is no power against the least of them, except it be
given from above. Therefore care away comfortably, sing we and say we, Si deus
nobiscum, quis contra nos. If the Lord be with us, who can be against us. No
doubt these inhabitants had burning hearts against Jacob, and his family for
the murder committed, but both hearts and hands are bridled by him, that
bridleth the very devils, and such a fear is stricken into them by the Lord,
that Jacob goes safely on his journey, and not one dare look out of the
doors after him, to attempt any evil against him. O sweet God, O dear God,
direct us aright to be thine truly, and we see here our safety. Thou will
defend, thou will protect, and mightier far then our selves are, thou will
make to fear us for our good. Blessed, blessed be thy name for ever, and let
our hearts till death be secure in thee, Amen, Amen.

Verse. 19
7 The next thing I note, is the death of Rachell, the wife of Jacob, Wordlye
comforts subject to change.
dear and dear, and twenty times dear again unto his heart. Who can
express the woe of this day, and the bitterness of this loss to the man of
God? Rachel is dead, and is she dead? O death void of mercy, or respect of
persons. She dies upon child, an increase of grief: she calls the child
the Son of her sorrow, a heavy word. But be comforted Jacob, and leave all
to God, who gives and takes at his pleasure. And learn we by thee whilst
the world indureth, to know worldly comforts whatsoever they be, to be subject
to change. Love with vnfaynednesse, what may be so loved, but love never too
much for fear of a check.

So love, that we think of loss if the Lord so will: yet so love, that we
wish no loss if the Lord so will. Let his liking moderate our affections
ever, and so happilye shall we inioye the thing liked a great deal longer.
But if thou exceed, werst thou as just as Jacob, God will school thee as he
here did Jacob. Thy dearest Wife, thy dearest Child, thy dearest friend,
shall feel their mortality, that thy heart may be taught, and wish for
eternity, crying heavily, sighing with mournful voice: Vanity of vanity,
and all is but vanity.

8 Grievous it is also that we read in the 22. verse, Verse. 22
Ruben the son of Jacob to lie with Bilhah his fathers concubine. But such
bitter accidents have in the wonderful wisdom of God befaullen to these
great men, The use of bitter accidents to the Patriarchs.
that we poor souls might not be oppressed with grief, when the like befall
us. Fathers and mothers can do no more then they can do, that is, instruct,
exhort, admonish, and teach their children and charge, and if that will not
serve but contrary to it, they will wilfully and wickedly offend the Lord,
lewdly and loosely behave themselves, their burden is upon their own backs,
and the God that ever was holy and pure, will pay them home, accepting the
industry of the parents in good worth.

Moses expresses not how Jacob grieved, when he heard this, but only says,
it came to Isreal's ears, that is was done. Surely the reason was this, that
we might thereby conceive that the grief was greater then could be expressed
to have his bed defiled by his own Son. So read we, the Paynter that
portrayed the intended sacrifice of Iphigenia, painted her father Agamemnons
face covered, because it was not possible to express will the countenance of
a man so plunged in woe. Think we then earnestly of Jacobs sorrow, but know
that we cannot think how it was. And what crossing griefs the Lord sends us,
Strength against o^fences.
let us strive to patience by these examples. Yea let us grow by these
examples to a Christian strength against worldly scandals and offenses, not
moved by them to waver up and down as some do, condemning truth, and judging
persons by faults and offenses that do happen. As if one should say see the
religion of these men, can it be true, can it be good, when the professors of
it have such spots? Simeon and Leui cruel bloudshedders, Dinah wanton and
wantonly defiled, and now Ruben an incestuous person defiling his own fathers
bed. How should the religion of these men be good? Surely the idolatrous
ignorance, and ignorant idolatry of the Gentiles, of the Cananites,
Perisites, Iebusites, or such like, was the good religion, and not the way that
Jacob served God by. Were this to reason well, or rather for the false and
faults of men to condemn the truth of God, and to censure men by their
imperfections not to be what they are in deed and truth, though thus defiled?
Yet this is the common reasoning of the world, and thus daily some stumble at
men's offenses. But let us be wise, and learn by this to take a surer course
to judge both of men and of religion. Jacob and his family had the true
religion, though thus sinful flesh offended sometimes. All were not evil in
such degrees, though some offended too much. Bewail the falls we may of
those that profess the truth, nay bewail them we ought with a sighing heart,
but forsake truth for them, or condemn truth to be no truth, we may not, we
dare not, we ought not. Let God be true, and all men liars. Let truth be truth
and all men sinful, yea such great Patriarks as these were not ever free.
Though his judgment shall be great that gives the offense yet they shall not
be excused that so far take the offense, as for it to forsake the way that is
right. Then having thus profited, let us mark again in this example of Ruben
the safety of sinners, notwithstanding sin, that truly repent and forsake
their sin. Ruben was not a castaway for ever from God having thus offended,
but sorrowing and sighing (as no doubt he did) for this ugly transgression,
the blood of Christ Jesus believed of him then in time to be shed, as we
believe now that it has been shed, washed him clean, and procured pardon
with God, that all sorrowful sinners might have faith, and not dolefully die
in despayring woe, if happily they should fall at any time through strength of
flesh of world or devil. Thus therefore again let us profit by him, and deny
to none that has fallen comfort, if sight cause sorrow from an heart not
fayning.

9 The death of Isaac the father of Jacob is an other thing mentioned in this
chapter, who enjoyed the presence of his son Jacob to his great comfort
before his death. Great faith exercised with great crosses
And Jacob to all his griefs had this also added the death of his father. So
that if you think of the course of Jacobs life but even hitherto, surely his
griefs were many, and his crosses great, such as we do not endure with that
patience that both we ought, and he did, neither yet with that comfort, as by
this example, and others of Gods dear ones we are justly encouraged unto. God
gives friends, and God takes friends, fathers and mothers, sisters and
brothers, or whatsoever, and he spares not any when he will, though he love
them dearly. Abraham loses Terah his father, and Sara his wife: Isaac
loses Abraham, and Jacob now Isaac, beside other friends whom each of them
lost in their times. This is our estate, we hold these things during pleasure,
and are tenantes at will, not otherwise. That the text says, Isaac dyed full
of days, it may well teach us that there ought to be a contentment in us even
with years, which indeed is not in too many. But we covet to live, and still
to live, and ever to live if it were possible. This world so pleases us, as if
we dreamed of no other, these earthly pleasures seem the joys we wish, and
death, death, O how bitter is the remembrance of thee even in very old age.
Surely old Isaac was not thus, and I trust we will note it to our good, and
thus much now of this chapter.

Chap. 36.
THe principal matter of this Chapter, is the progeny and offspring of Esau,
in the observation whereof diverse good things may be noted, respected no doubt
of the spirit of God, when he caused it to be written. As first it shows
the truth of Gods promise made concerning Esau, The truth of Gods promise ever.
chap. 25. ver. 23. and elsewhere, and yields us this sweet comfort, that if
the Lord be so sure to them, that are not of his household and family, but
hated as Esau was, how assured may we be, that he will never fail us in any
thing promised, except he fail to be God.

2 When it is said that Esau removed his dwelling, and gave Jacob room,
Verse. 6.
were it of favor, or were it for other profitable respects in the world to
him, we may well note the ouerruling power and providence of the almighty for
his ever. God his sweet care for his.
Had they lived together, being both so great, as the 7. verse notes, in all
likelihood quarrels would have grown, and perrillous contentions. Esau was
mighty, fierce and irreligious, and what conscience such men make, to wrong
and wringe a good man, the world yet shows too much. All this, God preuenteth
in mercy to his Jacob, and makes Esau give place. Cast we our care then upon
God, and labor to be his, we shall ever be cared for.

3 Their riches were so great, that they could not dwell together (says the
text) that they could not dwell together, Verse. 7.
and the land wherein they were strangers could not receive their flocks. Gods
powrefull providence for his in all places.
Let never then filthy fear to want in this world, what may be good for us:
wound our souls with distrust in God. The beasts of the field, the fowls of
the air and the fishes of the Sea, be all his, yea the whole earth, and all
that is therein is his, as the Psalm says. If to Jacob and Esau he be able
to give such wealth, when went his powerful might from him, that he cannot do
it again to you, to me, to whom soever his good pleasure is and shall be. If in
a strange country their flocks be so many, let my soul never despair for
place, but dwell where the Lord appoints, and with believing heart remember
such examples as this. Yea let it go to bed with you, let it rise with you,
write upon your hand, and print it in the very veins of your heart, what the
Psalmist says: The Lord God is the Son, and shield unto us, the Lord will
give grace and glory, Psalm. 84 11.
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. 1. Sam.
2.30.
He that honors me him will I honor, says the Lord, and he will not break
a promise to very Esau, of any good or comfort as you see in this whole
chapter. Be not we faithles then but faithful.

4 A sweet comfort again I see here in this, that if a man and woman fear
the Lord themselves, God is often merciful* even to the evil children of good
parents.
if religion be settled in the furrows of their hearts, as it was in Isaac and
Rebecca, surely even unto their wicked children, if they have any, yet for the
parents sake, God grants often worldly favors, as here to Esau: who would
not then with a faithful heart love such a God He loved Jacob and hated Esau,
yet Esau being the son of a good father, and of a virtuous and religious
mother, the fountain of mercy, and God of all goodness to his true servants,
even the God of heaven, will show mercy to this Esau, thus far as in the world
to make him a great one, and to give him riches. Again I see worldly slate,
Worldly glory, no s^re ^^t^es of Gods love.
no good cause why men should forget themselves and wax proud: but ever look
at the inward heart what piety is there, least painted, port, and glistring
glory of this fading world be united in my person, with the hatred of God
concerning future state, as it was in Esau. I have hated Esau says the Lord,
and yet his pomp thus great: Were this thought of, peradventure our hearts
would change, and with less regard of earthly show, make earnest search for
the favor of God, how indeed we may be assured of it toward us ever.

5 God promised Jacob that Kings should come out of him, The godly st^ll under
faith and hope.
but behold as yet all the glory in Esau. How then, has God forgotten, or will
he fail in faithfulness toward his servant? No no: you know what glorious
Princes came of Jacob in time, and the Prince of Princes that sits upon his
throne for ever, Dukes be his sons, etc.

Ver. 15. etc. Read the Chapter.


Christ Jesus. B^t as yet Jacobs show is less, and Esau his ruff has the
eyes of men. Thereby we learning, that Gods usual manner is to keep his
children under faith and hope in this world ever. What pleases him he
performs in Jacobs life, and the rest his faith is exercised within hope
assured of it in time, so with an other and an other after him, and still there
is use of faith and hope in this world with the godly. Be content then with
what God grants, and believe the rest if it be promised.

Man's busy brain.
6 The invention of mules specified in this Chapter, shows the busy
curiosity of some men's natures given to news and strange inventions, not
contented with simplicity and plainenes, nay discontented with the course of
gods nature many times. If we praise this invention, take heed we touch not
Gods former distinction of their kinds and sexes which he had created.
Therefore rather blame I, then praise such needles news as this was.

7 You see in this Chapter as I said before, all the glory in Esau and Jacob
has little, but hereafter these Edomites fall, and the Israelites rise.
Therefore thus let us profit by it, as never with the lusty bloods of this
sinful world, to despise the slow going forward of the children of GOD, or
the cause that they maintain. Sat cito si sat been. Soon enough, if well
enough, that is, fast enough, if with Gods favor, and better a stable estate
that is in longer time atteined, then a fickle fading estate got in have. Not
unlike the grass upon the wall top, that is, soon up, but as soon withered
and gone again.

Lastly, for genealogies in this Chapter laid down, I refer them to each
man's diligence that list to search them, wishing the Apostles counsel followed
in this matter ever, 1. Tim. 1. Verse 4. and Tit. 3.9. For our Pedigrees in
these days as they have an use modestly and moderately looked into, so show
they men's vanities otherwise used, who yet would not like to be called vain.
Maximilian the Emperor forgot himself in it, as I have showed before, and of
his very Cook he was reproved. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
nor the strong man in his strength (much less in joined Pedigrees) but he
that glories, let him glory in the Lord, and that his name is written in the
book of life, and he reckoned in the roll of the righteous. He that is over
busy in laying down his ancestors, whilst he seeks to be esteemed, as
descended of them, is often justly despised as degenerated from them, and not
in any measure seeking to express the virtues in them. But let thus much serve
both of this matter and of the Chapter.

Chap. 37.
The heads of this Chapter are chiefly three. The hatred of the brethren
toward Joseph. Their treachery against him. The lamentation of Jacob his
father for him.


THe causes of their hatred are specified in the Chapter to be these: His
complaining of them to his father, verse 2. His fathers great love to him above
them, ver. 3. And the dreams which he had, seeming to note a superiority over
them like to ensue in him, ver. 5. etc. The greatness of their malice is also
mentioned when it is said, they hated him and could not speak peaceably unto
him, verse. 4. For particulars to begin with the first cause of their malice
toward him, because he brought their evil as the text says to his father,
it may well teach us, that although brethren in nature and duty should most
kindelye love one an other, yet not so far, as that they bolster up one an
other in sin and evil. For true brotherly love admits an orderly complaint
of evil, Romans 1. Last verse. Winking at evil.
yea and even requires it. Not only they that do such things says the
Apostle, but they that favor them, etc. Noting it a most grievous fault to
wink at sin and wickedness, and to bear with it. Veritas odium parit, fratrum
quoque gratia rara est. Truth gets hatred, and even brethren to love together
(if truth be told) is a hard thing. The second cause of the brethrens malice
was their fathers love to Joseph above them al, an unjust cause again. For it
is lawful for a parent to love one child more then an other, as for a man to
love one man more then an other. Our Savior Christ loved John more th^n the
rest, yet might not the rest therefore have hated him. Nevertheless Ambrose his
counsel is good in this matter, to wit, that parents should beware, Ne quos
natura coniunxit paterna gratia dixidat, Note it
least whom nature has joined, Children begotten in age, loved for two causes
they by their partial love do separate and disioyne. There is a cause laid
down why Jacob loved him more then the rest, because he begot him in his age,
old men either not looking for any more in such years, or receiving such as
they have besides expectation, both which are causes of entire love toward
such as in old age are borne to them: so was Jacob toward Joseph. An effect
also of this love in Jacob is laid down, that he made his son a party
colored coat. A thing likewise lawful, that parents may attire one child
better then an other, yet still wisdom and discretion must moderate affection,
for fear of such heart burning amongst children, as here we see.

Parents love should not be to childrens loss.
2 Yet this child so beloved, went to the field and kept cattle as his
brethren did sometimes, not finding his fathers affection unto idleness in him,
which is a thing that may greatly profit us in these days: wherein if in any
thing we will make a difference betwixt our children, surely it is in labor and
travel, and matter of fruitful industry for the time to come. Some shall be put
to all hardness, yea to all drudgery, and others whom we favor more, not
suffered to do even good things, whereby hereafter they might be bettered a
great deal, not to learn least they catch cold: not to study, least their
wits be dulled: not to do any thing, least we want them to make wantons of. So
did not Jacob, though he loved Joseph, but to the field he went as well as the
rest, and did what he could in that course. Jacob ruled his love to his childs
profit, and so should we, Jacob wanted his company for his good, and so
should we. Jacob hated idleness in his children, and so do not we

3 The third cause of the brethrens wrath, were the dreams that Joseph had. The
first of sheaues, the second of the Sun and Moon, and Stars, doing
reverence to him. God without parents help exalts often their children.
Of dreams hereafter something shall be said: Now concerning his first dream
here, Josephus says they were sheaues without corn, and therefore the dream
showed, that not only he should come to honor, but that honor should be by
foreign means, not by help of any goods or possessions of his fathers.
Surely howsoever the sheaues did pretend that, so it was, and therefore
comfortablie teaches us, that God is able without parents help (if it please
him) to prefer their children even to the greatest places, no cause to make
parents careless, but a very just cause to make them not over careful. And a
sweet comfort to all that either have no parents of ability to enrich them,
or if they have, yet unjustly are thrown off, and by sinister practices
deprived of their portion, which in nature and equity is to be given them of
their parents. God is in heaven as mighty as ever he was, and as good as ever
he was. Let him be my father and mother, and remember Joseph, etc.

4 What say the brethren, Shall thou reign over us, We rather obey strangers
the^ our brethren.
and rule us, or shall thou have altogether dominion over us, and they hated
him so much the more. And why so, was he not their brother? Is it so tickle to
have a brother rule over his brethren? yea surely. So cankred is the nature of
many men, that they can better endure to be subject to a Turk, then to their
own flesh and blood, And as our Savior said, No Prophet is esteemed in his
own Country, so may it truly be said many times, A kinsmans government over
his kinsmen is envied and spited. But it is no virtue let them use it that
list. They bewray more corruption then all the water in the river will wash
off, and of wise men they are esteemed accordingly. Not much unlike to these
brethren of Joseph be they that had rather any man should have a penie-woorth
in what they part withal, then their friend, yea a friend may not have it for
any thing, when a mere stranger shall have it almost for nothing. The nature
is naught if there be not very just cause of such refusal, and as dogged as
here were Jacobs sons.

Knowledge not obeyed.
5 How readily they interpreted his dreams, yea and how rightly? yet they
abhorred to yield, to them. So do many with the word of God, they perceive what
he means, God I say in his word, and what he requires, yet no yielding, no
submission, no contentment, but grudge and grieve as much to be subject
thereunto, and to submit their necks to the scepter thereof as Joseph's brethren
did here to there brother, albeit they gessed and that truly, what was
intended. A fearful stubbornnes, and a stiffness, starting aside with assured
danger if it be not reformed. Not to see the Lords will is a plague, but to see
it, and to refuse to obey it, is death and damnation just for evermore, without
repentance.

6 As the fathers favor here toward his son Joseph, was the cause why the
rest hated him, Gods favor to his children, cause also why they are hated in
the world of some.
so is the gracious favor that God almighty shows to his children often the
cause of hatred in others toward them. If God be extraordinary to Moses, even
Aaron his brother, and Miriam his sister will be offended: if David be loved,
Saul will envy him) and seek his destruction. So in mo, and so in too many
if men were not wicked. The lord may not do with his own as he will, but our
eye is straight evil, if he be good. This is not well in them* But to us let
it be no discomfort: for their envy, malice and hatred shall hurt us as these
men's did Joseph, that is, God shall turn all to his own glory, and our
further way unto such good as in his good pleasure is determined for us.
Believe this example of Joseph, exalted notwithstanding all their spite.

The second part.
Having heard before the hatred grown in the brethren against Joseph, in this
second part of ye chapter we may see their execution and practice of the same
against him when they had opportunity. The opportunity was this. Verse 18.
Their father sends Joseph into ye fields to them where they kept their
cattle, to see how they did. Whom when they saw in this sort come into their
hands, straight they conspired against him. Now that the father would send him,
and that Joseph would go, having had such notice of their disliking of his
dreams, it plainly shows the simplicity of the godly, and such as have
honest minds, that they are far, and often but too far from suspecting and
forecasting such perils as in deed are toward them, and such evil nature in
others as in time shows it self and bursteth out. It is an old saying, and
even here we see it true, Vt quisque est vir bonus, etc. A man that means
truly and honestly himself, thinks all others to mean so likewise. But it
was so. Though old Jacob mean no hurt, neither yet Joseph, the other brethren
do, and conspire his death, when in love sent in love he comes to see how
they did. Though simple then it is good to be, yet over simple beware to be.
Inter spinas calceatu. Amongst thorns have on thy shoes (says an other
proverb) and it is worthy practice,

2 Out goes Joseph and thinks no harm then as I said, Vr. 16.17
and he seeks his brethren from place to place, Many seek one thing and
find another.
but he finds blouddie enemies rather then brethren at the last. So fares it
daily with many a man. We seek life, but we find death at the Physicians
hands: We seek justice, we find oppression: we seek truth, we find
falsehoode, and in a word, as Joseph here we seek for brethren but find
far otherwise in the end. So does secret sin cover it self even in the
Church militant to this day. But who so reputed a brother, becomes a foe, let
him think what credit Joseph's brethren had with God or man for such
hypocrisy, and who so is halted withal, and deceived, as Joseph was, meaning
no worse then Joseph did, let him turn his face from man, and clap hold of
God, saying with the Prophet, It is good for me to hold me fast by God. to
put my trust in him: and what protection and safe guard poor Joseph found,
when he was here alone in the midst of his, no brethren, but bloody foes,
that comfortablie hope for at the same Gods hand, who is one to day, then, and
for ever, to all that truly cleave to him.

Gods writings and man's writings.
3 But why says Moses so brodelie that they conspired to slay him. This was
much to be laid in writing against such men. No not a jot. For it being so in
deed, the holy spirit of God has taught us notably by it, what difference
is betwixt man and God. 18
Man in his writings flattereth, and smootheth, and dissembleth faults, yea
often, for vice puts in virtue, and where in deed a dispraise was due, yet
there extolleth to the sky. But Gods holy spirit in his writings does not
so. He speaks plainly and ever truly of all degrees, whatsoever. Again it
shows that Moses was not directed by flesh and blood: for if he had he would
have covered the blemishes, especially these great blemishes of his
ancestors. Thirdly, it is a rule to direct them to do it, and it is a
warrant to them if they do it that write stories, and commit to writing facts
of present or former times. Truth was ever without shame, what blame soever it
gets unworthily. But filthy flattery makes them live with shame that use
it during life, and shamefullie spoken off even after death.

Scoffers and mockers.
4 Behold (say they) this dreamer, or master of dreams comes. A scoff, and
a lewd scoff, the dreams of Joseph being from God to a special revelation
of his great mercy in time intended to that house. But we may well see in it
the fashions of the wicked, and the lot of the godly in this world often. How
differ these speeches, Behold the dreamer: and Behold the holy man, the holy
woman, the hot gospeller, etc Surely both are scoffs alike from a profane
heart, which God will visit with a whipping rod in his good time. Thus
scoffed the Captains and their fifties when they called the Prophet in
mockery, Man of God, 2. King. 1.11.
but with fire from Heaven the Lord consumed such mockers^ If the like fire
from Heaven consume not our mockers, let them yet be sure that fire in hell
shall never fail them.

5 Come therefore (say they) and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit,
etc. Verse. 20.
Hatred brings forth murder.
See what it is to harbor in our bosoms a dislike of a man and a hatred, in
time it leads us even to blouddie murder of the party so disliked, or at
the least to a willingness to do it, if we be by means kept from the act. For
if a brother breath death against his brother, because he hates him: surely
men in further degrees from us will never stand in our hands. Then stop
betimes if we fear God, and abandon hatred out of our hearts. Let it never lie
boiling within us and gather strength. Such Patriarchs overcome by hatred
against their brother may teach us whilst we live what hatred is

6 Then shall we see what will become of his dreams. As if they should say, so
shall we prove his dreams false. Striuers against gods appointment.
O blinded men, the determined counsel of God they will overthrow, and by
their power and practice they will prevent what he will have come to pass. So
thought the blind Pharisees, Priests, and Elders, that if they could compass
once the death of our Savior, all should be well, they should still deceive
the world, the Scriptures should be fall, and whatsoever by Christ was
effected, should be prevented. But was it so? or rather did not all their
malice work to the effecting of Gods purpose. Herod by policy or cruelty
open, will kill the babe Jesus, and then all shall be well, yea even to this
day fools will contend against God and prove him untrue. But away betimes
with such dreadful impiety. God will be true, and his purposes shall be
performed, when all earthly creatures shall be confounded that stand against
him, Joseph's dreams shall come to pass in despite of all scorners or
unnatural practisers to the contrary. So let us think, so let us know, so
let us live till life take her leave, and all be effected. Our faith, our
cause, our profession and religion, shall stand being the Lords, though
thousands of our bodies be destroyed by raging cruelty, and all is not sure
on our adversaries side as they suppose when once they have prevailed against
some of us. Blessed be God.

Verse 21.
7 But when Ruben heard that, he delivered him out of their hands, Never give
sentence upon any for one fault.
etc. What Ruben was this? Surely even he that lay with Bilhah his fathers
Concubine, as we heard in the 35 Chapter. Learn then says Calvin upon the
place, Non esse a peccato vno quantumuu atroci estimandos homines vt nobis
desperata sit eorum salus. Not to judge men peremptorily upon one sin,
though a very great one, and their estate to us seem very desperate. For
here we see more virtue, more piety and fear of God, though before he had
so grievously fallen, then in all the rest. See again how God will ever have
one Ruben or another, that is, one means or another to deliver his out of
perils and dangers, as ever shall stand with his blessed pleasure. Let wicked
men devise and determine what they will, the Lord has a hand over all their
purposes, and they shall not prevail but as he will. Killed to be, God will
not have have his servant, and they can not effect it, but sold into Egypt he
will have him, and therein they prevail. So it is his will, not theirs: his
counsel, not theirs, that indeed rules. The devise that Ruben had to save
his life, may ever be a warrant to us to use good means and lawful
pollicyes to the good of our brethren the children of God, either in delivering
them from blouddie rages of cruel adversaries, or otherwise. This was pia
fallacia, says a learned man, a holy deceit, to a good purpose, and we may
observe it.

8 They strippe him, etc. What we are grudged to have, we are soonest robbed of.
Greatly they spited his party colored coat, as we saw before, and what
most men are spited to have they are first robbed of, if their envying foes
prevail over them. What they said to Joseph when they thus stripped him, or
what he to them when they thus used him, is not laid down. But well we may
think this was doleful intertainement to his harmless heart, that came in
such sort both readily and kindly to see how they did, and to bear to his
father what they wanted. Yea questionless with weeping eyes, and aching heart,
he cried for pity, See chap. 42 ver. 21. the anguish of his soul.
calling them brethren a name of love, mercy, and nature, remembering them of
God, of nature, of their aged father at home, who had sent him to them, and of
what soever might move compassion, but it would not serve. O Lamb amongst
Woolues if ever were any. O Jacob at home, thou see not this. Little
dreamest thou thy darling is in this perplexity amongst his brethren. To thee
he shall come no more, but his coat for him. Thy sorrow is near and even at
the door by such cruel children. No God, no brother, no father, no friend is
regarded of them. Stony hearts, and iron bowels are now where Nature should
have dwelt. See we then man, if the Lord touch not, and prepare to endure
what GOD shall send. Pity or none, favor or none, feeling or none, his will
be done.

9 Then they sat them down ^o eat bread (says the text) Alas they should
rather have sat down to weep for their most wicked behavior toward their
innocent brother, then to eat and drink, The sinful security of a dead
conscience.
but they felt not the sin as yet, and thus are men's consciences to often
lulled a sleep through Satan's subtlety: an estate most dangerous and abhorred
of God. Such a lethargy was in David, in Ezechias, and others, to their great
hurt. Wherefore blessed is the man esteemed of Solomon that fears always,
Prou. 28.
that is, that has a feeling still of sin, to avoid it, and hate it, to
sigh and sorrow for it, as becomes a man or woman that fears God. But
whilst thus they were eating, behold a means to deliver Joseph out of the
pit, and to save his life. They lift up their eyes and saw merchants coming,
straight they concluded by the motion of one to sell Joseph to them, and so to
be rid of him. So fit can God make means fall out to serve his providence
evermore. So came Rebecca so came Rachell fit in their times: so can a
thousand known experiences full well declare if they be remembered. God has
his times, and his opportunities of times, to fit assuredly, and let it be
our comfort. Joseph then is sold and away he goes. But God had a purpose
unknown to Joseph to his great comfort. Had he known it, his sorrow nothing
would have been so great. Let it comfort us when adverse things happen,
little know we what may ensue.

The entire affection of parents toward their children.
10 Finally, the sorrow of Jacob, so great and so grievous, so long and so
lasting, refusing to be comforted whosoever came to him, most plainly and
effectually expresses a fathers heart toward a child beloved. Jacob had
endured many great afflictions in his time, yet never ran out as he did in
this. Here he is even overcome with grief, and his passions vehement, show
themselves in a doleful measure. Thus near lie chldren to their parents
hearts. Touch our goods, or touch our own bodies, we endure it often with
great patience, but touch our children and we are gone: Job can witness it, if
our daily knowledge wanted proof. The coming of friends to comfort him in
this we full well commends unto us a kindness and duty that is most
commendable* But that his sons would suffer him thus to sorrow for their
brother that lived, O barbarous hardness. Their confession of the truth,
though it might very justly have wrought them blame, yet most sweetly it
would have refreshed the mourning heart of their aged father. But see our
nature how it abhors truth, if it may ought hurt us, and how obstinate
Nature stands in a sin to face it out, and keep it close. Such is our
mould, and such is our great corruption. They comfort their father and yet
cause his woe, much like our Usurers that speak so kind, and cut so deep into
a man's estate till he be undone. O miserable comforters, and so I end.

Chap. 38.
The general heads are these chiefly. The marriage of Judah, to the 12. verse.
The incest, to the 24. verse. The manifestation of the same, from thence to the
end.


TOuching particulars, it is to be observed, first, how Judah took to wife the
daughter of a Cananite, which affinity by God was utterly condemned. And the
children that he had by such marriage prospered not. Even therefore as it
should seem the marriage of the father being mentioned, God plagueth ungodly
marriages.
that we might know how just cause there was why God should detract his mercy
and grace from the issue. Let men then look upon this example, and call to
remembrance with it their own experiences. Has not God ever hated ungodly
matches? Has not God sundry ways plagued them even in our days? by denial
of issue either to such as so marry, or to the next children of such marriage,
or by withdrawing his grace from them that they become wicked and vicious as
these were here, Er, and Onan, or by some means or other best pleasing his
justice, that strikes in time the unreformed person, though he spare long. Let
never then either lusting flesh, or covetous heart, or any respect under
heaven, draw us to the match that is not in the Lord. If she be a Canaanite, or
the favorer of Canaanites unlawfully, let her never be ours. And so on the
woman's part.

Verse. 6.
2 It is said, Judah took a wife to Er his first borne son, Consent of
parents.
and why should this be mentioned in this sort, but of purpose to show the
regard that was had of parents in those days touching the marriages of their
children. A thing that I have often noted before, and can never note too often,
so bold is youth in these days to take themselves, and not to let parents
take for them.

Verse 7.
3 But Er this first borne of Judah was a wicked man, etc. therefore the Lord
slew him. The end of the wicked to be slain.
Wicked, I say, because it pleased not the Lord to give his blessing to the
fruit of a wicked match, and slain of the Lord in justice for his
wickedness, that all like disposed persons might see in experience what first
or last shall befall them for such behavior.

Verse 8.
4 Then the father willed his second son Onan to take his brothers wife, An
envious mind, hated of the Lord.
and to raise up seed to his brother. A thing that after was made a law, as
we read Deuter. 25.5. But what did the wicked man (for even this same also
was a wicked man that an unlawful marriage of the father might fully be
punished) I say what did he. Cursedlie and sinfullie he spilled his seed upon
the ground. Wherefore the Lord also slew him. Behold in this man the malicious
spiteful and envious nature of many a man and woman in the world, who rather
make choice to hurt themselves, then to pleasure another. They cry as the
woman did to Solomon, Neither to me nor to her, but divide it. But let these
natures beware, lest god deal with them as he did here with Onan whom in his
fierce wrath he slew for such envying. And concerning the fact of Onan think
no better of it, then you do that a woman should destroy her fruitfulness, for
this in man is even that sin: an ugly, foul, and filthy wickedness. Many
men are not of Onans mind, who are too soon entreated to raise up seed to
other men: yet I know the difference, but thus much by the way.

5 Judah had yet a third son, but he was young, Verse 11.
and seeing both his other sons thus dead, he was afraid to give him to
Thamar his daughter in law, least he should also die as his brethren did.
Wholly imputing the cause of his sons death, not to their own sinful
wickedness, We blame readily the unworthy of blame.
as indeed he should, but to his daughter in law, nothing guilty of the
same. Therein teaching us two things. First how ready it is with partial man
to blame others not blame worthy, rather then to lay the fault where in deed
it ought. Secondly, that when any cross befalls our family, we should
ever enter into considertion of sin, and search carefully what has been
committed to provoke the Lord in such sort against us. Seek sin in our selves.
The former he teaches us here by his doing, the latter by his not doing.
Judah I mean the father of these children. The father in marriage with a
Canaanite, and the children otherwise grieuouslie sinned, and yet post it over
to the poor woman, as though she were cause of all. David said well, and
has left us a good president when he cried in vnfainednesse, It is I Lord,
it is I that have sinned, and done evil, these silly sheep have done
nothing: 2. Sam. 24.
let thy rod be against me, etc. to the like effect. Thus did not Judah
here.

6 Then she put off her widows apparel (says the text. Verse 14.
A kind of mourning apparel.
) Thereby instructing us that even in those days widows did use some grave,
sad and sober apparel, whereby they were known to be widows, and to
carry in mind their loss and lack of their husbands. What it was we know
not certainly, neither if we did is it necessary that all countries and
persons in such outward and indifferent things should be a like. Let it thus
far profit us that we may use some grave form according to the manner of
the place where we live, and we ought not to judge those that do it.

7 She covered herself with a veil, a thing that in my opinion makes nothing
against the use of women in some places after childbirth. Women's vayles.
For honestly it may of an honest woman be used, that immodestlie of naughty
ones is abused. And so in men. Much more might the veil that Rebecca cast over
her be used to approve that fashion, then this can any way be urged to
improoue it. But most plainly this fact of Thamar teaches, that wicked women
in those days were not altogether so past shame, either had the Devil taken
such full possession of them, as now in ours he has of such like. For then
they sinned with covered faces, as having some shame: but now with open faces
as past all shame. Then such behavior showed some feeling of it, that it was
not well, but now bold and bare faces, nothing blushing to commit such
sin, show plainly to all men we have no more feeling then we have
vayles, no more conscience then we have shame, and that is just of neither
any jot at all. O fearful boldness in so badde a cause, whither will it
carry us if we take not heed.

8 The reason is alleged, why Thamar thus wickedlie prostituted her self to
her father in law. The poison of discontent.
To wit because she saw that Shelah the third son of Judah was grown up,
Verse 14.
and yet she not given to him to wife, according to promise. Alas, and shall
another man's fault make me offend? If Judah break promise, will Thamar forgo
piety? Surely this is even the poison of discontent. It boyleth, it breweth
with man and woman sore and never cease urging to some revenge. Yea here it
preuayleth with her even to shame her self and to sin damnablie rather then
not to be revenged upon her father in law. Discontent made Judas to betray his
master: discontent made Haman set up the gallows that by Gods justice served
himself. Discontent made Demas forsake Paul, and embrace the world. And what
deadly sin has not discontent made seem as reasonable, equal and just. O
treasons and treacheries against Christian kings and governors, O but cherlie
bloudinesse and bloody massacres that discontent has greedily drawn unto
men, otherwise qualified with many gifts. Beware we then ever of discontent,
and snubbe it betimes, least it overthrow us as it has done many, and here
did Thamar. And if we have any cause of just offense, let it never draw us to
unjust revenge. If Judah break promise with us, let not us offend, God sees
our wrong, and God will punish our wrong, if we commit it to him in godly
patience. But if to punish sin we also will sin, as we loose the benefit
of Gods regard of the wrong done us: so shall we surely taste of his rod our
selves for so offending.

9 The text says again that he knew her not. Yet he talked with her and she
with him largely, Verse 16.
Sinners blinded in gods justice.
how then might it be that he knew her not, she having been the wife of his
sons and long in his company? Verelie God angry with his lewd disposition,
had blinded him so that he knew her not. And shall it not show us the wrath of
the Lord against filthy concepts. If thou love sin and wilt strain thy
conscience to drink of that cup, take heed least in judgment the Lord take
knowledge and feeling from thee, that thou no more discernest sin to be
sin, as it is, then Judah knew Thamar to be his daughter in law, as she was.

10 The match being made for her sinful hire, and the sin committed by her
sinful father, the text says, Verse 20.
He sent her his promise by his neighbor the Adullamite. Cole-cariers betwixt
offenders.
Such Cole-cariers the world is too full of, and I would their occupation were
writ in their foreheads, then would there be less wickedness wrought then is
by much. The virtue of man or woman has no such enemy under heaven as these
cariers be. Such neighbors as this be good to scour an ho^e oven withal.
They bring, and they speak, yea they swear, and fowlie forswear to work a
shame. What sender cannot, these cariers can have time and place to discourse
at full. They lie, they cogge, they face and flatter, till harmless heart
rereceyue their venom. O brokers of Satan, for sin and wickedness what
will be your end? True friendship is vsque ad aras, and no further.
If the sinner sinning by your procurement be damned and die, what measure of
confusion is due to you that have brought it about? Spit we then ever with
destance hearty upon such Adullamites as this was.

11 When this carier came, Thamar was gone, and finding her not he returned his
carriage unto Judah, and told him of it. Verse 23.
To whom Judah answered, Let her take it to her (to wit his pledge) least we
be shamed. So showing plainly what we find too true more in our eyes to be
the shame of the world then the fear of God. But it is a wrong course if God
gave eyes: for he above all is to be feared and regarded, that is able not to
shame only, but to kill both body and soul, and to cast into hell fire, etc.

Verse. 24.
12 In time this whoredom draws to light: for Thamar being with child after
three months made open show, and the news of it is brought to her father in
law, who by and by stoutly as if he had been the honestest man alive gives
justly sentence that she should be burnt. Showing as it is thought, that even
by the law of nature written in man's heart, whordome should be punished by
death, before ever the law written was given. When she was brought forth to
the end to suffer, she sent unto her father in law his tokens left with her
when she offended. Which by and by knowing, he changed his sentence absolved
her, and condemned himself, saying: She is more righteous then I for she has
done this because I gave her not to Shelah my son. So hasty sentence was
soon repealed, and the case being altered he is not so hasty as he was. Such
Judges and judgments have been seen, but the less the better. Sin will be
sin whatsoever we do, and God will assuredly punish sin whatsoever we
do. Circumstances may alter sin from more to less, or back again, but
circumstance never can make sin no sin, and unworthy blame. She had cause
to complain of wrong done her by her father in law, not giving her a wife to
his son, but that therefore with her father in law she should commit incest,
it cannot be justified: but enough before of this matter. That it follows
straight, He lay with her no more, it was some grace and token of repentance.
Such as if offenders would ever show, no doubt but mercy might be found for
passed frailty. Regard this therefore, and observe it well, Judah sinned but
he sinned no more, etc.

Last of all, when the time of deliverance came, A comfort to women with child
in their travail.
her travail was hard, yea so hard as it is not convenient fully to utter,
yet all was well in the end, both mother and twins too were in safety. The
use of it to women to trust in God who is mighty, and almighty, good, and all
goodness, to regard his faithful servants ever in this business. Let them not
fear, but cleave fast to his gracious favor, the rather if before they have
proved his mercy. For though it be a fault for any to doubt, yet it is a
double fault for one that has tried, to do it. Neither Gods mercy nor might
wax weaker with time, but he is for ever, what ever he was, and if you believe
it, as here did Thamar receive a good end, so shall you. First one, then
another, and if there had been mo, the Lord still all one according to his
pleasure. And this of this Chappter.

Chap. 39.
In this Chapter these three things as generals especially are to be noted.
Joseph's faithful and true service. His holy and unviolated chastity. His
wrongful and unjust imprisonment.


Verse. 1.
COncerning the first, it is said, That he served Potiphar an Eunuch of Pharaos,
and his chief steward, who bought him at the hands of the Ishmaelites. Where
we see the Lord has a resting place for his ever in his good time howsoever
they be tossed and carried up and down, even from pillar to post, for a while.
Read Esaias 39. the seventh verse, and confer it with this verse of this
Chapter.

Verse 2.
2 The Lord was with Joseph (says the text) and he was a man that prospered.
Giving us to learn therein very notably, that the favor of God is the true
fountain of all prosperity. He rises whom God loves, if so it be good, and
without him no man rises though they burst their hearts. Yet is not
prosperity a token ever of Gods love, though no prosperity come but from Gods
will. But here we are told in this particular, Ver. 3.4.
that Joseph prospered, because God was with him. Which when his master saw,
he also favored him, and made him ruler of his house, putting all that he had
under his hand, making by that means good Joseph's piety serve for his
profit, but not caring for the same to learn it himself. A daily trick of
earthly minded men. Yet God is good to his servant still, Verse 5.
and blesses even the Egyptians house for his sake. So gainful is godliness
but in servants. What should it be in our selves if we also were right hearted
with them. Should God forget to be good to such a family? no, no, he would
bless it certainly very graciously.

3 Then did his master much more trust him, Verse 6.
taking no account of any thing that was in his house. Partial affection to
our own Countrime^.
A virtue in some sort, and a testimony of good nature in his master. For
there be some that are so partiallie wedded to their own Countryfolke, and so
doggedlie hearted toward any strangers, that rather they had endure the
doltishnes of the former, then use the dexterity of the latter. So was not
Potiphar. But seeing gods graces in a stranger, even there also he yields
favor, and uses him fully according to the same.

4 His person is commended, that he was fair and well favored. A grace if God
give it not to be despised, Beauti^ a snare, and our eyes windows to sin.
for it makes lightly whatsoever we do to be better liked, according to the
old saying: Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Virtue in a comely
personage is more esteemed. But see the malice of Satan: though he could not
make Joseph abuse this beauty, either to pride or otherwise, yet he tempts
Potiphars wife by it, and with it, Verse 7.
for it is said she cast her eyes upon him, and said, Lie with me. So that we
see our very senses suck in our bane, if the Lord assist not, and the eyes
especially. In this book before, it was said, that the sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair, Genesis 6.2.
and took them wives. David saw from the top of his palace Beerseba, and by
sight sinned in measure straight, and soon after more. Peter speaks of eyes
full of adultery. Job made a covenant with his eyes yt they should not offend
in this respect. 2 Pet. 2. Job 31.
All these places teaching what windows for wickedness to enter in at our
senses be, if God give not grace. Well prayed David therefore, that the Lord
would turn away his eyes, lest they should behold vanity. A careful
conscience preuenteth much, and a careless person is soon deceived. Beware we
by this wanton mistress of Joseph's, if we fear God.

5 Joseph abhorred such impiety, and with most good and godly arguments
repelleth the temptation. Verse 7.
The first drawn from ingratitude and unfaithfulness in these words, An honest
nature, the more trusted, ye more faithful.
Behold my master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has
committed all that he has to my hand. There is no man greater in his house
then I, neither has he kept any thing from me but only thee, Verse 8.
etc. as if he should have said, being trusted as I am, and preferred in my
masters house as I am, it were ye greatest unfaithfulness, and the foulest
ingratitude that might be, in this sort to requite my masters favors, and so
great favors toward me. Therefore I may not do it* for I abhor to be
unfaithful where I am trusted, or unthankful where I am regarded and done
for. Here then is a servant of servants, if we think of our days, here is a
jewel more worth then gold, and a pearl of price for a man's house. Faithful
and thankful what wish we more. By these two virtues as it were, by two b^nds
upon his soul kept from such villainy toward his master as is contrary quite
unto them both. Live Joseph, live, though long thou art dead, for this thy
grace, and live not with God alone in his shining light, but in the mouths of
men till the world have end, to thy praise and honor most justly deserved, who
taste of grace will follow thee, and who offered thus, prefer their lust, in
judging day shall be condemned by thee.

The second argument.
His second argument is drawn from that marriage knot that ought to hold till
death does part. Thou art (says he) his wife, as if he should have said, Such
truth should be in thee toward thy wedded husband, even because thou art his
wife, that if I would thou should defy me, and again such stop to me is
made by this estate in thee, that if we both would, yet we ought not. A married
woman must have a married mind, that as her body by orderly course is
appropriated unto one, so her mind must be also to the same, and to none other.
Being then his wife, and so proper unto him, I may not consent to abuse this
knot that God and grace would be inuiolate.

The third argument.
His third argument is drawn from the nature of the sin it is a great
wickedness to touch an other man's wife: and as all wickedness should be
abhorred: so great wickedness greatly abhorred. A true judgment in Joseph, and
would God we might ever retain it in our selves. The world makes but a jest
of it, and at it, Genesis 20.9.
being herein behind the very infidels and heathens, of whom many have
confessed and hated as Joseph does. But with these mockers and fleshly wretches
the Lord shall not mock in his due time, when that shall be fulfilled in the 13.
to the Heb. Marriage is honorable amongst all men, but whoremongers and
adulterers the Lord shall judge. Heb. 13.2.


His last argument is drawn from the love of God. The fourth argument.
Thus should I sin (says he) against God, which how may I do? As if he
should have said, I love God who has ever loved me, and my love admits no
such requital. Many and many are the sweet mercies that I have found at his
hand, if I should tell all, and how then should I sin against him? Therefore
since trusted I am and may not be unfaithful, since regarded I am above all in
the house, and may not be unthankful, since thou art a man's wife, and by that
knot bound to abhor all others in such respects, since the sin is great, and
therefore with great care to be avoided, and since I love the lord for his love
to me, which abhors such requital, I must say nay, and thou must not say
yea, God must be feared, and these reasons regarded, sin must be hated and
virtue preserved in us both. O virtue bright in a holy child of God: to speak
of it were to say less then the thing deserves, and therefore honoring both
it and him that had it, God give us grace ever to follow it.

6 It follows in the text that she spoke to Joseph day by day, and yet he
refused. Verse 10.
Where not only mark her most vgglie unshamefastness, that having received
such answer, Satan tempts again and again, to the same thing.
would yet solicit: but see also plainly, and observe it carefully, how
Satan cease not to assaie us again and again with the same temptation,
hoping in time to win our consent unto the same, and to give us the foil at
the second or third assault, though stiffly we stand and resist the first.
Therefore once or twice having well fought against filthy assaults, yet be not
secure by and by, but even reckon of your enemy yet again, and prepare like
answer to the end. Joseph as heartily and zealously as ever any did repelled
the bait that Satan laid for him in his mistress, yet he gives not over but
still works in his instrument to attempt him again, yet do what both he and
his instrument could, Joseph stood fast in his holy purpose, Company to be
avoided.
and said her nay. Yea mark it with me and forget it never, what the text
says, that when he saw her wickedness, he not only avoided her filthy
desire, but even her dangerous and unclean company. Thereby most notably
instructing all men, that if they will not burn, they may not put their
fingers in the flame: that is, if they will not be evil, they may not still
and daily be in evil company. Prou. 13. Syrac. 13. Psalm. 18.
For company causes in continuance, what is not clawed off in any
continuance. Let Solomon teach us, and many more. Peter in bad company denied
his Lord, the skarre whereof in remembrance lives yet. Lot in the company of
his lusting daughters is ouerreached, and commits incest. Beware the woman
that is unshamefast, Pro. 7 from the 6. ver. to the end.
if she still may have place to continue her assaults. Read the seventh of the
Proverbs, and mark it well, at last she prevailed, and led him home as an Ox
that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks for correction.

7 Then on a time Joseph entered into the house to do his business, Ver. 11.12.
Impudency
and there was no man in the house. Therefore she caught him by the garment,
etc. O strange impudency and more foul and filthy then that I can speak of
it. Mark it and hate it, loathe it and detest it with a perfect hatred, for so
it deserves. And let it teach us this, Fulgent. epist. 4. ad Prob. page 532.
de orat. and compunct.
even to dash the bones of filthy co^ceits at the first whilst they be young.
For if we harbor and hatch them up still in our bosoms, their strength will be
such in short time, that we shall even with impudent faces, as here did she,
endeavor the accomplishing of them to our shame. Qui semel verecundiae limits.
etc. Who once has passed the bounds of modesty (could the heathen man say) he
will even straight and in very short space become passing impudent if he take
not heed. Again observe it diligently, how when Joseph is about his work and
thinks not any thing of such matters Satan assaulteth him and would overthrow
him. Beware therefore ever and be armed ever, even in thy work Satan will be
busy, and not let thee alone, in thy study, in thy house, in the field, and
at thy plow make ready for Satan, and think it not strange if even here also
thou feel his temptations. He goes about continually seeking whom he may
devour. Last of all, in the woman observe it also, that there was none in the
house, Solitarines to be avoided,
and then she is boldest of all, and bolder then ever she was. So is Satan
helped, and wickedness strengthened by solitarines and want of company. Therefore
though evil company be ever dangerous, yet some company with us, or near us
is much profitable. We see this example, and we remember also when Satan
tempted our savior himself, even when in the wilderness he was alone. Thinking
solitarines an advantage even against Christ, much more against us, and
therefore to be avoided as we may.

8 This filthy woman having received a foil, Verse 13. to the end.
when in this her so impudent an assault also (for Joseph stood virtuous still
to the end) see her devise. She having his garment which in his zealous
indignation against her monstrous behavior flinging away from her, he left
behind him, she makes that a means to color her filthiness, and to accuse
Joseph, as you see in the text Thereby teaching us that where incontinence is,
Where incontinencie is many vices are.
there are many vices. Impudency, subtletie, slander and treachery, and what
not? Again teaching us that filthy love denied, her lust turns to hatred
and deadly hatred, not caring to work the destruction of the denier. So did
she. Since she can not have Joseph as she desired, she will destroy him if she
can as he deserved not: who would think she could find in her heart so to
injury him whom even now she so affected? But thus it is, and therefore think
we of Mantuans verse if we list, aut te ardenter amat, aut te capitaliter
odit. Either she loves thee heartily, or hates thee deadly: the mean is not
found of many women.

9 Not only she accuses him to her servants, which was too much, but to her
husband when he comes home, which far was more: Credulity a great fault.
so malice works in mad minds, from worse to worse. Her foolish husband
having heard his wife, believes all, and condemns Joseph, never rewarding
his faithful service with due examination of the truth. A fault too common
with greatest persons, yet a blot too black for such estates. Joseph's whole
course had given occasion of better conscience, and shall all be forgotten?
Shall the truest servant and faithfullest heart in all that house lie
presently as open to the dart of slander as he that was never such? What
wisdom is this, what honor is this, what conscience is this? David so
credulous, or rather injurious to true Mephibosheth, whom flattering Siba
falselie accused, is chaulked out in no worse chronicle then gods book for an
unwise man to say no more. So ever were they that would measure true hearts no
better measure then this. Site and sapienter Epicharmus: Meme^to diffidere,
Sharply therefore and wisely said Epicharmus, Remember to be slow of belief.
And another again: Nerum est sapientiae non temere credere. Cicero.
It is the very sinew of wisdom not hastily or rashly to give credit. But
this is not observed or remembered here. All is believed against good Joseph,
and as a man most guilty to prison he goes. Behold ye servants and be of good
comfort. A comfort to servants.
Not ever to be esteemed and dealt withal according to desert, is but the lot
of a child of God, and one that is worthy all love and good liking, though it
be not given him. Then pass it over as you may the wrong that so wringeth, god
is in heaven, and in time Joseph shall out of prison with honor again. Such
snubs as these be little clouds, that when God has exercised us, with his
sun of righteousness, he will disperse and cause to vanish. But whither goes
Joseph to prison in this displeasure? Verse 20.
Surely says ye text: to the place where the kings prisoners lay bound. O
mighty providence of almighty God, and sweet sweet to be observed. You know
what after in this story fell out, when Joseph expounded ye baker and butlers
dreams, and how by that means after Joseph was remembered as able to
interpret the kings dreams and so delivered. This could not have been, if he
had been in any prison else, and therefore here God would have him, as having
determined both his delivery, and the means. Care away then with the Lords
elect. For if they go to prison their God gouernes, and even the place, their
end is appointed in his wisdom, and it shall not sail.

10 And the Lord was with Joseph, showing him mercy and getting him favor with
the master of the prison. etc. Verse 21. and to the end.
To prison he goes, but yet to that prison that God appoints as a place
fittest to his servants future and intended good, Even the prison is directed
by God.
and there even there the Lord is with him, not ceasing to work his comfort as
might be good. In his former masters house he wrought his favor whilst it
pleased him, and now in this man's house when that is gone he does the like. So
safe is he ever that fears the Lord. And shall he not want favor with men
necessary that cleaves to God, and defieth sin. Locked doors cannot lock
God from us, and that is comfort. Many things mo might here be noted if I
would be long: as that so long a man stands liked and regarded in place of
service as God thinks good, Note these.
who has further to use and dispose of that man. That disgrace and dislike by
God are directed not to hurt, but even further to prefer his faithful
servants that ever so lived that they well deserved favor still, though they
had it not. That before a rising goes an humbling, as here in Joseph, that
thankfulness may be more, and experience of affliction in others, with many
such, but I will not stand any longer now: only this let us note and end,
that the highest services be not the safest services for an honest mind. A
courtiers life.
No temptations to do evil, more disgrace when there is no evil then meaner
places can aford. Yet every man would be climing, and pitch we do too often
our desires there, from whence we shall suck the sowrest sorrow that ever we
tasted of in our lives. If Joseph's estate be thus tickle, having such virtue,
and such gifts: Mediocra firma, mean things be best things and surest to
continue, sing we ever, and think we ever. And so I end.

Chap. 40,
The heads in this Chapter are chiefly these. The imprisonment of the kings
chief butler and baker. Their dreams which they had in the prison. The
interpretation of the same by Joseph. The effect and truth according to his
interpretation.


Verse. 2.
TOuching the first it is said: Pharao was angry with his officers. Great men's
anger.
etc. Greater men are sooner angry, and with more danger far by reason of
their power: but princes angers above all others are especially dangerous and
to be avoided. Pro. 19.12.
For the kings wrath (says the wise Solomon) is like the roaring of a lion, and
his favor again like the dew dropping upon the grass: Chap. 16.14.
yea the wrath of a king is as messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify
it in another place. This anger of his cast them into prison, and their
imprisonment again teaches what I ended the former chapter withal, to wit,
how dangerous high services be in comparison of meaner places, even to men of
all conditions. The meanest places are often meanest to work great extremities
unto men. These prisoners are put in the place where Joseph was, and how this
does work a deliverance with honor unto Joseph the sequel shows. So
guides Gods goodness his childrens affairs to their good. Joseph also has the
oversight of them, that still we might see how God was with him and got him
favor, though wicked mistres, and too credulous master did seek his woe.

Of dreams
2 These two prisoners dreamed (says the text) either of them a dream in one
night. And it might occasion us to think of the causes of dreams, and matter
belonging thereunto, if I would be long. As that dreams flow from ouerruling
humors in man's body, whereby it falls out that sanguine constitutions dream
of merry and comfortable matter of love and lightness also, with such like:
choleric, of wars, braules and contentions, and of fire and such like:
Flegmatike, of water, wind and such like, Melancholic, of heavy, doleful,
and sad matters, of death and dead folks, with such like. So that Physicians
observe our dreams very usually, as no small help to discern what humor
rules and troubles us most. Galen and Boethius write much of it, and used it
still to their patients. Sometimes of actions and deeds done by us the day
before, according to the saying: Omnia quae sensu voluuntur vota diurno,
Pect ore sopito reddit amica quies,
Iudicibus lites, auriga somnia currus.
Sometimes of fear, according to the saying also: Somnia fallaci ludunt
temeraria nocte.
Et pauidas mentes falsa timere iubent.


These are natural dreams, and proceed commonly from their causes therein.
Beside which there are dreams spiritual and dreams diabolical. Dreams
spiritual have ever some, certain notes whereby they are known and discerned,
and either of the party or of some others have their true and certain
interpretations. Dreams diabolical, are illusions wherewith satan vexes his
own especially, as witches, sorcerers, and such like. These dreams of the
butler and baker might well be natural being so touching their proper
functions, and yet spiritual in this respect, that God using proper causes,
had a special drift in causing them, that Joseph might have passage to the
kings knowledge, and so to such honor as after followed. Think of them as you
will, sure and certain the Lords finger was in them, and with Joseph to
interpret them to them. So all things work as the Lord has appointed, and
by one means or other his mercy to his children shall be effected.

3 Having dreamed these dreams in the morning, when Joseph came in to them,
they both were sad and looked heavily. Verse. 7.
A good nature soon spieth others grief and comfort them.
Joseph spied it by and by, and said unto them, Why look ye so sadly to day?
Thereby declaring the goodness of his nature, and the fruit of affliction in
himself: Vincula qui sensit didicit succurrere vinctis. He that has been
bound himself, knows the better what belongs to bands. Neither had he an
eye more to see, then a heart to pity and to inquire what might be the cause,
ready no doubt to do them the good that any way he was able. Such virtue is
commendable with God and man, when sour and stern dispositions get no such
praise. A comfortable word to a heavy heart God knows is sweet, and too
much we think we can never do for so good a nature. They told him readily
their grief what it was, not thinking (as it seems) that he could expound
them. But Joseph a man instructed aright, answered again: are not
interpretations of God? As if he should say, Can not God stir up in this your
content: therefore be not sad, but tell your dreams unto me. No certain rules
of expounding dreams. Somnia ne cures, nam men's humana quod op^a^, etc. Read
Syrach 24 Ecclisiast. 5. Iere. 23. ver. 27. and 27 ver. 9. Cic. de diuinas.
confuteth, etc.
Which straight they did, and received a true and certain interpretation of
them at his hands. But if here hence we conclude, that with us also our common
dreams are to be expounded, we shall fowlie err, and who so have done, have
made themselves spectacles of folly to many, and showed no little impiety in
themselves, both in speaking and printing: for there is no rule that can hold
as certain in things so variable as dreams be. As for example, that ever
when we dream of such a beast, of such a matter, or in such a manner, it
should signify the same thing at all times, whereof unwisely some have
written too much. But of dreams elsewhere I have said more.

4 Joseph having told the chief butler his dream, which showed his
deliverance very shortly, and restitution to his office again with credit,
beggeth of him but this requital, that he would show mercy to a prisoner also
as himself then was, and to make mention of him to the king that he might be
delivered. Teaching us therein not to neglect means whenever we need, but
to use them carefully, referring all effect to God. The baker seeing his
fellows dream so good, tells unto Joseph his also. But alas the difference.
Yet Joseph is true, and tells him truly what it was, though it were so
bitter. Teaching us well that truth is to be preserved howsoever the matter
is, Sharp truths must be told.
and even hard and sour truths to be told if we be required. Confer
herewithall for proof and practice but these Scriptures. 2. Sam. 12. the 7.
verse. 1, King. 22.17. verse. 2. King. 20.1. and 17. Miche. 2.11. verse. Matthew.
3.7. and Chap. 14.7. Galat. 1.10. with such like. Beware we then ministers how
we conceal what the Lord reuealeth to us.

5 What is spoken here of Pharaohs birthday, and in Matthew. 14. of Herod's
birthday, Birth days.
shows us the antiquity and lawfulness also of this observance if it be in
measure. Birthdaies and mariage-daies, may be observed, if we keep a course
free from vanity and superstition. That Pharaoh delivers them both out of
prison, one to life, and the other to death, some have made it a figure of Gods
last judgment when the like shall be done. But I stand not of it. This only I
will note and now end. Unthankfulness.
How the butler released forgot Joseph, a note of disgrace to him justly, and
to all others that in prosperity forget their comforters in adversity. To
many, to many has this world daily that exalted to honor, to riches and
comforts, forget Joseph, that is, such persons as are godly and faithful,
worthy of comfort, and yet oppressed by some strange Putiphars, who erst
have been of their great acquaintance.

Chap. 41.
In this Chapter we have these things especialle to be observed as chief
heads. The dreams of Pharaoh the king. The deliverance of Joseph out of
prison. His government in the land when he was preferred.


The company of the godly profitable to the wicked.
TOuching the first, we see Pharaoh here by dream admonished of a great dearth
that should ensue in his land, and was this think you for Pharaohs sake? no
indeed not principally and especially, but it was for Joseph's sake, yt he might
be released and preferred, and for Jacob his old fathers sake, with all his
family, who were by this providence comforted and provided for, and brought
into Egypt there to remain an appointed time, according as was said to
Abraham. See therefore again and again, what profit still comes to the wicked
by the godly. For their sakes they have mercy, and manifold mercies, as here
had Pharaoh and all his land, when otherwise the famine had devoured most of
them, as well we may see if it had not been told to Joseph by God, and he
directed with wisdom to provide for it. The king has two dreams, but all to
one end, the doubling being only for more certainty and more plainness.
Whereby the ministers of the word may learn of the Lord in matters of weight
that ought to be known, even twice to speak the same thing, Preachers to
repeat the same thing good.
and oftener also if it be needful. For this is sure, this is plain, and this
is even the pactise of the Lord himself. Foolish curiosity auoydeth this, and
vaineglorie suffers us not to submit our selves, but who follows the Lord
he follows the wisest guide, and let others be no rule against him.

2 When the morning came his spirit was troubled, Verse 8.
which fear was enough to teach him that these visions were sent of god, but
none could interpret the^ unto Pharaoh, yt we might thereby learn, how the
wise in the world understand not gods secrets, but to his servants his will is
revealed. Then spoke his chief butler, and told him of Joseph. Better late
then never, Verse 9.
but fie of such heart that so long could forget so good a man, Worldly wise
understand not God.
and one that so friendly had dealt with him. Two years (says the first
verse) ere this was done after Joseph spoke unto him. Delays in court then,
and some Courtiers even in honest suits and very reasonable are too old we see.
Delays in court, old.
But the best men abhor them ever, and tha^kful minds defy forgitfulnes of
their friends: twice is it done yt quickly is done, and a ready dispatch
doubleth the benefit to the receiver, and consequently duty to the giver.

3 Then sent Pharaoh and called Joseph. Not much unlike to many others, Verse
14.
that ever in their need do seek to the godly and well disposed, to receive
that comfort, The wicked seek to the godly in their need.
or reap that benefit which other cannot yield them. But in prosperity they
contemn them, and little regard either them or their virtues. That Joseph
shaued himself, and changed his raiment to come unto Pharaoh, it may well
teach us with reverence to regard the Lord much more. Outward reverence before
God
Before whom yet we come not with thus much regard: the more is our fault, and
the less is our feeling assuredly. The Lord weighs not outward gesture, but
inward heart, yet in respect of our selves outward gesture does help our
inward heart, and stir us up rather unto reverence* as changing of garments,
kneeling and bowing with eyes, and hands lift up, and such like, therefore to
be used.

4 Without me (says Joseph) God shall answer for the wealth of Pharaoh. As if he
should say, Verse. 16.
Glory to be given to God.
though I expound thy dream which turns to thy good, it is yet God and not I
that answers for thy wealth. A dutiful speech in a child of god, to give god
the honor that is due to him, fit for us, and for all believers evermore. For
what have we that we have not received? does not every gift and every thing in
nature good, proceed from god? 1. Cor. 4 7. Iam. 1.17.
why then should we rob him of his own? God forbid. Herod for taking to
himself most vainly the praise of his well speaking, Act. 12.
fearfully perished to make us beware. Yea Joseph is careful even before the
unbelievers to commit this sin: and let us mark it. Therefore in the 28. verse.
he repeateth it again. This is the thing which I have said unto Pharaoh,
Verse. 28.
ye god has showed unto Pharaoh, what he is about to do, carefully preserving
unto the Lord his due.

Verse. 35.
5 That Joseph gives counsel to Pharaoh to lay up, etc. Beside that it
shows the duty of gods prophets and ministers, not only to show the evils
to come, but also the remedies for the same. It does also further warrant as
lawful and good such laying up in one year as may serve for an other, either
of father for his child, man for his family, or governor for his place
committed unto him. Only moderation and order that it be kept is to be cared
for. Storing lawful.
Which moderation must regard circumstances of person, calling, place, time.
etc. Therefore said Joseph, let there be chosen a man of understanding and
wisdom to do this, meaning no doubt which should do with discretion yt which
was fit. No warrant therefore this gathering thus limited and for such end, for
those scrapings ye greedy cormorants use amongst us, neither with measure, nor
for good end, or any care of any godly circumstance.

6 Then said Pharaoh, can we find such a man as this in who^ is the spirit of
God? Verse 38.
Thou shall be over my house, etc. Making this argument, Gifts fit for places
to be regarded.
that because Joseph had such gifts, therefore he was fit for such place, and
implying the contrary, that places ought not to go where want of gifts is fit
for them. A thing that will accuse many a giver in the latter day, when the
lord shall reckon. That they have not been so holy as Pharaoh of Egypt to
regard gifts in such men upon whom they have bestowed places of charge, and
most great charge. But what did I say? not regard gifs, do not giuers of places
in our days regard their gifts who must enjoy them? How have I erred, since
gifts, and gifts, and nothing but gifts, and all for gifts we do what we do, Si
nihil attuleru ibis Homere for as: If you have no gifts the door is open, and
the way before you, pack you hence. But O cursed gifts, and cursed they that
regard so much such kind of gifts. My meaning is plain, and this text is
plain. Pharaoh of Egypt, even Pharaoh of Egypt, I say, Gifts too much regarded.
regards what was within Joseph, and not what was without, and shall we be
all for the gifts without, and nothing for grace within? for gain to our
selves by sinful bribes, not for gain to the Church or common wealth by
strength to discharge? Thou and thy gifts perish (said the Apostle once) and
thou and thy gifts perish, shall god say one day, when it shall smart. Yea thou
with thy gifts that thus give for such gifts to an unworthy one, and he for
want of gifts that yet gives thee these gifts to supply his want of gifts
inward in mind, and required of god if he will have such place as requires such
gifts to ye discharge of it. The heathens to show that honor ought ever and
only accompany Virtue, built a Temple to Honor, Panormitan. lib. 1. de gestis
Alphonsi.
and so adjoined thereunto another Temple to Virtue, that by no means a man
could get into the Temple of Honor, but only through the Temple of Virtue, and
alas shall we that profess more knowledge be worse in our practice then all
Heathens? God work with us for his mercy sake in this respect.

7 Then said Pharaoh to Joseph, Behold I have set thee over all the land of
Egypt. Verse 41.42.43.
He took his ring and put it upon Joseph's hand, araied him in garments of fine
linen, and put a chain of gold about his neck. After a fowl day comes a
fair.
He set him upon the best Charet that he had saving one, and they cried before
him Abrech, etc. O god of comfort how art you one and the same for ever to thy
children, sweet and merciful, kind and gracious, bountiful and liberal in
thy good time. Is Joseph now thus highly exalted? And shall all Egypt be ruled
by him? O what are the afflictions of gods children then? are they any thing
but such humblings and schoolings as the lord their god and most gracious
father fitteth them by and with, and under to such places, Sweet comfort in
deed in all afflictions.
honors and comforts as he has appointed for them either here in this life, or
in yt to come? No, no, they are no matters of anger any way, but trainings and
leadings to other purposes of our sweetest god. Foul days have fair days we
see it here, and lowering nights to bring bright mornings, we shall ever find as
shall be good for us. Farewell Putiphar with thy filthy unkindness to a true and
gainful servant, O note and feel.
farewell mistress of mischief with thy sinful slander, thou have done thy
woorst, and Joseph lives, and is out of prison, honored with honor above thy
self, and God taking his pa^^, thy malice has failed of strength to hurt him,
blessed be God. And blessed God bless us also, that sinful unkindness toward
true meaning, or hellish malice against holy life may be indu^^d with patience
of us and visited in mercy by she, toward us in thy good times, our
righteousness made open by thy favors as here it was: yea all thy children
enabled by view of this experience to continue careful, to be upright, and to
cleave unto thee before all the world, in love, in fear, in thankful feeling
and comfortable taste of thy sweet nature toward thine for ever and ever.
Amen, Amen.

8 That Joseph suffered all this honor to be done unto him, and received it,
The godly may accept honors in this world, by places, titles, etc.
held it, and used it, does it not show that the children of God may enjoy
worldly places of high regard, and yet be faithful? is piety such a
simplicity, that cannot abide honor in this, or like order amongst men? No,
neither yet is such peeuishnes, piety, that condemns Gods blessings, as
things unlawful for his children, and grindeth the teeth at the comforts of
Joseph without a cause. What Anabaptists think and have put in writing we know
more, then we need to regard. Their kinds were diverse, and their sentences
differing accordingly. Princes and potentates in this world here on earth have
received honors, and given honor to their inferiors again without dislike
of God, ever from their beginning, so that an order be kept. And to say that
princes may not use any of their subjects seruises according to their gifts,
and honor them for their services accordingly, when they have done, is most
derogatorie, not only to the princes own honor, but also to his government
and liberty. How did Darius honor Mordecai, and how did Mordecai (a faithful
man) accept the same? How did Nabuchadnezzar honor Daniel, and Daniell take
it, use it, and enjoy it with thankfulness to God, faithfulness to the king
that gave it, Dan 2.48.
and good great to many a one. Daniel was made a great man, says the Text by
the King, who gave him many and great gifts, and made him governor over the
whole province of Babel, and chief of the rulers above all the wise men of
Babel, Sidrach, Misaak, and Abednago were also honored and accepted of it. 2.
Kings 18, 7.
Obadiah a good man met the Prophet Eliah, and fell on his face and said: Art
not thou my Lord Eliah? and the Prophet refused not this honor. The like said
the Sunamite to Elisha, with diverse others. Let not my Lord be angry, says
Aaron to Moses, and here dwells in this Town a Seer, an honorable man, Number.
12.11
says Saul's servant of the Prophet Samuel. The iayler in the Acts to Paul and
Sylas: My Lords what shall I do to be saved? (...). 1 Samuel 9.6. Act. 16.30.
Act 14. Ezra. 8.
And they startled not at this title, who yet rent their clothes, etc. when
unlawful honor was given to them. To be called Princes of Priests, in that
estate was most honorable, and no title greater. Number. 3.
Eleazar the son of Aaron was called Prince of Princes: Eliasaph, Elizaphat,
Suriel are called Princes and Heads. But of this I have spoken elsewhere,
Sermon at P. Cross.
and therefore now go no further. Hoping that hereby we see it plain, that
titles and honors accepted of Gods children, as here of Joseph, are no signs
of ambition, nor forbidden as unlawful, so the mind be humble and meek, and
a measure kept. And immoderat it cannot truly be said, which of a chistian
Prince for just cause is voutsafed to ye faithful subject according to the
custom and manner of the Country. No, rather it is to the commonwealth and
church both anornament and adiument. The contrary being sought at this day in
ministers out of al question by ye deep malice of Satan, to the end that all
they being brought into contempt, Religion with them might also fall, he having
his liberty to spit out his venom and blasphemies against it at large, not
one being of authority and countenance to oppose himself against him, and such
his dealinges of the ministers. Who so would have the foundation of an house
and building out, may not immediately begin to strike at that, A similitude
for fear all the building fall upon his head, but he must begin at the top,
and first until it, then vntimber it, and so by little and little come to the
foundation, which after this sort he may take away with ease: even so in this,
which we now have speech of, if Satan directly should strike at the
foundation, Christ and his word, with religion issuing from the same, then all
men espying his malicious drift, would oppose themselves against him, and so
his drift be hindered by many stones in the building, falling as it were upon
his head. But when he begins to until it, and to vntimber it, as I have
said, that is to debase and disgrace the ministers already in it, and to hinder
by their disgraces others of any gifts to come unto it, with such like
proceedinges many and wicked, in time he will have the foundation with ease,
that is Christ and his word out of the same, with all holy worship according to
the same, placing for learning barbarism, and blindness, and for religion,
superstition, with all the blacknes and darkness of Egypt again. Wherefore, if
ever the comforts of learning and learned men have nourished to church and
commonwealth sufficient helps, and ye contrary in all ages rooted them out by
little and little till all were gone: let us never grieve at the means that so
happy a good follows after, but bless God heartily if the place we live in
afford them to us, and labor to our powers ever to maintain them. Knowing by
Joseph, Daniel, and all these examples now recited, that in men of all
conditions and callings in the church, and commonwealth, outward things, as
wealth and riches, honors and dignities, with titles of encouragement, and
gracious favor in religious Princes may be allowed. The true children of God
having daily learned, to abound and to want, that is in prosperity to use what
the time affords to Gods glory, and in aduertsity to embrace what the Lord
then also sends without repining. If Israel offend, let not also Judah sin
herein: that is, if some offend, who should not do so? Let not us thus hearing,
and thus seeing, follow their example, and offend likewise. But defye we
Satan and his attemptes, to our last day.

Chap. 42.
In this Chapter consider these Heads especial and chief. Jacobs sending of
his sons into Egypt for food. Their intertainment there with Joseph when they
came. Their return again to their father.


TOuching the first, in that Jacob sends for food, The godly afflicted as the
wicked, yet to other end.
we see that even he also was subject to this famine: where we may note, that
the godly often times endure the same afflictions that the wicked do, but far
yet differing from them in the end. For unto the wicked such afflictions are
the whips and scourges of God for their sins and deserts, unto the godly they
are trials of faith and patience that God may be further glorified by them.
Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, with thousands more may be examples unto us and
proofs hereof. That Jacob sent we see he tempted not God, but used means and
we must do the like. The Egyptians sold, and we keep, never contented with
the price, that our judgment may be just in the day of the Lord, when we shall
smart for this greedines and want of love. To have traffic also with
strangers and forreners, even with such as differ from us in religion this
story warranteth with many more. But that Jacob would not let Benjamin go with
them, we see his love, he loved the mother, and he loves the child. Benjamin
is his joy now that Joseph is gone, and he may not be from him. The reason that
is alleged least he should die, is common to the others also, if he had
regarded them so much. But indeed he did not though all were his children.
Benjamin he loved, and for him he fears love being ever given to fear,
according to the saying: Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.

2 Joseph was governor of the land etc. And why did not Joseph signify so
much unto his father all this while by letter and messenger sent of purpose
both for his fathers comfort and his own by mutual hearing one from another?
Verse. 6.
A question.
S. Austen moves this question and answers it by another. Why (says h^) did
not God reveal unto Jacob his beloved servant what was become of Joseph his
son, and that he was living? etc. Surely (says Austen) because his good
pleasure was otherwise, and that things might come to pass not only which
God had decreed, but as God had decreed concerning the manner. The self same
thing it was which governed and ruled Joseph, that he could not like to signify
unto his father his estate, but even follow the Lords determined way, and let
all fall out as he would. Gods purposes come to pass when we think not. Chap.
37.5.
That the Text says also, Joseph's brethren came and bowed their face to the
ground before him, it shows us plainly, how prophesies of God do come to
pass, we little knowing either to good or to evil. For was not this the
dream of Joseph, that all their sheaues should do reverence to his sheafe: and
see now if it be not truly fulfilled though they little think of it. They bow,
and they bow to the ground before Joseph, little thinking that it was Joseph. So
did the Jews fulfill the Scriptures concerning their dealinges with Christ
when he should come, and yet they did not think so. So does the Church of Rome
fulfill the Prophecy of the Apostle concerning a departure from the faith,
Act. 4.
a forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
ordained to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the
truth. 1. Tim. 4.1.
Do you remember a little before how these brethren of Joseph scoffed at his
dreams and said: then shall we see what shall become of his Dreams. Now let
them see what is become of them, they being now with their Faces down to the
ground before him, doing reverence unto him, Mockers.
as the ruler of all Egypt. So so shall all mockers see come to pass what God
has spoken to their just confusion, if they repent not for such disdain and
unbelief. Let those mockers of whom S. Peter speaks consider this. They say
in their iolitie, where is the promise of his coming, tush the day of doom
will never be etc. Behold, behold ye profane hearts what is come to pass in
Joseph, and what yet shall further follow in his time, and take up your scoffs
in trembling fear to provoke his wrath, whose truth did never fail, nor ever
shall.

3 Joseph knew his brethren, Verse 7.
and made himself strange to them, speaking roughly etc. Some condemn him for
dissembling, and say, we may not follow him. But others excuse it by our
Saviors dealinges with the woman of Canaan, to whom he meant in the end
nothing but good, what show so ever he made awhile that her faith might
appear. How so ever surely the truth is known, that we may conceal a truth
for a time and not by and by utter all that in time we will. Therefore hard it
is to interpret all the doings of the godly according to outward show and
seeming for a time. Verse. 8.
But that Joseph knew them, and they knew not him, A type of Christ.
some have made it a figure of our Savior Christ knowing, but not known, at
diverse times. Mary knew him not being risen till he called her by her name, yet
he knew her: So again the Disciples going to Emans, and many more. But the day
shall come that he shall be known to those that sold him, and unto all as
Joseph in time was to his brethren.

4 Joseph tells them, they are spies, and are come to see the weakness of the
land. Thereby showing us how careful all good subjects ought to be of the
safety of their country, Love to our country.
and how ieliouse that any should espy the weakness or nakedness of the same to
the hurt of it ever. Far and far unlike to such unnatural runagates as are
borne amongst us, which daily and continually are discovering to the enemy
our ports and crekes, Popish love
our men and munition, our strength and weakness, and what so ever we have or
may have that may hurt our selves, or profit our foes. But the reward of such
is with a just God that ever hated it since he made man. And for this present
time me think we might thus profit by this place: that if rulers and
governors be so careful to keep covered the weakness of the Land least any
advantage should be taken by the enemy, surely with like wisdom, and very
godly discretion should all particular men be careful of their private wantes
and weakness, their imperfections and infirmities, Our own private wa^ts to be
covered.
either to fortify against them that they may cease to be such, or to keep them
covered and warely hidden from advantage sought, and to be taken by the
adversary. For this is fit, if we care for any thing, and no little good it
would cause in time to the common truth. Many are too weak and wide open, if
Satan sailing and seeking a port will enter there. And being thus weak and
full of advantage there is not that care that ought to be to prevent the same.
Whereby we fall and with us the cause that we should more tender then our
selves. Be warned by this and apply we the care of Governors in the land to
our selves and our amendment in this respect. We see it good and let a word
suffice us.

Verse. 13.
5 They say to Joseph's face that Joseph is dead. The youngest (say they) is with
our father, Truth present and yet not seen.
and one is not. What a blindness is this? face to face to speak with a man and
yet not to know him. Marvel we not then if God so will that some see not the
truth yt is yet present with them and even under their eyes: For their darkness
is deep whose eyes are blinded in the Lords judgment. When Christ spoke to
Mary, she knew him straight, but not before. So if Christ touch we see full
bright, but not before. Verse. 14.
That Joseph swears by the life of Pharao we see the experience of pitch
pitching the touchers of it. Verse. 16.
That be swears again the second time we see how easily sin enters
twice where it has entered once. And therefore learn to beware betymes not
giving entrance at all to that which is evil if we can.

6 Then they acknowledged their transgression when time was against their
brother Joseph, Verse. 21.
The force of affliction and trouble
and said one to another: we have verily sinned against our brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear
him, therefore is this trouble come upon us, showing in themselves by such
speech that force and fruit of trouble and affliction, even to make men
acknowledge their faults, which otherwise slily they would dissemble. Guiltines
in the heart and conscience is fitly compared to a body laid in the grave, for
as yt sleapeth and lies still, but at last awaketh and ryseth again, so does
guiltines and sin, it awaketh, it awaketh and biteth full sore that erst lay
still and was clean forgotten. Prosperity lulleth and lappeth it up, but
affliction rouseth it and unfolds all. Ruben as one yt is also wounded,
perfectly remembers them of that which passed against their brother. Verse. 22.
Did not I warn you (says he) not to sin against ye child, and ye would not
hear, charging the^ in words as worse than himself, and yet touching himself
also very deep, who both contented in the end, and kept counsel with them
all this while. Fellows in sin fall out.
So use fellows in sin to fall out amongst themselves, when filthye
wickedness has touched them all. But why did he wish them not to hurt the
Child? The reason in him is very well known unto all, because nature moved
him and the doing was bad. But the reason yt I think of might have bin this,
and as yet may be in like case, because children in time may be men* when we
may be reckoned withal for our doings. Then Joseph a child was too weak for
ten, Children will be men, therefore abuse them not.
but now Joseph a man is too strong for ten. Therefore so use children whilst
they be young as well may be answered when they be men. There is a remembrance of
the anguish that pore Joseph was in when be besought them. A circumstance sure
that moves a good heart very much, and most hard is the heart that yeldeth
nothing to tears and anguishe of a troubled mind. Would GOD the sighs and
grievous groans of our perplexed Brethren moved us more. We should more
resemble the GOD of pity and less express the manners of these stony
Brethren. We know the truth of the saying most sure, The petition of a mind
in anguish should move much.
that he which wants mercy of mercy shall miss, and he shall have mercy
that merciful is. Yet grieve we the souls and wring the Bodies both full
hard and sore of our Christian Brethren and Neighbors by us. But mark these
Brethren of Joseph here how now it pincheth their very inwardes, that ever
they were so cruel to their Brother, especially that they regarded him not,
when in anguishe and woe he besought them of favor and better dealinges.
Verily so shall it us, if we do ye like, crushing our brethren and grinding
their Faces whom we can overcome. And who knows the end of Gods wrath to
such bloody hardness of heart? A guilty conscience.
Again, mark in these Brethren the Nature of a guiltye conscience, how it
still accuses, still stirs and startleth within a man, and is always
gawling his mind with bitter remembrance of deed done. Especially when any
things do chance or fall out cross, as here it did. Then it tormenteth us
more within, than the affliction we do suffer does without, still suggesting
into our minds, that this befalls us for such a thing. So you see were these
brethren now tormented, and beware we by them. Last of all, that Ruben
exhorted and warned them when they did offend, and now iustifyeth his warning
given to their Faces: may it not well remember us of the warnings given unto
our selves by Preachers, and by Parents, by Friends and welwillers of sundry
degrees? Is not Gods Finger in it, that we are thus warned? And shall not they
also one Day accuse us certainlye, as here Ruben does, and witness unto our
Faces, that they did admonish us, and we would not hear? Surely they shall:
and we cannot be ignorant of it any way. Happy is the man then that harkeneth
willinglye to all good admonitions, and yields to them. Joseph hears this
woeful Dialogue of his Brethren, Verse. 24.
but little knew they that either he was Joseph, or yet understood them: And
he turned (says the Text) from them, Pity.
that he might weep. Showing thereby (what I wish well noted) that a man
possessed with Gods Spirit, has pity and mercy ever within, what Face or
fashion so ever he be forced to show without. He speaks roughly like no
Brother for a time, but his affection is brotherly and most tender at all
times. His words be rough, but his meaning smooth, our words be smooth and
softer than Oil, when our minds and meaninges are roughe and cruel. O
contrary course, and therefore contrary end if we take not heed from Joseph
here.

7 Joseph then taking Simeon a pledge that they should return commands
their sackes to be filled with wheat and every man's money to be put again into
their sackes with vittaile given them for their journey. Verse 25.
Benefits done would be secret oftentimes.
And why must the money be secretly put in their sackes, and not openly given
them to their hands? The reason was here that they might suspect nothing, his
time being not yet to reveal himself. But we may truly learn by it this good
lesson, even to steal a benefit upon our brethren, doing them good without
any trompet blown before us. Time shall serve to reueile what God will have
known, and till then it is known to God which is enough. We covet too much
many of us the knowledge of men, when we do them good, and if they see it not
we will tell it yea again and again rather than it should be secret and
unknown. But this marreth all, Vainglory.
and thus loose we love with men of skill and all reward with God Almighty
that hates vaineglory. Wherefore he said it well that said it: Si tanto studio
vitia nostra abscondimus, ne humanam gloriam amittamus: Bernard.
quanto maiori cura dissimulanda virtutes coelestem gloriam amittamus. If so
carefully we hide our faults least we should loose the praise of men: how
much rather should we cover and keep secret our virtues least we loose the
praise of God. For as well is God lost with vain publishing of our good deeds,
as man by revealing of our evil deeds. A treasure hidden is safer from
thieves, and virtue covered is safer from Satan. Similitudes
The fruit that hangs by the way side seldom stands till it be ripe; and
virtue published before me^ for vainglory sake loses her beauty and deserved
praise which kept more close she had been sure of. To conclude, the hen,
because she cackleth loses her egg, and cackling boasters loose their praise
with God and man, which Joseph did not being thus secret in his good.

8 Having all things ready, these brethren set forward to return to their
father and being in their first Inn one of them opening his sack to give his
Ass prouender espied his money in his sackes mouth, whereupon a great fear
arose in them, Verse. 27.28.
The commodity of our country here above others
and they were all astonished etc. Their Innes then differed much from ours,
yelding them no such provision for their cattle as ours do, but ye fain every
traveler was to carry for himself: would God this benefit (ye least of ten
thousand yt our la^d affords us) might stir us up to be tha^kful to God and
to preserve ye peace and prosperity of the same to our best powers. They that
have their business in foreign countries know by experience the blessing that we
have and many times utter it in our ears, if our hearts had feeling of any
good. If the word should be urged, peradventure our blessing would greatly be
amplified: for it forces not yt they were in any June at all, but only abode
in a place for the night season and there prouendred their Beasts and
refreshed themselves, having provision given for both. How Jacob lodged you
remember before, and what a soft pilow he had of a hard stone under his head.
Genesis 28.
Therefore look we more at ye good of our country, where every village almost
yeldeth comfortable rest to a weary traveler. Their astonishment and fear
still, A gauled conscience.
still declares ye gaul of a wounded conscience, which being in these
brethren great and grievous, and accusing them still without any rest made them
think yt God would have brougth them to some trouble by this money. Not to
have therefore thy conscience against thee, is to have a thousand comforts with
thee. Again, it shows how little good a multitude does in distress except
God give counsel and direct to comfort. Counsel in perplexity.
For here are many, and yet all amazed at a matter not great had they
considered. Pray we therefore in all perplexities to the Lord of counsel and
wisdom, and he will direct us assuredly, but trust we nothing in numbers of
men, for they cannot help. They fear again where was cause of comfort had they
known all: even so do others to this day still, and yet all is well in the end,
when God opens matters fully. Even in fears therefore comfort we our selves
hereafter, and trust in God, hoping the best in the end: their eye cast upon
God in this their perplexity, saying one to another: what is this that God
has done to us, must make us avoid all drowsy dreams of Luck and Fortune,
and see the Lords Finger even in our adversity: No fortune or luck.
So did Job, and so have all godly done from the beginning. The Lord it is that
takes as well as that gives, and blessed must be his name of us in them
both. The greatness of their astonishment appears in this, that the rest did
not look whether their money also were in their Sackes, but as all amazed are
void of consideration what to do: when being come home their moneys also were
found likewise: the drift of good Joseph was not to fear either Father or
brethren, but to comfort them, and to provide for their coming again, if
happily money should be scarce. But what a good man does to a good end often by
men's weakness or waywardnes turns otherwise.

9 Ye have robbed me of my children (says old Jacob. Verse. 36.
) When they had told him the whole story of their travel, how roughly they
were used and accounted spies, how Simeon was taken and bound behind them, how
Benjamin the youngest must go to clear them and to release Simeon of his
indura^ce. Then Jacob cried (and no doubt he cried, ye have robbed, robbed me
of my children, Joseph is not, Simeon is not, The heart of Paren^ to their
children
and Benjamin now ye will have also from me: all these things are against me.
Alas good Jacob, thou know not yet how God will comfort thy heart ere long,
and show how al these things are for thee, but as yet the time is not.
Therefore now do thou show and let us learn the pangs and passions of natural
parents. Their children stick near to the hearts of them, and with their
adversities they cannot jest, would God their children requited them ever. Some
fear to have and grieve little to loose children, but it is not so with Jacob
nor with any good ones.

10 Ruben steppeth in to appease his Father, Verse. 37.
and bids him slay his two sons if he bring not Benjamin safe again unto
him. Why, the matter concerned no more Ruben than all the rest. Wherefore then
will he offer such a pledge, not knowing how able he should be to perform?
Surely Ruben regards his fathers grief. Simeons imprisonment in a strange
country, and their credit to be cracked with Simeons danger for ought he
knows if Benjamin go not. Therefore learn by Ruben in our parents fears to
be comfortable and hearty to bring them out, in ^ur brethre^s distresses not to
be forgetful, To be co^^fortable (...) stout in (...) friends (...)
or yet formally mindful as speaking and doing yet nothing earnestly to effect
in deed, But as Ruben, be earnest, and impawne even thy credit to deliver
effectually a brother and friend in a cause that is good credit again remember
it tenderly, and approve it carefully by this example. Spies they were called,
and more than once sent to espy ye weakness of the land for some evil purpose:
nothing they knew, but it was in earnest, and being not such, Ruben is careful
to make it appear by the course agreed upon, to wit, by returning with their
youngest brother that they were no such. So earnest is he in a matter of
supposed treachery against a foreign country. O faithles wretches then, that
fear neither fame nor truth of treason, and treachery against their own
country, but wish it and will it, hunt it and seek for it, and being not able
to become traitors rank enough at home, run over sea to the Scholars and
nurceries of this damnable sin, that there they may receive as deep a die in
this hellish color, as the blackamore has of his natural hue, whom all the
water in the Sea cannot wash white.

Verse. 38.
11 But say Ruben what he could, Jacob indureth not to part with his Benjamin,
and therefore says flatly, My Son shall not go down with you, for his
brother is dead, and he is left alone, if death come to him by the way which
ye go, then ye shall bring my gray head with sorrow to the grave. Perplexity
blind a while.
Perplexity sees not by and by what is to be done, and therefore Jacob yet
denies what after he yeldeth unto. But why is Jacob so fond over Benjamin more
than all the rest, that if he die his gray head will follow after. Surely the
affection that he bare to the mother now dead makes him love above all the
rest the child he had by her. So love to ye living shows love to the dead
what it was when they lived. And would God it always showed as it should,
David loved Jonathan whilst he lived and for his sake he loved others, 2 Samuel 9.
making open inquiry for any of his Stock, that he might do good unto for
Ionathans sake. I could say some thing, if your thoughts themselves could not
reach far enough in this matter. Love to the living shows love to the dead.
If want of love to the living, how want of love to the dead of whom these
living came, judge in your Hearts, without further speech what lives be
written in some foreheades to their endless shame, that they never loved whom
God and duty bound them unto whilst they lived. Jacob is not so, David was
not so, never will any good one be so, and therefore beware that Jacob
mentions his gray head is greatly patheticall, and tells us truly that all
parents are duly to be regarded, that they be not grieved, but the aged father
or mother with locks like snow is most tenderly and derely to be regarded.
Whose heart then melts not to see this old man thus making his moan, that if
Benjamin die, he will die, and his graye head with grief and woe should
follow his Child to the grave that he so loved. God give children some of this
love.

Chap. 43.
This Chapter contains these Heads especially. Jacobs content to let Benjamin
go. Their second coming to Joseph. Their intertainment.


TOuching the first it is said, Verse. 1.
the famine grew great, Trials of faith.
and what they brought from Egypt was spent, where upon old Jacob wished them to
return etc. Where we still must mark which was noted before) how this godly
patriarch with all his household is also subject to the famine, yea to this great
famine, wherein, no doubt, notwithstanding this wheat from Egypt, they were glad
to eat herbs, and roots, and beries with many a hungry meal: Yea even in
that land are they thus distressed, wherein God had promised to bless both
Jacob and his posterity, and was this think you no temptation to Jacob?
Learn we then profitably by this example to stand steadfast in faith
whatsoever fall out and preparing our selves for the worst euentes comfortably
wait for end joyful as here it was.

Verse 7.
2 Could we know certainly that he would say, bring your brother with you etc.
as if he should have said, Inferences upon our speeches more than we thought of.
we answered but his questions of our kindred and brethren, not able to guess
before hand what there upon he would infer. Therefore speaking no more than
we were urged unto, we are not to be blamed for his illations. Truth it is, and
may teach us daily to spare undeserved blame, that we use many times to bestow
upon men. For so it is, that a man speaking as occasion justly moves him,
something is inferred that he never dreamed of against his will. We may not lay
this to the Speakers charge, but leave it as a thing besides thought falling
out, and excuse the guiltless.

3 Then Judah, another son of Jacobs, moves his Father to consent to the
request of Ruben his brother made before for Benjamin to go with them, Verse. 8.
and uses to this end some arguments as first of necessity. That we may live
and not die, both we, and thou, and our children. Secondly, from security, I
will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him, if I bring him not
to thee, Verse. 9.
and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. Verse. 10.
Lastly a damno, of hinderance that comes by stay: except we had made this
tarying, doubtless by this we had returned the second time. Then the Father
yielded and said, Verse. 11.
if it must needs be so, do thus etc. Where see and mark in Jacob a most
Godly course in extremity and danger, The godly have ever a yielding time to
every good thing.
namely, to use all honest means to relieve our fear, and yet only to trust
in the GOD of Heaven. Jacob sends the best fruits of the Land etc. But as
his hold above all houldes he speaks thus: GOD Almighty give you mercy in
the sight of the Man etc. Then again, observe it in Jacob here, that in time
he yields, and cannot resist when GOD had decreed it should be so. Surely so
do we, and so must we do what we can. Startle we may, and strive a while
as Jacob did here, utterly refusing, and utterly dislyking to do this or that,
but if GOD have appointed it to be so, a time will come, that we shall strive
no longer, but say as Jacob said in this place: If so it must be then so be it.
Happy are they yt yield soonest and strive least against that good which God
has appointed. Obstinacy was never constancy, nor wilfulnes wit, as I have
noted before. Obstinacies not constancy.
To change from evil to good, from error to truth, from darkness to light was
ever piety, when contrary course was sinful obstinacy and the rod of God
upon the ungodly. But O how hardly is this persuaded. So love we the thing we
have loved long, that needs we must cleave to our own damnation, and think
it holy. So have we done, and our fathers long: O constant course, Ezech. 18.
but you shall not do as your Fathers have done, says the Lord.

4 The truth of Jacob would also be observed, Truth in all dealings.
who wills them to take double money with them, least happily the former was
an error. This conscience want not only thieves, and robbers, and open
offenders, but some that seem honest* and are not the worst. Who can be
content to make an advantage of the error or oversight, or mistaking of their
neighbors. according to the common saying, Si spy, sport etc. But if you spy
not, good earnest, and swallowed up without any remorse at all. Thus did not
Jacob, no this hated Jacob and all good men ever. God sees, and God must judge
me one day justly according to my works. What profits then if my neighbor
see not. Beware we then and keep clean hands with a good conscience, that
shall never be ashamed.

5 Thus all things made ready, Suspicion.
these brethren set on and come into Egypt before Joseph, who when he saw
Benjamin was not a little glad: yet kept his own Counsel, and commanded his
Steward to make ready for Dinner, that they might dine with him. The Steward
did so, and now when it was time he brought the men all to Joseph's house, who
straight were afraid, and said to themselves: because of the money that came
in our Sackes are we brought hither that he may pick a quarrel against us
etc. O filthye suspicion, how blottest thou, and spottest thou even good men?
Thus apt to misdeeme are these men. Genesis 20.
So was even Abraham in his time when he said, I thought the fear of God was
not in this place, and that they would kill me for my wife. So was old Heli, 1.
Sam. 1.
and misiudged Anna, that she was drunk. Wherefore well said the Father and
full true: Quanti non dederunt locum errori, Ambrose offic.
and dederunt suspicioni: How great men have withstood error, and yet given
place to suspicion. Suspicio calumnia^ parit: Suspicion breeds slander, and
is the mother of it in time. Suspicio amicitiae venenum. Suspicion is the
cutthrote of friendship and ever was. Chrisost. in Math.
As hardly does a good man suspect one to be evil, so hardly does an evil man
imagine one to be good. Again, see how Joseph in a meaning so good is
misiudged and ill thought of by those men. Then who can avoid this damnable
suspicion, or what can a man so well intend which some will not conster quite
awry. The man so good, the meaning so good, yet all suspected. Their God give
grace to do but well, and God give comfort against cursed misdemers for they
cannot be avoided, but will be doing.

6 When Joseph came home they brought their presents to him, Verse. 26.
and bowed down to the ground before him, where see the dream again fully
accomplished. A Glass for children.
Now is the youngest also with them, and all bow. Then asked Joseph of their
welfare, and by and by whether their Father the old man was in health. Not
forgetting I warrant you for any honor his old father. This was a child that
had God in him, and this is a glass for all children to behold them selves in,
who now a days quickly forget their parents, if never so little wealth grow. But
if honor also happen to come, O what should we do with our old parents then?
Our high places may not think of such mean people. But proud Pecocke remember
thy self, and behold here a man second in the kingdom to the King, a man
honored with all the honor that a mighty kingdom could aford, and yet his
second word is for his father, his old father, his dear father, and never is he
well till he have him with him. Let Courtiers like or dislyke, his friends be
his friends, and he will not deny them. God give Children such hearts.

7 Then Joseph turned to his youngest brother Benjamin, his brother wholly by
father and mother (for Rachel bare both Joseph and Be^iamin) and Joseph blessed
him with that not able to go any further his heart so melted upon his brother,
Gods mercy makes a man's heart to melt.
but turned aside to weep a while. See then tears by Gods mercies. Himself
delivered from danger and prison, exalted highly to great honor, his father
alive and in good health, his brethren before him and Benjamin with him, what
mercies are these? No marvel then if a good man seeing so sweet a God, be
moved to tears in a sweet feeling. And think of your self. If never wet cie
has showed feeling heart have you not been dull? Certainly mercy in a gracious
God wringeth out tears from a feeling child, when neither fire nor sword can
get them out. The one we overcome by faith assisted, but ye other quite
overcomes us being sweet and comfortable above all desert. Then Lord give
feeling.

8 When Joseph had eased his heart by this tender weping forth he came to dine
with them. A state may be maintained lawfully.
But they prepared for him by himself and for them by themselves, says the
text: which being done to show his dignity, it teaches us our liberty in this
respect. What God vouchsafes may be used without pride or blame, or any
offense. And as great a fault to, is an abject mind to go too low as an
arrogant and haughty to go to high David exalted maintained his state though a
poor man's child.. Daniel preferred knows his liberty and does the like.
Esther again with many more. So God be honored as the giver, and measure
observed in his fear, have honor and use honor, have state, and use state,
according to the place you live in lawfully, behold Joseph here and all the
rest.

9 The Egyptians might not eat bread with the Ebrewes, Verse 32.
for that was an abomination unto ye Egyptians, Hypocrites be bolder ever in
their own eyes than others
by what laws Surely by the law of counpted Hypocrites imagining themselves to
be better than other that in deed are far and far better than themselves.
Such law rules still wherein law it ought not, to their shame be it spoken that
are so lawles, and who now is defiled with church meetings, with prayers and
sacraments celebrated duly, but he or she that in deed is more vile if all
were known than any or many that are yet despised as unworthy ones. To eat or
drink with us poor Ebrewes not at Joseph's table, but at the Lords table were
an abomination to these Egyptia^s of whom I speak, when living without a
vocation by other men's labors, and at other men's tables, when hard and extreme
dealing in buying and selling, when keeping commodities for a greater price as
barley or malt, or the like till they be cast away, when censuring Magistrates
and ministers with Corah his countenance, yea (shall I say all) when filthiness
and sin sundry ways is swallowed and accounted not so great an offense, as
to come to church. But let these Egyptians know the Lord rules, who has
chosen these despised Ebrewes to be his people, when they and theirs shall
perish in the red sell of everlasting fire. Abhore we than heartily such
damnable hypocrisy. Say we to no man in this proud spirit, Isay 65.
stand apart, I am holier than thou, touch not, handle not etc. but modestly
think we every man better than our selves, and of all sinners with the Apostle
Paul: let us think our selves the greatest. So shall God exalt who humble
themselves unfeignedly, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and proud Pharisees shall be cast down. But why did not Joseph reform this
fashion so foul in the Egyptians, and so greatly in disgrace not only of
others. but of these his own brethren and friends? Surely because he could
not. And see here his wisdom what he could not reform, he indureth without
contention, being nothing prejudicial to the piety of him or his brethren,
though to their worldy disgrace. Such wisdom, such Spirit, such patience and
discretion. O how should it school us, and teach us to abhor the contrary.
We seek not peace, nether insew after it, when wilfully we wrangle about
every tryfle, and place life and death in every ceremony. Fathers of the
Church have done far otherwise, if we remember them, and even the Apostle
himself denies such custom in a Church of God. But I have elsewhere touched
this more at large.

10 Then they took measses from before Joseph, and sent unto them. Verse. 34
^oue can^^ot be hid.
See not only kindness in Joseph to his brethren, but a figure and type of
Christ Jesus to his brethren who bountifully and mercifully set measses before
them being unknown unto them of life and salvation. How then may he ever
forget them that know him and love him, fear him, A type of Christ.
and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing? Never, never shall he fail
them, but as here is said of Benjamin, five times greater shall he make their
measses than any others. That is, where any mercy is vouchsafed unto those that
know him not, many shall they have that duly serve him as their God. But was
Beniamins measse thus increased more than the rest? O how hardly then may love
be smothered altogether? It cannot, it cannot, do what you can, but one way
or other it will peep out, much like a candle that enclosed fast in some house
or prison, shines through the chinkes of the door or walls and will not be
hid. Love will creep where it cannot go (says the old Proverb) and amongst
others it may have even this sense, that wholly and fully it will not be
hidden, but if it may not appear in his full strength for some purposes, yet
glymmering it will be through one chinke or another, that it may be spyed. How
then may we think of Christian love and charity, when natural love is of this
kinde^ Verily what nature may work in a natural man, Gods holy Spirit much
more affects in the spiritual man Than no fruits of love no love, and small
Fruits small love. Examine we our selves by this rule, our charity to our
christian brethren were it any thing in us by one way or other, it will appear
as here did Joseph's. Yet his brethren observed it not, as little thinking he was
Joseph: and if our love tokens be not ever seen of those, that think not of
us as we are, it is but like this, and it may not grieve us. Joseph will be
known ere it be long, and then all these tokens will be remembered. So we
again: But I go no further, let this suffice.

Chap. 44.
Two things especial has this chapter, and they are these. Joseph's trial of
his brethren. Judah his oration for Benjamin.


TOuching the first, we are to understand that Joseph was desirous to make
trial of his bretherens affection toward Benjamin, thinking peradventure they
envied him as they had done himself before, Creditonce cracked is hardly
recovered.
where we may see and learn, how even good men are hardly induced to think
well of those whose behavior before they have known to be bad. Therefore stand
we steadfast in a good course least happily our fall make all our whole life
after half suspected. Credit, and honor, and honesty is soon lost, but soon
gained again when once it is lost. The means that Joseph used, was a
commandment to his steward to put his own cup in Beniamins sack etc. which
may not be a warrant to us to use any unlawful practices, seeing God has
commanded us to walk in simplicity, of like in Joseph this was some
particular motion for which he might have warrant. A moderation in pomp and
port of plate. etc.
It seems by the text the cup was but silver, and then how that might be his
honor being so great may be a question. Whereunto we may answer that
peradventure that age was more temperat in plate and pomp than this of ours:
again, though it were but silver, yet might the ingrauing and workmanship be
very costly. What also if Joseph but newly exalted, wisely and discretly
moderated his course, least spite and envy (a weed in Court growing very
much) might work him woe being but a stranger. Increase one may with credit
well, but to strike sail with worthy minds can never want scorn and scoffing
taunt.

2 That Joseph takes upon him to be a Diuiner, Verse. 7.
it shows the little spots that are in the fairest faces, The best men have
imperfections.
and may not be followed, but let us rather stand now and see the poor men's
plea when Joseph's Steward ouertooke them, and laid the cup to their charge.
Alas say they, why does my Lord say so, God forbid that thy servants should do
so, etc. A detestatione peccati.
But how do they prove themselves honest and true? First ab aequitate. God
forbid we should be such, as if they had said, it were not right, it were not
good, and thy servants (though poor men) have a care of right, and what may
become them. Secondly a repugnantibus, of things contrary in some sort one to
another. Behold (say they) we brought our money again, how then should we
steal? etc. These things being cross and contrary one to another in some
sort. Lastly ab incommodo, by the detriment they are content to endure. With
whom soever of thy servants it is found, let him die the death, and we also
will be my Lords servants. So stiffly stood they upon their truth, and so bold
is truth before all men ever. But yet see a defect, Be bold, but wary in
justifying your self.
though bold they might be being true men, yet wise and not rash must
innocence make men. They rashly said, with whom it is found let him die: but
they should have added being stolen by the party, and of knowledge taken. For
want of which warines we see their danger had not things been as they were.
Therefore thus much let us learn and not stand upon it, that in the midst of
our best integrity and upright course, yet we use no unadvised Speeches,
neither give any needless advantage, but warely speaking avow our truth, and
so abide the trial.

3 This offer of theirs was thus far taken of the Steward, that he with whom
the cup should be found should become servant, and the rest should be
blameless. then fell they to searching, beginning at the eldest, and behold,
in Beniamins sack the youngest of all is the cup found. Then they were abashed,
they rent their clothes, they laded their asses, and back again gat they to
the City to Joseph for mercy. A pattern of the fading comforts of this world.
Who sees not here as it were a pattern of this brittle worlds comfort.
Yesterday these men were bidden to dinner, feasted and much made of at the
Governors table, yea the same day in the morning with comfort and gladness
they lade^ away and all was well: but behold now an other hue al is changed and
changed greatly, their clothes rent, there hearts heavy, and nothing but danger
and death before their faces. Such is this world, and the fickle fading
comforts of it. To day we laugh, to morrow we weep, to day we flourish, to
morrow we fall, nay even in the turning of a hand our estate is turned as these
men's was. Post imbres fructus, post maxima gaudia luctus. Rain bringes floods,
and joy bringes woe, sorrow follows comfort, too often we see it so. Being come
to the presence of Joseph again, they fell before him with heavy hearts, we
may well think, and the rather may we think it because there is no mention
of any words used by and by, by them, but only that they fell before him
upon the ground. Verse. 14.
Surely their fear and sorrow within bereaved them of speech for a while, and
so does it use. Remember Anna whose heart oppressed, as it were with anguish and
grief took speech from tongue and spoke by signs. Remember the Shunamite
again falling at the Prophets feet, 1 Kings 4.27.
and not able to speak. Such was the case of these men, by humble gesture, and
falling down they sue for mercy not able to speak: yet at last they spoke,
God knows with passions, with tears and lamentation, with sobbinges and
sighinges to see their case (as Luther notes.) They say, they can say nothing,
the thing is found with them and what should they say? His servants they must
be and abide his pleasure. But Joseph would not so, having his affection but
upon Benjamin only. The rest he would despise, and retain Benjamin. Then
Judah drew near and told him the whole story that here you see, how hardly
their Father parted with Benjamin, what promise was made to return him safe,
and how lamentable would be their old fathers case if they should fail.
Therefore whosoever taryeth, he must go ere his Father die. For his life
depended upon the Child: where I mark again the reverence of age in those
blind days, if their light be compared with ours. Before there was mention of
his gray head, and now here is mention again of the same to move pity and
regard in Joseph toward him. Let it ever be honorable then as it ought, old
age, and let hoary head work all regard in the best mind still and ever. But
then again let old men be also admonished to remember well the old verses
concerning this.

Sape nigrum cor est caput album, sed quibus album
Et caput and cor est, sint in honor senes.
Often is the Heart black and the Head white, but whos^ have both white Hearts
and white heads, White heads should have white hearts.
those old men are honorable indeed and to be regarded. The vehement
affection of old Jacob to his son Benjamin has often been note^, and yet
here again is laid down in large manner, Judah refuses to see his face any
more rather than to go without the Child, yea to redeem the Child that he
might return to his father, he offreth himself a servant for ever in a
strange country, which never would he have done, but that he knew his fathers
life depended upon the Child. Unspeakable therefore is a Parents affection
sometimes where it is settled. Do we think Joseph's heart was not turned up and
down in his body, whilst he heard and saw these things? Yes, yes, the next
chapter will show he could hold no longer. Such sorrow, such weeping, such
sighing and sobbing in all his Brethren, Joseph not able to hold any longer.
such fear in their hearts to loose Benjamin, such mentioning of his fathers
love to ye child of his mother that was now dead, and the rather because he
the other brother by that woman was accounted dead. These, things I say were
darts and daggers to pearce Joseph's Heart, and he could no longer hold but
confess his name.

Chap. 45.
The heads of this Chapter are these three. Joseph's manifestation of himself
to his brethren. Pharaos princely Clemency when he heard of it. Jacobs dancing
heart when they came home, and told him Joseph lived.


NOw are we come to that which we long have looked for, Verse. 1.
Joseph to be known unto his brethren. Affection restrained if it break out
is violent
Wherein first it is said Joseph could not refrain himself before all that
stood by him, but cried, have forth every man from me, not that he was
ashamed of his Kindred, but that he would cover his Brethrens fault, then wept
he and cried so abundantly, that the Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharao
also heard: Brideled then may be affection awhile but when the bank breaks,
the stream is strong, and who can then stop the course again a while. Yet see
a care of his Brethrens name even in the midst of his pang, and till all were
gone he would not touch them. Such wisdom, such government, and such
discretion is most gracious wheresoever it is: and would God we mig^t ever be
beautified with it. Let love be seen, and let sorrow show, but remember ever
time and place. Then cried Joseph, I am Joseph, I am Joseph, does my Father
live? as if he should have said, fear no longer my dear brethren, nether be
dismayed, it is Joseph your brother that has thus dalied with you, Joseph your
Brother, your own flesh and blood, and no other. I am Joseph I tell you, even
Joseph your Brother, and cast fear away. Does my Father live? But his Brethren
amassed, could not answer a word, they were stark dumb. O mighty God what a
change is here? such ends to sorrows can God give when it pleases him, and
let all flesh give glory to him.

Again, see a type of the Lord our God, which may be comfortable. He checketh
us and snubbeth us, he binds and imprisoneth us, that is, he imposes upon us
sundry afflictions, as Joseph did upon these his brethren, and when he has
tried us to his good pleasure, we thinking of this man and that man, of this
malice and that malice against us, fearing, and dismayde almost altogether, in
the end he can hold no longer, but that bottomless mercy of his breaks
out, and with bowels of love he cries unto us, it is I, it is I, I am Joseph
your brother, that is Christ your Savior, your God and your Lord, that have
not spared mine own life, but have given it for you, be not afraid, be not
afraid, but pluck up your hearts and rejoice, your sorrow is ended, and your
trial finished, Isay 40.2.
I will be a brother to you, and no worse for ever. It is I, it is I: so sweet
is the end in time of the troubles and trials of Gods children. Even as upon
the Sea when he walked, Mat. 14.27. John 14.
and his Disciples feared, he cried, it is I, be not afraid, be of good
comfort. I will manifest myself unto him.
Come nere unto me says Joseph, and come near unto me says Christ: Yea, come
unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. So
again in his day of judgment. Come ye blessed of my Father, come, come, I am
Joseph your brother. etc. which kindness in him both heaven and earth shall
hear then as Pharao his house heard now of Joseph. So fitteth this figure to
our Savior.

2 Now therefore be not sad, nether grieved with your selves, that ye sold
me, Verse. 5.
Comfortable to the grieved.
for God sent me before you for your preservation, etc. This comfortable
speaking of Joseph to his brethren must teach us by all means to comfort them
which are truly humbled and wounded for their sins. And the ascribing of his
coming into Egypt to God teaches us to distinguish betwixt Gods finger and
man's malice in the self same action, for they differ greatly, the one being
sinful to an evil end, the other being gracious and merciful ever for good.
In Jobs affliction God had his finger and Satan his with, but what Satan
maliciously, God most mercifully directed to his glory and to Jobs good. So the
crucifying of our Savior, and the afflictions of his children evermore.
Therefore it follows not that if we say such things be of God, by and by it
should be concluded, that he is author of evil. You see the difference, and
remember S. Austen, God would never suffer evil to be done except he were able
out of evil to draw good. The land of Egypt yielded this comfort, that the
posterity of Jacob according to Gods purpose might be preserved in the same.
Therefore ye Godly are not burdensome to a country, but a country is blessed
yt it may relieve them, and the inhabitants enjoy for them such mercy, as
peradventure without them they should never have. So happily even this land
wherein we live for the poor exiles of Gods flock, and we may do well to
think of it, to stay all grudging.

3 That Joseph calls this deliverance a great deliverance, being but from
famine and bodily death, Verse. 7.
it may fitly move us to think of our deliverance from hell, Great
deliverances.
death, and devil, by Jesus Christ in the bottomless love of our most
gracious Father, and from ignorance, superstition and popery, from fire and
faggot with most bloody cruelty by a dread and dear, a mild and merciful
Sovereign of God, for this purpose given unto us and placed over us. O what
deliverances be these, and how should we feel them within, and publish them
without day and night, to the praise of God the fountain of all, and the honor
of his anointed, and appointed means for ever? The Grecians delivered but
from bodily servitude, Plutarch in the life of Flam.
called their deliverer a Savior to them, and range it out, Savior, Savior,
that the Fowls in the Air fell dead down with the cry. Much more, much more
than ten thousand times, may we call the Lords Anointed a Savior unto us.
God give feeling which I fear we want.

4 Then bids he his Brethren, go tell his Father what honor GOD had given
him in the land of Egypt, Verse. 9.
Freindes to be near a comfort.
making GOD the Fountain of his preferment, like a thankful man and not
worldly means, like the graceless hearts of these times. Promotion comes
neither from East nor West, from North nor South, but GOD raises up and
sets with Princes even with the Princes of his people. Psalm. 75.
That Joseph would have hs father near him, it notes the comfort, that is
comfort indeed if GOD vouchsafe it, Verse. 10.
friends to be near one to another. And that he promises to nourish both him
and his may not be forgotten, but for ever teach us, that if the Lord vouchsafe
us any thing in this World, our Parents portion should be there in, Verse.
11.
Parents to be norished if the child be a Joseph.
with offer of us, before demand of theirs, and all comfortable countenance
unto the end. Yea see, if Joseph be not even earnest and greedy to have this
comfort derived to his Father from him, and verily there is no more pleasure or
sweet comfort to a good virtuous Child than to do good unto his Parents
according to the power that God has given. Fie of all filthy natures then too
visible: daily before our Faces in this accursed and dangerous time, that
being both rich and welthy, warm and well furnished with all comfortes,
suffer not only other friends in kindred near them (to say nothing of the
naked members of Christ) but even their Parents that bred and bare them to
suffer both hunger and cold, need and misery, to their utter shame. Thus did
not Joseph, and let us mark it.

5 Then fell he upon his brother Beniamins neck and wept, and Benjamin upon
his neck. The godly be full of kindness and grace.
Moreover he kissed all his Brethren and wept upon them. etc. See the
Bowelles of men endued with Gods Spirit, they are full of love, full of
affection, full of grace, and full of goodness, when clubby chu^les have Iron
hearts and brazen bowels as far from sweetness outward toward any friends, as
from holy feeling inward toward God. O where are these natures become now a
days that was in Joseph? We when our friends come to us have a formal show,
but for this heat and hartinesse, this life and power of love that was in
Joseph, alas it is gone, and that makes us strangers one to another: but I say
no more. You see here by Joseph the godly be no Stoics, nor they be no
flintie Nabals toward any, but full of affection to their friends. Yea,
though their friends have wronged them as these had Joseph, yet all is
forgotten and blotted out when once they meet. Now the God of Love, work more
of this love amongst us daily.

Verse. 16.
6 The tidinges of this meeting came unto Pharaos ear and the text says, Gods
power, over men's hearts.
it pleased Pharaoh well and his servants: where we see the power of God still
for his servants to give them favor in the hearts and ears and eyes of any
mortal men whatsoever whose ministry it shall please him to use to the
relief, comfort, or countenance of any of them. He rules poor and rich,
mean and mighty to his Childrens comfort when he will, yea even the Princes
have their hearts in his hand, Prou. 21.
and he rules them as the Rivers of water at his will. We heard in the
former Chapter, that for the Egyptians to eat bread with the Hebrews was an
abomination to the Egyptians, yet see now even the king and his courtiers most
favorably bent to these despised Hebrews. So powrefull I say is God over all
hearts when he will, and who may not be comforted with it? Nay see more, not
only the King is favorably inclined to them, but most extraordinarily
regards them calling for Joseph, and giving him commandment to dispatch his
Brethren away with their lading, and to give them in charge to bring their
Father and Families wholly unto him, and he would give them, not some wast
part of the Land, but the very best of the land, and they should eat of the
fat of it. He furthermore wills, that charrets be taken out of Egypt for
their children and wives, and that they should not pass for their stuff, for
he would provide for them. See therefore the power of GOD, not to provide small
things for his Children, but even thus far to move the King, that he
thinks of the very best of the Land for them. And see in the King a most
Princely mind, being (where he is good) most bountifully good. A virtue
ever worthy great commendacion. In far meaner personages it may have his
effect in a measure. They also doing good for their degrees liberally, heartily,
and thoroughly, not sparingly and pinchingly. Again we may see the use of
Charets in those days, for necessity, not for pomp and pride, where the
journey is small, the way easy, and the body strong. That use then warranted
them, and such use now condemns them, if it be so. Let therefore necessity
have her lawful helps, but let not pride and vanitye be cherished and
maintained. Lastly, in the King it was most Honorable so to love his true
Servant that for his sake he loved all his friends, yet not only loved them,
but thus loved them that he would be a Father to them and theirs in this
measure, and in this extremity of famine and dearth. Happy Joseph whose
faithful service found so gracious regard, and worthy Pharao of a faithful
servant as ever was any Prince that we may read of.

7 Then did Joseph carefully dispatch them according to ye kings commandment,
and sent unto his father also great comforts else as you see in the text,
withal which provision they come to their Father home safe, and well every one
of them, and as all a fire with the comfort of their tidinges they tell their
Father, Joseph is yet alive, speaking as it should seem even all together
least any should prevent another in so sweet news. Abruptly also and hastily
their speech seems to have been made, which argues the heat of their
hearts and their affections all troubled with these strange euentes. Jacob a
good man on the other side, hearing these words, betwixt hope and fear, is
all daunted and amassed, so that his heart failed (says the Text. GOD knew his
Heart, when he heard of Joseph to live: and yet afeard he is least so sweet a
tydinge should not be true. Even as usually still we see it fall out, that
happy news are hardly credited, for fear of the Proverb: Too good to be
true. Tarda solet magni^ rebus in^sie sides.
But when he saw the Charrets that Joseph had sent to carrye him, then the
Spirit of Jacob revived. Such assurance have deeds above words always. The
Phrase of his spirit reviving, may put us in mind of the effect of sorrow,
even killing as it were the hearts and minds and spirits of men, as also of
the nature of comfort and joy, to revive again what sorrow so had daunted and
even overcome.

8 Then Jacob said, I have enough that Joseph my son is yet alive, never
making any mention of his honor, where a man would have thought he should
have gloried in that. No, Life more to be ioyed in the^ honor.
no, the life of his Child is that, which chereth him above the whole World,
and therefore of that he speaks. Teaching us that natural Parents do
greatly joy to have their Children living, though they have no honor nor
dignity in the World. Yet not unthankful to God, if that also be added, as
Jacob assuredly was not here. Would GOD Children were in like sort affected to
them again, ioying in their lives and deaths more than in any honors or
worldly possessions that they are indewed withal be they never so great.
Surely both duty and nature would it, if God were in us. Then says Jacob, I
will go down and see him yet ere I die. Teaching us, the nature of faithful
Love, it coueteth sight, Friends should meet together.
and comfortable society in the presence of those whom in Heart and mind we
do both love and affecte, and contenteth not it self wholly with hearing that
they are alive. Such long and liked absence then of Parents from Children,
and Children from Parents, and one Friend from another, shows frosen
affections is not at all dried up and quite decayed. Jacob was now about an
hundred and thirty years old, and yet he will take this long journey to see
his Child, cutting the Throat by this his example of all such seely excuses as
we use to keep our selves out of one an others company. Surely Love will
creep, if it can not go, and tender Affection by one means or other will
show it self. If so great an age, so long a Journey, so many difficulties,
as might have been objected in this remove, can not hinder Jacob, what can
hinder the Heart that loves from sometimes visiting his affected Friends, and
blessing God even together for his given comfortes. Here is then a sweet
alteration of Jacobs estate, and even suddenly. So sweet is GOD.

Chap. 46.
Then follows this Chapter, wherein we have laid down: The preparation of
this old man with all his to his journey. The manner of their going. The number
of persons that went. And how they were all received in Egypt.


THen Israel took his journey (says the Story) with all that he had, and came
to Beer-sheba, Verse. 1.
and offered sacrifyce unto the God of his father Isaak. Whereby he signified,
that with most thankful heart he saw the great goodness of God toward
both him and his, and that he kept in his breast the possession of that land
from whence present necessity drove him. Yea by this example he most
effectually taught, that both iourneis and all other business whatsoever should
be undertaken with prayer and service of God. Since a good beginning has a
good end following in Gods gracious blessing.

2 Then GOD spoke unto him in a vision by night, etc. where we see and learn
that never comes man or woman to the Lord in true duty, but he is ready to
give care and to answer in unspeakable mercy. Jacob in all likelihood had
besought GOD to prosper his journey, and to be his protection against all
dangers, and the Lord is ready to assure him of his desire with most sweet
comfort. Follow we then Jacobs practice, and expect in faith not wavering,
Jacobs blessing.

3 No sooner had God said, Jacob, Jacob, but he answered and said, Gods
children are ready to hear when their father speaks.
I am here, being pressed and ready with all reverent attention to hear what his
GOD should say unto him, and to follow the same with all faithful obedience.
Such readiness becomes Gods Children well even at this Day in the Church
where GOD speaks, and with that Heart, to come and to sit me down is a
holy obedience to the Lord, Think of this.
thinking with my self in this sort. O Lord, this is thine Ordinance, by thy
word Preached to instruct thy people of thy will. Here Lord then am I in all
humble fear to hear thy blessed pleasure, what this day it shall please thee
to put in the mouth of thy Servant, Absence from church.
the Minister by whom thou speak to us, to deliver. Lord guide him, and Lord
frame me to all profit and good in this thing: Here I am, therefore speak on
Lord, thy servant hears. This cannot they say, that dull and dead in their
inward feeling esteem of the Ministry of the word, as of a matter of course
and human policy to keep people in obedience, and no otherwise: therefore
absenting themselves from it, and seldom or never setting themselves in this
holy manner to hear the Lord speak his good pleasure to them. But let us be
wise and learn of Jacob, if they will be wilful and witless both, what
remedy? I am here Lord is a speech for a Child of GOD, when I am in the
Fields with my Cattle, in my House with my Cofer, or in the Tavern with my
like, is a Speech of a wicked Worldling, that sauoureth not the things which
are of GOD, as one day they shall know, when it may be too late to repent
their folly, and to call again yesterday. That GOD that is able, rent our
hearts and give us feeling, I beseech him.

Verse. 3.
4 Then said the Lord, I am God, the God of thy Father, fear not to go down
into Egypt, The sweet care of God for his children.
for I will there make of thee a great nation. I will go down with thee into
Egypt, and will also bring thee back again, etc. Here is the mercy of a
sweet God, and here is the staff and stay of all godly hearts. Mercy, that
thus sweetly he would comfort his old servant now worn and wearied with a
wicked world, assuring him of his hand, favor, and help in all this journey,
then the which what could the heart of a man wish more. The stay of all men in
their business whatsoever, even the Lord, The true stay of a man ever.
the Lord, and none but the Lord. For mark I pray you, how God draws Jacobs
eyes from looking upon Joseph's honor and credit in the land whither now he
was going, or yet upon the king that so graciously had commanded to send for
them, and his heart from trusting in these things, unto himself and his
protection, providence, and power, saying, I will go with thee, and I will bring
thee thither, and back again in thy posterity: as if he should have said,
this is thy safety, this is thy stay and staff that will hold, my presence
with thee, and my providence for thee, not thy sons great honor, though in
deed it be great, nor yet the kings favor, though indeed very gracious. If we
have ears to hear then, let us hear, and whatsoever comforts God grants
us in this world, of friends, or children, yea of princes themselves, yet let
our ankerhold be the Lord, and none but he, knowing that with him these
comforts shall profit us, and without him fail us, as most fickle and
uncertain things, even happily then when we would be most glad to enjoy and
have them, I, I will be with thee, is a word of trust, and let it ever be
looked to of us.

5 Further goes the Lord with Jacob, To close the eyes of our dead friends.
and tells him that Joseph should put his hand upon his eyes: that is, close
up his eyes when he died. Where we learn the custom of those times to have
committed this matter to the chief of the kindred, or to one that was most
dear to the party dying. Whereas we now a days refer it over to some old
woman, and hard hearted keepers, void of love, void of affection, and
oftentimes void of honesty and good dealing, either in this or other things
concerning the keeping of sick folks, we our selves being so tender, so
weak, or rather in deed so wanton and forgetful of true love and duty, that
we cannot abide to be present to the end with those that have been present
with us to our comfort, but give them over and forsake them unkindly when we
should show them our last love and office with a faithful heart, taking such
Christian courage to us in that respect as is needful. We may amend this
fault by this example, and remember it ever that God makes a matter of account
of it here, that Jacob should receive this comfort also, even to have Joseph
his son to close his eyes. Then what God reckons of we may not think
lightly of, neither wilfully or carelesselie withdraw that from them whom
we ought to comfort with all due and good duties, which God himself
accompteth a comfort to the father, and a duty in the child. It is
expresselie said of young Tobias that he buried his father and mother very
decently, Tobit. vlt.
comely and orderly, when they were dead, that even by him also we might
think of these last duties, and not carelessly commit them over to others,
whilst we greedily, and beastly regard their wordlie goods they leave behind
them, as too many do.

Verse. 5.
6 In the Chapter follows the manner of their going, and the persons that
went, whereof I need not to stand, only we must know that the persons are
numbered, and the number noted, that the accomplishing of Gods promise might
appear but even now noted, that in Egypt he would make of him a great
Nation. The persons that went here, Verse. 27.
were in all but threescore and ten: the persons that returned when God
delivered them out of Egypt, were six hundred thousand men of foot, Exodus
12.37
beside children. Great therefore was the blessing of increase in this people,
and true was the Lord in his word to Jacob. As true was he ever, and ever
will be in all his promises to his servants. I come to the last point, which
was their intertainment in the land of Egypt when they came Joseph (says the
text) having intelligence of his fathers coming by Judah, his brother sent
unto him for that purpose, made ready his Charet, and went up to Goshen to
meet Israel his father, Verse: 29.
and presented himself unto him. No honor then nor preferment ever so high
can make Joseph forget his duty to his aged father, but honor him he will
unto his end as a dutiful child, that by him to the worlds end all children
might learn to do the like. What was that that Solomon did to his mother,
when he rose to meet her, bowed himself unto her, called for a stool, 2.
King. 2.19.
and placed her on his right hand, but even a pattern of like grace and
duty in a virtuous child. When Joseph was come unto his father, O the
fountains of affecton, how were they broken up both in father and son. There
was clasping and cleaving one to another, weeping and wringinng for joy and
comfort, that hardly with dry eyes any present could behold them. Joseph
fell upon his fathers neck, and wept upon the same a good while not able to
speak, till his heart was eased by a stream of tears. And do you think the
father wept not to behold his son? The son of his love, the son of his
desires, whom so dearly he had bewailed, as one rent in pieces with some
wild beast, and now saw with his eyes to be alive, and not only so, but in
such honor as to him and his he might be a father? God knew his heart all
full of affection, and what Rachell his mothers heart would have been if she
had lived to see this day. Well, both of them weep out of all question
abundantly, yet Jacob the father gets the victory over his passions first,
and speaks to Joseph, but how speaks he? I warrant you, his words both
for form and matter savor of affection also. Now (says he) let me die,
since I have seen thy face, Verse. 30.
and that thou art yet alive. What is this but heat, and most fervent love in
a kind father. He now cares not for his life, having once he held Joseph
before his death. Such speech used Simeon or not much unlike, when he had
seen Christ, Now Lord (says he) let me depart in peace, since mine eyes
has seen, etc. Who can then tell the hearts of Parents. O that children may
more and more think of them, and requite them no worse then Joseph did.

7 Thus Joseph having done his duty to his father, he remembers himself
also toward the king, and tells them that presently he will to the king to
give him intelligence of their coming. Where we are to mark the titles which
Joseph will adorn his kindred withal when he comes to the king: Joseph's
humble mind not ashamed of his kinreds mean estate.
surely he will tell him that they are sheepheards: what, plain sheepheards?
Yea verelie no more painting and coloring will Joseph use, but confess that
they are sheepheards, and which is much more, he instructs his brethren if
the king should call them, that they should say, that not only they were so,
but that their fathers before them lived also so. Where is this simplicity
now become in these proud and scornful days of ours, when every man
almost if he come to any place, is ashamed of his parents and kindred if their
condition be but mean, when we tumble, and toss, and rake up old Records day
and night to fetch it about, that we may be gentlemen? Surely it is gone, and
our pride before wise men as ridiculous, as before a just God it is sinful and
odious. What if our parents be but mean, with others of our kindred, the more
is Gods mercy and goodness seen toward us if we be exalted. And shall we
grudge to the Lord the praise of his own mercy in such measure to us, by
dawbing and painting our friends out with such antiquity of blood, such
descent and alliances, and I know not what, as may darken in some sort the
Lords doing. Fie on ^is ingratitude, and fie again upon this filthy pride.
It is far from Joseph's spirit in whom this was virtue, neither to adorn his
kindred with vain colors, neither once to be ashamed of them as they were. If
we follow Joseph, we follow him whom God loved, and even for this his virtue
in this place notes and commends secretly: If we follow the world, and
vanity of hautie minds, we take a course that has no such comfort either with
God or good men. If a man see a piece of clay, know it to be clay, and esteem
it but as clay, does he not well? But if he take it to be gold, and esteem it
as gold, when in deed it is but clay, is he not mad? So are these vanities
that men so glory in, of small value, who so thinks so of them, and so
reputeth them he is wise, when others follies feeding but themselves are laughed
at of others very justly.

8 The more yet appears Joseph's virtue. For every sheepkeeper (says the
text) was an abomination to the Egyptian. Verse. 34.
And yet was not Joseph daunted with it, nor once goes about to cover the
matter. But his friends are to him still as they ought to be, and the pride of
the Egyptian hurts himself. Proud hypocrites despise as unholy who in Gods
acceptance are holyer then them selves.
What if the question were asked which of these two sorts of people were the
better in respect of Gods approbation, the Hebrews that were despised, or the
Egyptia^s that did despise, would you not say the Hebrews? Then we see they are
not always unholy with God whom proud spirits esteem to be so, neither yet
they so holy as they take themselves, who in respect of themselves esteem
others to be abominable. This is but an old trike of a tempting devil, to
make some people think both of themselves better, and of others worse then
they ought, to esteem of others as abominable unto them, when in deed rather
they themselves should be so to the other. This practice of Satan, and power of
his venom is too to manifest even in our days, in such as condemn our
Church-meetings, our exercises of the word and Sacraments, and whatsoever we
do in comparison of their own supposed purity. Of whom it may justly be
spoken that Austen said, Finxerunt se nimis iustos, cum totum vellent
perturbare. They have feined themselves over holy, when in this sort they would
trouble al. For us who are so abominable to them, let us comfort our selves
with the truth of our cause, and with this example of Gods people, whom yet God
suffered thus to be judged of by filthy Egyptians, knowing that in the end
these proud censures shall hurt us as much as this contempt in the Egyptians
did the Hebrews, when it caused them to be placed in the land of Goshen, which
was the very best of the land of Egypt. Let this suffice of this Chapter.

Chap. 47.
The chief points of this Chapter are two. The speech of the king with Joseph's
brethren and father. The extremity of the famine.


Verse. 1.
TOuching the first it is said that Joseph went to ye king to tell him of his
friends coming, Joseph's modesty and wisdom.
and withal took with him five of his brethren, whom he presented to the
king, as well that the king might be assured they were come as also see what
manner of people they were. Wherein appears both the majesty and the wisdom of
Joseph that without the kings knowledge and express direction he would do
nothing in this matter, though his favor were great with the king, Court
flatterers.
and very extraordinary, well-knowing what meaner places then Princes Courts
give* trial of, that many are the whisperers, flatterers, and maligners of
them, who with any special favor use to be regarded of the chief. Soon
might they, and peradventure soon would they have incensed the king, both
against Joseph and his friends, if this course had not warily been taken. And
what though the king before had given commandment touching this matter, yet
safe it was to have direction again in a matter of his own, and of this
nature to bring strangers into a Princes land to inhabit the very best place
of the same. Who know the variety of great men's minds, and what mountains
privy whisperers can move sometime, when a man is not admitted to his answer,
but condemned unheard, will approve Joseph's wisdom and say it was necessary.
The king when he saw them asked what trade they were of, taking it as certain
that they had some trade. Verse. 3.
So unusual was it then for men to be idle. But had he asked many a man in
our days, there answer peradventure would have been to seek unless they
should have answered that they used to walk from tavern to tavern with a
white rod in their hands to top Dasies withal. These men's answer was not to
seek, but readily they told the king they were sheepheards, both they and
their fathers, that is, men that lived by keeping and breeding of cattle, a
most profitable and good trade for the wealth and comfort of a land. Would God
their example might work with us, to cause us to abhor this sinful
idleness the mother of infinite evils amongst us, and to buckle our selves to
some profitable service to the common wealth Surely it is for the dead to rest
from their labors, and not for the living altogether. But many times I have
touched this matter, and therefore now no more.

3 Then said Pharaoh to Joseph, the land of Egypt is before thee, Verse. 6.
in the best place of the land make thy father and brethren dwell, etc. Most
constant comfort to a true servant
We saw the kings gracious favor to his faithful and true Joseph before, and
now we see his constancy in the same. A most princely virtue in him, and a
most sweet encouragement to the heart of Joseph, as they know that wish and
want. Bound was Joseph if he had had a thousand bodies and minds to have served
such a master with them all. Farewell Pharaoh thou king of Egypt, and live
being dead in the pens of men whillest the world endures for this clemency.
Be thou to all men a mirror of sweetness to faithful servants, and teach
even them that know more then thou did of Gods truth in this behalf. Joseph
praise thy lot also, and say thou had mercy not always found to serve such
a master, so kind and so constant in favor to the end, not only to thy
self, but even to all thy friends, O marvelous comfort.

3 Not long after Joseph brought his old father also to ye king that he might
see him. Who being come into presence, Peevish denying to salute our brethren.
saluted Pharaoh, or blessed him. Teaching us thereby how peevish, not how
zealous they be, that amongst us meeting them who profess the same truth, and
rely upon the same God that themselves seem to do, yet will not speak to them
a word lest they should be defiled by saluting those that are not so factious
(to say no worse) as themselves be. O learned skill. Jacob may salute Pharaoh
of Egypt, and we may not say good morrow to a true professor of the gospel. But
such straining at a gnat, and swallowing of a canull will one day have his
judge, to whom I refer it with this little remembrance by the way.

Verse 9^
4 The king also spoke unto Jacob, and asked him of his age, to whom he
answered, Jacobs life how our comfort.
that the whole time of his pilgrimage was an 130. years, few and evil have
the days of my life been, and I have not atrained unto the years of my
fathers, etc. Where we have a comfort both against shorter life and more
affliction then our fathers have had if the Lord so please to have it. He
dealing no otherwise in that with us, then with Jacob his servant. That he also
calls this life a pilgrimage, has his profit ever to admonish us of another
place, and to pluck our affections from this sinful world. Heb. 13.
We have not here an abiding city, but must look for one from above, settling
our selves and our business no otherwise in this world then becomes
pilgrims that must along to another place. This do not many whose buildings
and purchasings, Build^ngs and purchasings
and incessant cares, give shrewd show their hearts are here, not as pilgrims
hearts, but rather as men that dream of little good when this life is ended.
Read the 49. Psalm, the 2. Cor. 5. and meditate of them.

Verse 12.
5 Then Joseph placed his father as Pharaoh had willed, and Joseph nourished
his father and his brethren, and all his fathers household with bread, even to
the young children. See the duty of a godly child to his dear father, not to
see him want the comfort of his ability any ways during life. And see how
cruelly Joseph now reuengeth his brethrens wrong done unto him when he was
young. He nourishes them and theirs with comfortable food during all the
famine. Such remembrances of injuries and such reuenges are in the godly still,
and therefore let them weigh their estate that take such bitter courses as we
daily see, whether that spirit be in them that was in Joseph or no. Nay, are
they like unto far worse men then Joseph was for knowledge in the truth that
moderateth reuenges? As unto Antigonus, who hearing with his own ears certain
of the soldidurs speak evil of him, never revenged the matter, but patiently
endured it, and bad them either go further, or speak softer lest the king
should hear them: unto Augustus Caesar, who suffered one Timagenes a writer of
history, abusing notoriously both him, his wife, and his whole family, to
live nevertheless, and to live in good estate even in Rome under him. If such
men as these thus governed their affections when they had wrong, may we carry
the credites of christian professors, boiling in malice, hunting for revenge,
and even breathing out slaughter against whom we dislike, as we see at this
day. What the Lord has said against such heates sundry times in these notes
I have observed, and our selves full well know his dislike of such dealing.
Now do but think of him, that in wisdom said it. Parcius vtendum
potestat^, quo semper ea vti possis. Sparingly should thou use thy power
that ever thou may use it. That is revenge little and live long, etc.

6 The greatness of the famine is laid down and noted by the effects of it.
When it consumed all the money in the land, Verse 13. etc.
and brought it to Pharaohs coffers: then all their cattle, being glad to give
them for food when their money was gone: This famine shows our blessing.
thirdly all their land, and even their bodies also, if he would so have taken
what they offered. What a spectacle is this of Gods power. what easily he can
do, and of his gracious favor what yet he does not. Durum telum necessitas. A
sharp dart is need and want. And therefore a great mercy is plenty and
store. Where be our hearts to feel it, and to bless God for it using it well
to his glory? But what when both money and cattle with land also were gone,
and all become Pharaohs? See then a wisdom, and a fatherly mercy in Joseph.
Then gave he them seed to sow their land, yielding ye king but the fifth part
and themselves keeping four to their maintenance: wisdom I say, Merciful
dealing in Joseph when he had the vantage and could have nipped.
because else the land should have been wast, and the food as yet holding out
would have decayed: mercy, for that if some had had them at such a list, they
would have rather taken four parts and have left them one, then quite
contrary as Joseph did. Mercy again, in that he regards their wives and
children, etc. That is, their charges, and according thereunto deals with
them, and allows to them. Which is a thing they little think of that shave
to the bones, A blessing upon him for it.
and grind even the faces of their tenants now adays. What blessing also this
kind dealing had in the hearts of the people the story notes, when they
thankefullie attributed the saving of their lives unto him. Verse. 25.
note.
Gracious dealing will ever have a gracious report with thankful men, when
sighing groans of whole families beggered and undone, will cry for speedy
vengeance from a just judge.

7 Except the land of the priests only, etc. This wi^h that before in the 22.
verse, Maintaynance of ministers
where it was said that Pharaoh nourished the Priests with an ordinary,
shows what care should be had of ministers, and what provision should ever
be made for them. This Pharaoh of Egypt had a care of his Priests. Iesabel a
wicked woman maintained her prophets of the groves 400. at her table. 1.
Kings. 18.
Verse. 19.
Micah in the Judges maintained his Priest. And may only the professors of
the Gospel neglect their teachers? Iud. 17.
Let the Lord judge, who said the labourer was worthy of his hire. Math. 10.
Let the Apostle judge, who says they are worthy of double honor, and the
ox may not be mufled that treads out the corn: 1. Tim. 5.17.
nay who with many similitudes and arguments proves the contrary, as 1. That
no man goes to warfare on his own charges. 1. Cor. 9. from the 5 verse to the
15.
2. That husbandmen eat of the fruit of such vineyards as themselves plant. 3.
That sheepherds eat of the milk of their own flocks, and cloth themselves with
the wool. 4. That sowing spiritual things which are the greater, we are well
worthy to reap carnal things being the lesser. 5. That the ordinance of God
was to have them live by the altar that served at the altar, with other like
reasons in that place, and to the Galatians if you consider them, and gather
them out. Had the priests of the law the tenth part, Galat. 6.
and shall the ministers of a better testamenc have never a part? Such
maintenance will have such ministers in time out of question, to the utter decay
of learning, piety and religion, and to the bringing in of al barbarism and
error as Satan wishes. Worthy is the virtue of Nehemiah touching this matter,
Nehem. 13.14.
everlasting remembrance and imitation of them that have like authority and
fear God. He finding that the priest Eliashib, who had the oversight of that
which belonged to ye maintenance of the priests, being joined in affinity with
Tobiah ye Ammonite an enemy of the Jews, the portions of the Levites were not
given them, Verse 10
but every man was fled to shift for himself amongst his friends: most
zealously reformed it, as there you may see, threw out Tobiahs vessels, thrust
out Eliashib, and placed them yt were counted faithful, and brought the tithes
of corn and wine and oil into the house of the lord again. Mark the state
of our times, Church robbers.
and see if such Tobiahs be not yet amongst us, and such Eliashibs, who dealing
together in all unrighteousness, convey the portions of the Leuits by little and
little from the church, yt all may come to ruin and utter confusion in time.
They must have the tith corn, and the glebe land, peradventure the house also
for a dairie, and their cosen Eliashib the minister there shall have the tith
geese, and the eggs at Easter. But shall not god visit this great impiety? O
lord, O lord, in mercy forgive the sins of the land and the iniquity of thy
people deserving justly the loss of thy word, and sweet liberty of their
consciences, and yet yet show favor. For these mercies raise up workmen yt are
able to feed thy people as they ought, and either convert or confound these
church-robbers that savor nothing but their (...) gain, that taking thus
daily away the reward of knowledge, endeavor the death of thousa^ds thousands
of souls (...) created. Stir up, Nehemiah thy faithful servant to redress
this sin, Galat. 6.
and to settle things carnal as shall be (...) to them that so ^^spiritual, that
God be not mocked. How that be thy people and sheep of thy pasture shall give
this praise for ever for so great a mercy. Amen. Amen.

8 So Jacob dwelt in Egypt in the best of the land, grew and multiplied
exceedingly, Verse. 28.
and had possessions, he lived in that land seventeen years, and saw his
childrens children, he inioyed his son Joseph in great honor, with Benjamin
also whom he loved, yea, he inioied them all placed about him, and living in
unity, peace, and plenty. See then the comforts of god to his true servant
after many afflictions. God is not changed. Cleave we therefore to him, and be
ever shall dispose unto us for the best. If we now weep, he is able to make us
laugh, if we now groan under any burden, he is able to ease our shoulders from
it in good time, and to comfort our later years with a sweeter measure, as he
here did Jacob. Remember the great calm that followed after their great
danger in the ship. Math. 8.
Remember the words: you now are sad, John. 16.
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Remember the prophet: for a moment in
mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season: Esaias. 54.8.
but with everlasting mercy will I have compassion on thee, says the Lord.
Tobiah had his sight again, and ended in comfort, Job had all well again in
the end, and the lord blessed the last days of Job more then ye first. Job
last.
David after many troubles has a crown of honor, and Jacob has his Joseph
again, that his spirit reuiueth. Jonas comes up again all in safety from
the bottom of the sea. Fear not affliction therefore, but refer all to God. He
is not the god of these men alone but of us also. All shall be well in the Lords
good time, al tears wiped away from our eyes, and what he has promised any
way, so true is he, so good is he, so himself is he, and ever shall be. Here
then might I end, if it were not also worthy observing how reverently Jacob
speaks to his son being in authority. If I now have found grace in thy
sight, deal mercifully with me, etc. Teaching hereby all parents to (...)
their childrens places, as their children ought to (...) to them* So such
giving other that honor is due, God shall be honored of them both, and in them
both. Of this burial (...) by Jacob in the land of Canaan, withal have
occasion to speak hereafter. It respected Gods promise of that land in time to
be given to his posterity, which he steadfastly believed, and for show of the
same his vnwauering faith, and the confirmation of others, wished and sought
that his body might thither be carried to take possession till that tim came.
Such faith in other of Gods promises concerning us becomes it us ever to
have, and God in mercy give it.

Chap. 48.
In this Chapter two things especially are laid down. The adoption of the
sons of Joseph to be Jacobs sons. The blessing that Jacob gives them.


TIdings are brought unto Joseph that his father was sick. Verse. 1.
The godly are sick.
Sick then are the godly when it pleases God as well as others, and worn
and wasted with diseases and griefs, they pass away as other men. The Lord
could do otherwise if it pleased him. But this course is best in his eyes, that
being as others appointed to die, they also as others should have these common
messengers and forerunners of their death: that hereby receiving as it were a
watchworde that the time is near, The use of sickness.
they might renounce the world with all the flattering and fading glory
thereof, they might lift up their eyes to the God of heaven and consider the
comfort of that company. They might dispose of their goods and affairs of
this world to the quiet peace of them that shall have them. And lastly, with
more ease depart and make an end, the body being weakened and worn away by
sickness that it cannot so stiffely startle against that separation. Joseph
visits his father in this his sickness, and takes his two sons with him,
Manasses and Ephraim, still showing himself in all things a comfortable,
careful and obedient man toward his father, confuting also by his example
that most sinful softness of some in our days, Visiting the sick.
who can not abide to come at any sick persons, as though themselves either
never should be sick, or being sick could rest contented to lie by the
walls, not comforted nor visited of any body. That with him he took his two
sons, he showed that more highly he esteemed to have his children received
into Jacobs family, which was the Church of God, then to enjoy all the
treasures of Egypt.

2 Then one told Jacob that his son Joseph was come, and Israel took his
strength unto him, Verse. 2.
and sat upon the bed, etc. See how the presence of dear friends comfort
the sick and grieved in their beds. The joy of friends.
It even makes their spirits revive, and their strength to come again, that
they are able to speak and deliver matters as whole men. How may a friend then
answer it to God or man, to deny such comfort to the sick.

Verse. 11.
3 Then Jacob called for Joseph's children, kissed them and embraced them, A
most full feeling of Gods mercies to be wished.
and breaks into these words: I had not thought to have seen thy face, and
behold God has showed me also thy seed. Showing thereby what a full feeling he
had in his heart of Gods infinite mercies unto him, receiving more then ever he
could hope or look for. Such, such feeling should we also have in our estates
every one of us, weighing our case past weighing our case present, weighing
what once was likely, and what yet now we have, what once we could not dream
of, and yet now by God is done, and rising up upon it into all fervent feeling
of a sweet and gracious God, which has so done for us. This did Jacob here,
and blessed he, this do not some of us, as may be feared, and therefore
sinful we. But now let us amend, and write this saying of Jacob upon our
hands, that we may ever see it. Joseph then took away his children from his
fathers knees, Verse. 12.
and did reverence down to the ground. Reverence to parents be we never so
high.
O dutiful child, a very pattern of all virtue and true affection to
parents whilst the world endures. So great and so mighty, so honorable and
so high, yet to his father he boweth, and does reverence even to the ground,
his father being but a shepherd (as you heard before) that is, a man that
lived by breeding and keeping of cattle.

4 Then Joseph took his two sons, Verse. 13.
Ephraim in his right hand toward Isreal's left hand, and Manasses in his left
hand toward Isreal's right hand, so he brought them unto him. But Israel
stretched out his right hand (crossing his hands) and laid it on Ephraims head
which was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasses head, directing his hands
of purpose, for Manasses was the elder. Then he blessed them, giving such title
to his father Abraham as I wish us to mark, namely that he walked with God.
To teach us not to delight so much either in honor, or prowes, or policy, or
any thing in our ancetors, The best praise of Ancestors.
as that they were religious and feared God. But this manner of his fathers
hands displeased Joseph, and he sought to remove them, telling his father that
Manasses was the elder, etc. Where we see a weakness in good Joseph, God not
tied to natural arts
that he would go about to tie God unto senioritie and natural order, when as
before that it had appeared how God disposes of his blessing to the younger
before the elder. As Ismael being elder, yet Isaac was blessed, Esau being
elder, yet Jacob was blessed, Ruben being elder, yet of Judah came Christ, etc.
Now could Joseph a good man thus errs, A good man deceived.
and think that amiss which his father did rightly and even of purpose, and
may we no way be deceived? I wish them then to consider this who are so wise in
their own eyes that they never like of their ministers course, but would
gladly have their own devises followed as ever the better. Surely it may teach
them modesty, and humble their spirits if god will to think more reverently
of others, that for their places and diverse circumstances are more like to see
what is the best.

5 But his father refused, etc. Verse 19.
Then father and son divided in a matter of ceremony, the father one way,
Good men diversely minded in a matter of ceremony.
the son an other, yet both godly. Let it school^ us ever to know what may
be without breach of unity and common peace if men themselves be lovers of
peace. Yet remember also that old Jacob had the right, and young Joseph was
deceived. If father and son then may differ, brethren also may do the like.
But yet go further. We oppose our selves even to God.
We learn not only by this example the difference often that is betwixt men
of near conjunction, but we may take occasion also by it to think how we
differ often even from God, setting our selves as it were against him, and
esteeming that better that in deed is not. As when we are governed in matters
of salvation by the judgment rather of flesh and blood, then by the spirit
that sees truth. If he lay the right hand, we wish the left hand, and if be
lay the left hand, we like the right: what he thinks good we judge evil, and
what he makes evil we make good. Know this corruption which is too true, and
then begging strength let us seek to amend it. The Lord gave Jacob a
prophesying spirit, to declare to them what was to come. And no little account
in those days made godly children to be blessed of their fathers. What Jacob
told also came all to pass, Ephraim was the greater, and yet both great. His
name was likewise named upon them, Number. 1.33.35. Esaias. 4.1.
that is, they were taken and reputed as his children, and not he prayed unto
when he was dead by his posterity, as most foolishlie Papists would reason
herehence. His assurance that he gives them of the land of Canaan, was
grounded upon the sundry immutable promises of God, which he believed. That
god should be with them when he was dead, respected the promise that is also
our comfort: I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after thee. The
portion that he gives him above his brethren, How ancient to make a testament
gives testimony how ancient it is to make a testament concerning worldly
goods when die we must. Finally, that he speaks of his dying so
comfortablie, and without any fear, it teaches us the effect of a lively
faith, how mightily it expels all fear of death. Thus ended this conference
of sick Jacob with his son Joseph: and thus end we also for this time.

Chap. 49.
Two especial heads there are of this Chapter. Jacobs last Prophetical
blessing of his Sons. His death.


THen Jacob called his sons and said: gather your selves together, that I may
tell you what shall come to you in the last days. Written it is of the Swan,
that before his death he sings most sweetly, and so did this godly Patriarch
in this place. Never more sweet songs than have passed from the godly toward
their later ends. Sweet speeches of diverse at their deaths
Moses in the 31. of Deuteronomy. and in the two chapters following, Joshua in his last
chapter and even our Savior himself in the 14. chap. of Ihon, in the
15.16.17. and at his last Supper. The apostle Paul when the time of his offering
was at hand. 2. Tim. 4 v. 6.7.8. etc. 2 Pet. 1. v. 13.14.
The Apostle Peter when he could the^ he thought it meet while he was in this
tabernacle to stir them up, knowing yt the time was at hand, that he must lay
down his tabernacle etc. This Cignea cantio, this last sweet song of Jacob
because interpreters have seen to be amost singular prophecy of things to
come, they have thought yt they did not adorn and set out sufficiently,
unless they devised some hydden mysteries, and dark matter to be drawn out of
it, swaruing for this purpose from the true and natural sense of it in diverse
things. I will omit these dreams of theirs and keep to the Text, with such
matter as it properly and truly yeldeth. Praying it first to be observed, The
end of this prophecye.
how by their father Jacob it pleased almighty God to inform these men of whom
thousands after were to come concerning their future estate, that they might
hereby know and be most assured, yt God cared for them, and not only so, but
that most extraordinarily he cared for them, governing them as his own
peculiar people chosen from the whole world and made his own. If you ask or
think how could Moses yt wrote these books know of this speech of Jacob to his
sons being made in a private house, in a place but obscure, and about 200.
years before he wrote. Answer your self with another question again and ask
how could he so cunningly and so particularly describe the land of Canaan,
bordering it, and distributing it unto some as he did, Number. 34.
himself dying, and never entering into it: and if you must say, by Gods spirit
illuminating, guiding and directing him he did this (as in deed you must say)
why not then did the same spirit reueile unto him being a chosen instrument to
commit these matters to writing, what Jacob said at his later end to his
children? Yet probable also it is, that so famous a prophecy as this, and at
that time made when men's words are especially marked, to wit, at their deaths,
and before so many witnesses, was right carefully remembered, and by tradition
carried from man to man, and from time to time, even unto Moses. It contains
in it the whole time from their going out of Egypt unto ye coming of Christ,
as by diligent observance may appear, not I mean every particular accident in
that time, Verse. 2.
but the fired and set order and course of the Church till that time. Let us
come then to the word, and observe how he doubleth the word of hearing, saying:
first hear, and then harken, al to note unto them that they must not with an
ordinary care harken unto him, but with very great attention, with very
special care and regard, since the matter by him now to be uttered was of
weight and concerned them most nearly. So notes this repetition usually in the
scripture, as in the Psalm, Psalm. 45.10.
when he says: Hearken O daughter and consider, incline thine ear, Psalm. 49.1.
forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house. Again, Hear this all
ye people, give ear all ye that dwell in the world. Prou. 4.1.
In the Proverbs: Hear O ye children the instruction of a father, and give
ear to learn understanding. with many such. Again he gives himself 2.
names, Jacob, and Israel saying: hear ye sons of Jacob, and hearken unto
Israel your father: drawing from these names 2. good arguments to stir up in
them this attention which he requires, ye one of nature, the other of
religion: of nature, because he was Jacob their father, of religion, because
fearing God truly, and serving him ever, he found favor with God even so far,
as to receive from him this name of Israel, whereof you have heard before the
full circumstance.

2 Ruben mine eldest son, thou art my might, Verse 3.
and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power. 4
Thou wast light as water, thou shall not be excellent, Mercy received makes
sin more grievous.
because thou we^test up to thy fathers bed, then did thou defile my bed,
thy dignity is gone. Coming now to particulars he begins with his eldest
son, and as you see often repeateth his excellency, making great mention of it,
that he was his might, ye beginning of his strength, ye excellency of dignity,
and the excellency of power, in the end throws him out of all, saying he
should not be excellent, his dignity was gone. And why thus? because he had
sinned against nature, and defiled his fathers bed. Then al these repetitions
of his dignity te^ded but to this: to exaggerat his fault and to make it appear
unto his conscience and the posterity ever after, how great it was and foul
before God, as for which all this dignity was lost and taken away: Nothing more
shakes the heart of any one, not quite dead to God and grace then this course.
Therefore often God uses it in his word. Hear O heavens, says he by the
prophet, and hearke^ o earth, Esaias. 1.2.
I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me.
The Ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe, but Israel has
not known me, my people has not understood, amplifying their sin by this that
they had received this dignity to be nourished of him, and brought up as his
Children. In the fifth Chapter again, my beloueds Vineyarde was in a fruitful
ground, hedged about, the stones gathered out, planted with the best plants,
a Tower built, and a wine press made, yet it brought forth wild grapes: 2 Samuel
12 7. and 8.
To David likewise I anointed thee king over Israel, and delivered thee out of
the hand of Saul, gave thy Lords house, and thy Lords Wives into thy bosom,
gave thee the house of Israel and Judah, and would moreover, if that had been
too little have given thee such and such things: wherefore then have thou
despised, etc. Still proouing the greatness of sin by grace and favor
vouchsafed before. So here Ruben being vouchsafed of God to be his fathers
first borne, his might, the beginning of his strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power, and yet sinning in this sort, his fault
by these favors was made most great, and therefore his dignity and the
sequels of his dignity most justly translated otherwise. Genesis 49.26.
As the birthright to Joseph, the priesthood to Leui, and the Kingdom to
Judah. Read Deuter. 33. verse. 6. Iud. 5.15. and 16. Note.
Take we heed then of sinning ever, but especially when our consciences tell
us God has been gracious, gracious unto Body, and gracious to Soul,
gracious to our selves, and gracious to our friends. For this is as the
dignity of Ruben which shall increase our offense, and justly pluck down
from the hand of God a very sure and certain punishment upon us, and happily
even also upon our posterity as here in Rube^, whose whole offspring was
deprived of honor. There is not one of us but has received mercy from heaven
in very great measure, if we be alive within to feel it. Therefore not one
of us, but even in this respect bound with a careful heart to avoid the thing
that offends God. And happy we if we will do it, remembering Ruben here and
his fearful loss, his dignity being gone, as his Father says.

2 Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, the instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations. Verse. 5.
6
Into their secrets let not my soul come, my glory be not thou joined with
their assemblye, for in their wrath they slew a Man, and in their self will
they dug down a wall. 7
Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel.
I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. To the self same end
tends this punishment inflicted upon these two brethren that the former did,
The use of Gods' punishments to the godly.
even to humble themselves in themselves, and to teach posterity how God
hates evil. The Papists prattle of poena and culpa, that the punishment
satisfies for the offense etc. But far otherwise does the Word instruct,
Esaias, 53
telling us ever that punishment is not imposed to make satisfaction (for that
only does Jesus Christ and his stripes) but to purge the heart from all
hypocrisy, humbling it faithfully and unfeignedly, and to stir up to
repentance for ye time passed, as also to carefulnes for the time to come,
keeping both body and soul in a godly fear as it were with a bridle. Therefore
says the father as you have heard before. Quod patimur vnde plangimus,
medicina est, non poena, castigatio* non damnatio. That we suffer punishment,
it is a medicine not a punishment, a correction, not a damnation. Non enim de
peccatis sumit supplicium, sed in futurum nos corrigit. For God does not take
punishment of our sins (forgiven) but chastises us fatherly for the time to
come. Mark also in this place how fully, how plainly, how faithfully Moses
lays down to the world in writing ye shame and reproach of the tribe he came
of, of his father Leui: An arg. of the scripture to be given by inspiration.
which certainly declares the power of Gods spirit ruling and ouerruling in
these writings, and that of him and from him, not from flesh and blood they
are proceeded: for flesh and nature would have covered these blemishes in his
ancestors.

3 Thou Judah, thy brethren shall praise thee, Verse. 8.
thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies, thy fathers sons shall bow
down unto thee. Judah, 9
as a Lions whelp shall thou come up from the spoil, my son. He shall lie
down and couch as a Lion and as a Lioness, who shall stir him up. The scepter
shall not depart from Judah, 10
nor a lawgiuer from betwixt his feet until Shiloh come, and the people shall be
gathered unto him. He shall bind his ass fool unto the vine and his asses colt
unto the best vine. He shall wash his garment in wine, 11
and his cloak in the blood of grapes. His eyes shall be red with wine, and his
teeth white with milk. 12
Great is the blessing of Judah then, and many favors are vouchsafed to him.
Mighty in battle and prosperous in war shall he be. Of him shall come kings,
one after one and many in number til at last the Lord Jesus come, who is K. of
Kings, and L. of Lords. Earthly blessings he shall also enjoy, as wine and
milk, that is, a country most abundant in vines and pastures and all
commodities. His brethren shall bow to him, and his enemies shall fear him as
men do to stir up a Lioness that is a sleep. What greater blessings? but I
pray you let us remember, was not Judah also faulty when he lay with Thamar his
daughter in law, as we heard before? how happens it then that Jacob so
sharply reproving Rube^, Simeon and Leui passes over in silence thus Judah
his fault and speaks of nothing but blessings unto him? Surely this thing was
of God yt we might thereby learn that sometimes he even passes over and
covers the faults of his chosen in sweet mercy as at other times he openly
touches them in unblameable justice. That in Jacob also we might take a lesson
not ever to publish whatsoever we know. The discretion of a man passes by an
offense and the same again at other times does it not: there are times to
speak, and times to be silent, which this guider of Jacob here will also direct
his servants unto as shall be fit, ye heartily in prayer and for his glory beg ye
same.

4 Zabulon shall dwell by the sea side, and he shall be an haven for ships, Verse.
13.
his border shall be unto Zidon. Here Jacob in ye spirit disposes to Zabulon
what 200. years after by lot fell so out as we see in Joshua chap. 19.10. etc.
whereof came a double comfort. Zabulon.
First to encourage them very cherefully when time should serve, to go into
that land wherein their portion and inheritance was assured already, Secondly,
to be content with it when by lot it should fall unto them, knowing that though
thus the casting of lots was used: yet this was altogether the same which their
father Jacob in the Spirit had foretold, and therefore no Fortune or chance,
but the very finger and providence of God.

5 Issachar shall be a strong Ass, couching down betwixt two burdens. Verse.
14.15.
Issachar.
And he shall see that rest is good, and that the land is pleasant, and he
shall bow his shoulder to bear, and shall be subject unto tribute, This is, as
if Jacob should have said, Issachar or ye tribe of Issachar shall be for strength
able to do much, being like a strong Ass, or an Ass of great bones as ye
Hebrew is, but to his strength he shall not have courage to resist his enemies,
and therefore shall couch down betwixt two burdens, and bow his shoulder to
bear, etc. A nature which we daily see in too many, Think of this.
to be content for their own ease and earthly profit to carry sackes and coals
too in them not a few. rather then they will intermeddle any thing. In some men
this is too bad, namely in magistrates and men of place in their countries.
Whose couching down, and bowing to these burdens, because they see rest is
good, will one day be laid as hotly to their charge as now it does greatly
disgrace them in the world with good men. In the mean time they are but like
Asses, as Issachar was, fit to bear.

6 Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a
serpent by the way, and adder by the path, Verse. 16.
biting the Horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. 17
The sense is this: Dan also shall have the honor of a tribe, and shall in
subtilty and craft abound, being that way like a serpent, also that way he
shall pinch his enemies, and give them overthrows, biting as it were the Horse
heels, Craft and secret cunning.
so that his rider shall fall backward, though openly and by hand stripes (as
we say) he be not able to encounter or to do any great matter. Subtle secret
byters then and workers of their will by policy, craft, and cunning are hereby
noted and resembled. Outwardly and openly they do little, but covertly and
craftily they are like Serpents by the pathe, so biting the heels (not the
head) of the Horse, that in the end the rider is overthrown and falls
backwarde, as well as if openly he had been encountered, and peradventure
rather. So ouer-reacheth hidden guile, when a man thinks not of it.

7 O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. An abrupt breaking from the matter
in hand to a meditation, as if he should say. Verse. 18.
O Lord whilst I thus speak of the estate of these my children and the
posterity that of them shall come, A steadfast faith sees a good end of all
affliction.
I see unto how many troubles and afflictions they shall be subject, and with
what crosses they shall be exercised, but in this my faith ever was and still
is that thy gracious hand and help shall never be wanting to them, but what
thou have promised to my forefathers, thou will perform most faithfully in the
posterity of them and me, when thy good time shall be. For this is thy
salvation O Lord, which I have ever waited for.

Verse. 19.
8 Gad an host of men shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the last.
John. 16.33. To. 8.36.37.
A prediction of them not unlike to that of our Savior Christ's concerning his
children: In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world. To that in the Apostle: for thy sake are we killed all
the day long, and appointed as sheep unto the slaughter. Nevertheless in all
these things we are more than conquerours, through him that loved us. To that
again in his epistle to the Corinthians. We are afflicted on every side, yet
not in distress, we are in doubt, yet despair not, we are persecuted, yet not
forsaken, cast down, but yet we perish not etc. Finally to that of John. All
that is borne of God overcomes this world, and this is that victory that has
overcome the world even our faith. Who is it that overcomes this world, but
he which believes that Jesus is that son of God. Not therefore uncomfortable
to Gad in the end, more than this estate and lot of all Gods children, though
for the time grievous and bitter.

Psalm. 20.
9 Concerning Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall give pleasures for a
King. The meaning is this, a fruitful part of the land shall fall to him,
which abundance, with corn and all good fruits, shall make his bread fat, and
his pleasures many even fit and convenient for a King in that kind. A
comfortable blessing in this world, and granted to more then I fear me feel
Gods goodness in it, and send from a feeling heart thanks to almighty God for
it. A blessing that this our native country has had long, and many a
particular member in it if al were thought upon. Pleasures upon pleasures fit
for a king, yea that many a king wantes enjoy private persons, if their
spirits be not dead from all feeling.

Verse. 21.
10 Nepthali shall be a hind let go giving goodly words. That is, this tribe
shall be given to humanity, to sweet speech, and by peaceable means rather
than by force of arms to defend themselves, and to have their being and stay
in the world. A course certainly not without great power, though it seem
outwardly to be weak. What more perceth tha^ a smoth tongue? and what anger
yeldeth not in the end to a soft answer. Pro. 15.1.
Salomons testimony of this is know, that a soft answer puts away wrath,
when grievous words stir up anger. In his 25. Chapter again: A soft tongue
breaks the bones. Meaning the heart that is bent unto anger. As for example,
Verse. 5.
How pacified Gedeon the raging Ephramites. Iudic. 8
How stayed Abigael the fury of David coming with death in his heart to Nabal
her husband and all his household? 1. Sam. 25.32.
What the Towne-clarke did in the uproar of Ephesus, we see in the Acts of the
Apostles. Other examples we may remember many. The saying is old and true, Act.
19.
If a man will catch Birds he may not come toward them with a staff. But
Fistula dulce canit volucres dum decipit auceps. The Pipe goes sweetly whilst
they are deceived: what daily experience shows I need not tell. But think
you whether the smiling Sun, or the blustering wind, will cause you to lay
down your cloak first, Note:
surely with his kind beams he will take both your cloak and your coat from
you, when the others puffes does make you hold all harder. Great therefore is
the power of a sweet tongue. It comfort the afflicted, it heals the
sick, it cheareth the poor, it rules the rich, it wins the subject, it
appeaseth the King, and whatsoever it will have, it gets in the end,
neither anger nor strength can resist the force of it. Mark therefore well the
blessing of Nepthali here in this place, and know it to be a blessing being
used well, that he shall be a Hind let go, giving goodly words.

11 Joseph shall be a fruitful bough, Verse 22.23.24.25.26.
even a fruitful bough by the well side, the small boughs shall run upon
the wall, etc. Joseph.
Great and comfortable is the blessing of Joseph in many verses, which being
sufficiently lightened with the marginall notes in the Bible, I refer you to
them and pray you to mark them. Benjamin is the last, and of him says his
father, He shall rauine as a Woolfe, Benjamin.
in the morning he shall devour the pray, and at night he shall divide the
spoil. Meaning that of him should come a seed which should be given to
spoil and to live thereby. So goes not this blessing by affection and favor,
but Jacob by the spirit speaks what he must, be he never so dear. So
were these twelve Tribes blessed of their father with several blessings,
Whereof if some seem hard blessings unto us* we must remember, that forasmuch
as they hindered nothing the covenant, but notwithstanding them, they were all
Patriarchs, even them that were sharpliest spoken unto, as Ruben, Simeon, and
Leui, Crosses be blessings.
etc. Therefore in deed and truth they were blessed, as daily yet it may be
said, that forasmuch as the crosses, punishments, and afflictions of Gods
children be so far from hindering their felicity in heaven, as that usually
they be helps and furtherances thereunto, therefore even in the midst of
them and in the thickest of them, they may be said to be blessed, yea with them
and for them, I mean for that God thus vouchsafes to chasten them in the
world, to the end they may not be condemned with the world. Blood-letting
making for health is not an evil, but a good, and so worldly crosses leading to
God change their nature, and become no curses but blessings to the godly. What
a faith had Jacob here so far to see, and so cheerfully to hope? Let it teach
us to see and expect with comfort what God has promised and will truly perform.

Verse 29.
12 The blessing thus ended, the second part of the Chapter follows, 30.
concerning the death of Jacob which here was with great quietness, 31.
and in great comfort, cheerfully charging them what to do with him, 32.
and so taking his leave. Let it teach us the blessing of a stayed heart to the
last end, 33.
with good memory and good comfort to prescribe unto all what is our will,
Jacob ^yeth a quiet death.
and so to bid the world without fear, farewell. Let it teach us the duty of
all the children of a man to be this, Notes.
jointly to care for the honest burial of their parents, since here they are
charged al together to see this done, and not some one or two of them. Let us
learn that faith makes death no worse then a gathering of us to our fathers,
though frail flesh often startle at it. And finally be sure that, h^ appoin^teth
not his burial in ye land of Canaan, Popish conceits of places to ^ury in.
for any holiness of ground, or superstitious conceypt, of one place to be
better then an other of it self, as blind Popery does make a difference of
the Church from the churchyard, and of places in either of them before others,
as nearer the cross and nearer the altar, but only for the promise sake, as
has been said before, that his faith might appear how so constantly he
believed God, that that land should be given in time to his seed* as that dead
he would take possession of it with his fathers, and thereby encourage his
posterity unto like hope, patiently passing on toward the time, as became
their knowledge. Jacob then dies a sweet death: he plucked up his feet
having thus spoken and gave up the Ghost. Many were his crosses whilst he
lived as you well know, yet thus he ends and ends them Our time must come
and who knows how soon. The God of might and mercy, be unto us in that hour
as here to Jacob, that end we may and yet never end, die, and yet not dy^ng
live with him for ever in his kingdom, Amen.

Chap. 50.
The chief heads of this Chapter may be these. The honor done unto Jacob
before his burial. The honor done at his burial. Joseph's sweet placabilitie
toward his brethren. Joseph's death.


THen Joseph fell upon his fathers face and wept upon him and kissed him. Verse
1.
Love to the dead.
Where we see the force of love loatheth not his dead face, his pale lips, his
earthly hue at all, but breaks and bursteth through all impedimentes, and
shows it self by true tokens. So love where it was would never be hidden,
and as yet it continues the same nature.

2 The embalming of Jacob and others in those days, shows us the lawful use
of this honor then. Embalming.
It was unto them in those days, some sign of future incorruption, their
faith being then usually hel^^d with outward Symballes. To us at this day it
has no such need (though it may be lawful in other respects) since the
resurrection of our Savior and head, Phil. 3.21.
gives full assurance he shall likewise change our vile body, Philip.
3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

3 Forty days were accomplished, etc. The days differed as people and places
differed. Verse 3.
The Jews here mourned forty days in this sort. Days of mourning.
The Egyptians seventy, others nine, and some one way, some an other. A time
set we cannot appoint, but ever remember that our grief be moderate, and
without hypocrisy.

4 When Joseph asked leave to go bury his father. Pharoh most willingly
consented unto it and said, Go up and bury thy father, Verse 6.
as he made thee swear. Thereby giving again very great testimony of his
Princely favor toward his good servant, and even therein also showing some
religion, that he would not have a lawful oath broken, to the just reproof of
those now that have not so much in them. But me think I hear you object
against this, the example of our Savior in the Gospel: who said to his
Disciple seeking leave to go first and bury his father: Objection
follow me, and let the dead bury their dead. Mat. 8.21.
the preaching of the Gospel, a work of weight and also of speed.

5 There went with Joseph to the burial, all the servants of Pharaoh, both the
Elders of his house, and all the Elders of the land of Egypt. These for
honor. Likewise all the house of Joseph and his brethren and his fathers
house. These for nature and aliance. Lastly Charets and Horsemen not a few,
and these for security. So the company in all was exceeding great. And as
their company so was their mourning also passing great, so that both the
inhabitants of the land wondered at it, and the place received a name thereof,
the lamention of the Egyptians. So his sons did unto him according as he had
commanded them. Verse 12.
Which right well may admonish us ever to be faithful in dead men's wills when
they are honest and lawful. A virtue surely worth very much, yet not so
honored as it deserves, which woorketh to some both shame and sin.

6 When Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said it may be
that Joseph will hate us, etc. Verse 15.
Where see the sting and the continual ^yting of an evil conscience: what they
had deserved now they fear, and a guilty mind wants ever rest. See it also
how parents lives keep many things straight that either go awry or are feared,
as likely when they be gone. Esau will hold while his father lives, but when
once he is gone, have at Jacob his brother for a revenge. Small cause there is
then why children so egerly should wish their ends, since their life keeps
out much contention and evil. Their message to Joseph was but feined, and so
appeared since easily it might be thought, that if Jacob had feared any such
thing, he would have carefully spoken of it to Joseph himself in his life
time. But let us learn by it, that an untruth will be peering out one way or
other to shame us if we use it, and therefore take heed. The argument they use
to move him to mercy would be observed, to wit, because they were servants of
his fathers God. Verse 17.
It is all one as if they should have said, they which have one God should be
joined in most sure love together. To the great confusion of them that so
proudly, so maliciously and so contentiously disturb the peace and most holy
unity that otherwise would be, and of right ought to be amongst brethren,
brethren I say of one God, one faith, and one baptism, etc, They likewise came
unto him and fell down before him, confessing themselves his servants and at
his direction.

7 Then Joseph wept when they spoke unto him, Verse 17 18.19.2^*
and said unto them, fear not, for am not I under God? When ye thought evil
against me, God disposed it to good, that he might bring to pass as it is this
day and save much people alive, etc. See the tenderness of a godly heart, Joseph
could not forbear tears when he saw the fears of his brethren falling thus
down before him, but even with water upon his cheeks he most kindly speaks
to them, comfort them, and bids them not fear. Yea he makes arguments
unto them, and by proofs will have their hearts assured that they need not
doubt. Am not I under God says he: that is, do not I fear God and therefore
cannot deal hardly with you being my brethren, or am not I under God, that
is, can I or may I go about to revenge that which God remitteth and forgiueth
being under him, but by the success of things, it appears that God has
forgiven you, therefore far be it from me to control the doings of his
majesty. O that I were able with word or wish, with speech or prayer, to
effect in some the sequeale of this argument, we know how many times offenses
grow amongst us, and how many times some being sorry for their faults, seek to
satisfy them whom they have grieved, with an unfeigned heart. But it will not be
taken, Revenge, revenge cries the spirit of venom, and leave him not whilst
he is worth a groat. Would that man now behold here Joseph, might he not
learn, that if he fear God he must forgive, yea he will forgive? Or if you
take it in the other sense, that in revenging that which God forgiueth. he
professes openly that he takes not himself to be under God. Now what a man
is sorry for and willing to make amends for, God forgiueth, if therefore man
will not, that man proudly exalts himself above God, in controwling his
doings, and in punishing that which he remitteth: which if it be horrible in
dust and ashes, then let that person know that the Lord will awake though he
seem to sleep, and beat that bitter stomach even with iron rods, till he
have taught it to stoop to both him and his. O look we therefore upon Joseph
ever, and when sight of misdooing moves the grieved neighbor or friend to say
forgive, then answer with Joseph in holy words, Am not I under God? That is,
my brother, my friend, I see by this sorrow that God has forgiven, and if I
should keep, I should make my self above and not under God, which far be
from me. Therefore fear not, I forgive and forget, and all is well. The very
bones of Iosephes brethren rejoiced at his clemencye and kind nature, no doubt
blessed him, and blessed God for him, and so for you if you do the like. Am
not I under God? O speech of a gracious heart, I cannot make an end to think
of it. But I must be ruled. Let me remember you therefore of his second
argument. Why says he should I be angry with you, since what you did evil
the Lord has turned to good, and to the saving of many lives. No no. I will
look upon him and not upon you, and his mercy shall blotte out your offense.
Therefore whilst that is in mine eye which I trust shall never from eye,
whilst I have an eye, fear not I may not, I cannot I will not hurt you. Verse
21.
No I will nourish you and your children. And this shall be an argument unto you
without all doubt, that I am your brother still in all love and nature of a
kind brother. Thus did he cheer them and even make them to live, who were
like dead men before him for fear. This last argument is worthy marking,
namely, that by his deeds of love to them, he would show that he had
forgiven them. Should our forgiveness be measured by this rule, would it show
well? God knows all, and the world sees this, that the tongue saying we
have forgiven, yet our hand ho^^eth in the least courtesy which may pass from
us. This was not Joseph's forgiveness, but in token that all was faithful, I will
nourish you and your children says he, that is, I will do you all the good
that I can. Sweet Joseph then sweet are thy words, and sweet are thy deeds,
true is thy love and thy favor faithful, Love we must, not in lips or in
tongue only, but in deed and in truth.
therefore tokens follow it, as the heat the fire, live thou in this to our
example ever, and thy honor for such arguments be never forgotten.

8 So Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his fathers house, Ioh 3.18.
and Joseph lived an hundredth and ten years. Verse 22
The Lord being merciful to his people, Good Magistrates in mercy, continued
long.
continued the life of a good Magistrate long unto them. The like mercy is with
him still to preserve unto us our comfort and our head governor, his faithful
servant our gracious Sovereign, if we entreat him by fervent prayer, framing
our lives to his lyking more and more, and thanking him truly for so great a
good. If not, as mercy keeps, so so justice takes, that the cries may ring
when it is too late.

9 Joseph saw Ephraims children, even unto the third generation, which was a
great blessing, also Manasses childrens children. So deals God with his
chosen when he will, and he will when to them it may be good. Be it therefore
with us as he pleases, and that is best for us. If we live yet he must
bless, and if we dye, yet neither he nor that power in him dies to be
favorable to our seed, and to bless them in mercy when we are gone. His
promise also is past already, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after
thee: and what would we more, if our consciences tell us we are in this covenant.

Lastly, Joseph dies also, and takes an oath of his brethren, to remove his
bones when God should visit them by delivering them out of Egypt, to carry
them to the land of promise. Where in his faith as his fathers before him did
appear, as the Apostle witnesses to the Hebrews. Their faithfulness in so
doing, when they removed we see in Exodus. Thus ended Joseph the renowned
servant of God, the faithful servant of his Lord and master, and the nourcing
father of all his kindred, with him ends this book, and with it my labor,
which to the Lord of mercy I most humbly now commend, that it may find a
blessing with him, to the glory of his name, to the comfort of his people, and
to the moving of others: whose leisure is greater, and whose gifts be better to
consider what wants to a multitude in this land, and to relieve them
according to their reaches. Praying thee also good Christian reader, to whom
there may be any use of this my poor labor to go forward with thy holy
exercise of reading the scriptures, to take thy bible into thy hands anew, and
ever when thou have read a Chapter, to read these notes over upon the same, and
to confer them with the text. And if thus both thy feeling and comfort
increase, to bless God the author of all mercies, and namely of this, and to
pray for him truly who loves thee heartily, and shall so continue.

FINIS.
Corrections.
Folio 6. line 5. read would. fol. 37. b. line 9. his. fol 47. b. line 20. f.
all. fol. ^0. b. line 5. is. fol. 67. line 1. asked for Sarah saying, where is
^o^d. note line 3. these. fol. 69. line 33. the religion, ibi. and line. fol.
121. b. lin. 4. dealings. fol. 122. line. 34. similitude.


