A spiritual consolation, written by John Fyssher Bishop of Rochester, to
his sister Elizabeth, at such time as he was prisoner in the Tower of London.
Uery necessary, and commodious for all those that mind to lead a virtuous
life: Also to admonish them, to be at all times prepared to dye, and seems
to be spoken in the person of one that was suddenly prevented by death.

2. Corinthians. vj. Behold now is the acceptable time* now is the day of
salvation.

Matthew. xxiiij. VVatch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does
come.

A spiritual consolacyon written by John Fyssher Bishop of Rochester, to his
sister Elizabeth.
SIster Elizabeth, nothing does more help effectuallye to get a good and a
virtuous life. Then if a soul when it is dull and unlusty without devotion,
neither disposed to prayer, nor to any other good work, may be sturred or
quickened again by fruiteful meditacion. I have therefore devised unto you this
meditation that follows. Praying you for my sake and for the weal of your
own soul, to read it at such times as you shall feel your self most
heavy and slothful to do any good work. It is a manner of lamentacion and
sorrowful complaynyng made in the person of one that was hastily prevented by
death, (as I assure you every creature may be) none other surety we have,
living in this world here. But if you will have any profit by reading of it,
three things you must do in any wise. First when you shall read this
meditation, devise in your mind as nigh as you can, all the conditions of a
man or woman sodaynlye taken and rauyshed by death: and thynke^ with your self
that ye were in the same condition so hastily taken, and that incontinent you
must needs dye, and your soul depart hence, and leave your mortal body,
never to return again for to make any amends, or to do any release to your
soul after this hour.

Seconly, that ye never read this meditation but alone by your self in
secret manner, where you may be most attentyue thereunto. And when ye have the
best leisure without any let of other thoughts or buzinesse. For if you
otherwise behave your self in the reading of it, it shall anon lose the virtue
and quickness in stirring and moving of your soul when you would ratherest
have it sturred.

Thirdly, that when you intend to read it, you must before lift up your mind
to almighty God, and beseech him that by the help and succor of his grace
the readyng thereof may fruitfully work in your soul a good and virtuous
life, according to his pleasure and say, Deus in adiutorium meum intend,
Domine adiuvandum me festina. Gloria patri. etc. Laus tibi domine rex eternae
glory. Amen.

Alas, alas, I am unworthily taken, all suddenly death has assailed me, the
pains of his stroke be so sore and grievous that I may not long endure the^,
my last home I perceive well is come. I must now leave this mortal body, I
must now depart hence out of this world never to return again into it. But
whether I shall go, or where I shall become, or what lodgyng I shall have this
night, or in what company I shall fall, or in what country I shall be received,
or in what manner I shall be entreated, God knows for I know not. What if I
shall be dampened in the perpetual pryso^ of hell, where be pains endelesse
and without number. Grievous it shall be to them that be dampened for ever, for
they shall be as men in most extreme pains of death, ever wishing and
desiryng death, and yet never shall they dye. It should be now unto me much
weary, one year continually to lie upon a bed were it never so soft, how
weary then shall it be to lie in the most painful fire so many thousand of
years without number? And to be in that most horrible company of diuils most
terrible to behold, full of malice and cruelty. O wretched and miserable
creature yt I am, I might so have lived and so ordered my life by the help and
grace of my Lord Christ Jesus, yt this hour might have been unto me much
joyous and greatly desired. Many blessed and holy Sayncts were full joyous and
desirous of this hour, for they knew well that by death their souls should be
translated into a new life: To the life of all joy and endless pleasure, from
ye streightes and bondage of this corruptible body, into a very liberty and
true freedom mong the company of heaven, from the miseries and greeua^ces of
this wretched world, to be above with God in comfort inestimable yt can not be
spoken ne thought. They were assured of ye promises of almighty god which had
so promised to all them that be his faithful servants. And sure I am that
if I had truly and faithfully served him unto this hour, my soul had been
partner of these promises. But unhappy and ungracious creature that I am, I
have been negligent in his service, and therefore now my heart does waste in
sorrows seeing ye nighnesse of death, and considering my great sloth and
negligence. I thought full little thus suddenly to have been trapped: But
(alas) now death has prevented me, and has unwarily attached me, and
suddenly oppressed me with his mighty power, so that I know not whither I may
turn me for succor, nor where I may seek now for help, ne what thing I may
do to get any remedy: If I might have leisure and space to repent me and
amend my life, not compelled with this sudden stroke but of my own free
will and liberty, and partly for the love of God, putting aside all sloth and
negligence. I might then safely dye without any dread, I might then be glad to
depart hence and leave my manifold miseries and encombrau^ces of this world.
But how may I think that my repentance or mine amendment comes now of mine
own free will, since I was before this stroke so cold and dull in the service
of my Lord God. Or how may I think that I do this more rather for his love,
then for fear of his punyshement, when if I had truly loved him, I should
more quickly and more diligently have served him heretofore? Me seems now
that I cast away my sloth and negligence compelled by force. Even as a
Merchaunt that is compelled by a great tempest in the sea to cast his
merchandice out of the Ship, it is not to be supposed that he would cast
away his riches of his own free will, not compelled by the storm? And even so
likewise do I if this tempeste of death were not now raised upon me, it is
full like that I would not have cast from me my sloth and negligence. O would
to God that I might now have some farther respet, and some longer time to
amend my self of my free will and liberty. O if I might entreat death to spare
me for a season, but that will not be, death in no wise will be entreated,
delay he will none take, respet he will none give, if I would give him all the
riches of this world, no if all my lovers and friends would fall upon their
knees and pray him for me. No if I and they would weep (if it were so
possible) as many tears as there be in the seas drops of water, no piety
may restrain him. (Alas) when opportunity of time was, I would not use it
well, which if I had done, it would now be unto me more precious then all
the treasures of a Realm. For then my soul as now should have been clothed
with good works innumerable, the which should make me not to be ashamed when I
should come to the presence of my Lord God, where now I shall appear laden
with sin myserably, to my confusion and shame. But (alas) to negligently have
I let pass from me my time not regardyng how precious it was, ne yet how
much spiritual riches I might have gotten therein, if I would have put my
diligence and study thereunto. For assuredly no deed that is be it never so
little, but it shall be rewarded of almighty God. One draught of water given
for the love of God, shall not be unrewarded: And what is more easy to be given
the^ water. But not only deeds, but also the least words and thoughts shall
be in likewise. O how many good thoughts, deeds, and works might one think,
speak, and do, in one day? But how many more in one whole year. O (alas) my
great negligence, O (alas) my foul blindness, O (alas) my sinful madness
that knew this well, and would not put it in effectual execution. O if now all
ye people of this world were present here to see and know the perilous
condition that I am in, and how I am prevented by the stroke of death, I
would exhort to take me as an example to them all, and while they have leisure
and time to order their lives and cast from them sloth and idleness, and to
repent them of their misbehauior toward God, and to bewail their offenses,
to multiplye good works, and to let no time pass by them unfruitfully. For if
it shall please my Lord God that I might any longer live, I would otherwise
exercise my self then I have done before. Now I wish that I may have time and
space, but rightuously I am denied. For when I might have had it I would not
well use it: And therefore now when I would well use it, I shall not have it. O
ye therefore that have and may use this precious time in your liberty, employ
it well, and be not to wastfull thereof, least peradventure when you would have
it, it shall be denied you likewise, as now it is to me. But now I repent me
full sore of my great negligence, and right much I sorrow that so little I
regarded the wealth and profit of my soul, but rather took heed to the vain
comfortes and pleasures of my wretched body. O corruptible body, O stinking
carrion, O rotten earth to whom I have served, whose appetites I have followed,
whose desire I have procured, now do thou appear what thou art in thy own
likeness. That brightness of thy eyes, that quickness in hearing, that
lyuelinesse in thy other senses by natural warmenesse, thy swiftness and
nimblenesse, thy fayrenesse and beauty. All these thou have not of thy self,
they were but lent unto thee for a season, even as a wall of earth that is
fair painted without for a season with fresh and goodly colors, and also
gylted with gold, it appears goodly for the time to such as consider no
deeper then the outward craft thereof. But when at the last the color
fails, and the gilting falls away, then appears it in his own likeness.
For then the earth plainly shows it self. In likewise my wretched body for
the time of youth it appears fresh and lusty, and I was deceived with the
outward beauty thereof, little considering what naughtiness was covered
underneath: but now it shows it self. Now my wretched body, thy beauty is
faded, thy fayrenesse is gonne, thy lust, thy strength, thy lyuelinesse all is
gonne, all is failed: Now art thou then returned to thine own earthly
coolour: Now art thou black, cold, and heavy, like a lump of earth: Thy
sight is darkened, thy hearing is dulled, thy tongue flaltereth in thy mouth,
and corruption issues out of every part of thee: Corruption was thy beginning
in the womb of thy mother, and corruption is thy continuance. All thing that
ever thou receyuest, were it never so precious, thou turnest into corruption,
and naught came from thee at any time but corruption, and now to corruption thy
self returnest: altogyther right vile and lothly art you become, where in
appara^ce before you wast goodly, but ye good lines was nothing else but as a
painti^g or a gilting upon an earthe^ wall, under it was covered with stinking
and filthy matter. But I looked not so deep, I contented my self with the
outward painting, and in yt I took great pleasure: For all my study and care
was about thee, either to apparel thee with some clothes of diverse colors,
either to satisfy thy desire in pleasant sightes, in delectable hearinges, in
goodlye smelles, in sundry manner of tastings and touchings, either else to get
thee ease and rest as well in sleep as otherwise. And provided therefore
pleasant and delectable lodgings, and to eschew tediousness in all these, not
only lodgings but also in apparel, meats and drinks procured many and
diverse chaunges, that when thou wast weary of one, then might thou co^te^t
thy self with some other. O (alas) this was my vain and naughty study
whereunto my wit was ready applied, in those things I spent the most part of my
days. And yet was I never content long, but murmuring or grudging every hour
for one thing or other. And what am I now ye better for all this? what reward
may I look for of all my long service? Or what great benifites shall I receive
for all my great study, care, and diligence? Nothing better am I but much the
worse, much corruption and filth my soul thereby has gathered, so that now it
is made full horrible and lothely to behold. Reward get I none other then
punishment, either in Hell everlasting, or at the least in Purgatory, if I may
so easily escape. The benifites of my labor are the great cares and sorrows
which I now am wrapped in: May not I think my wit to have been well occupied in
this lewd and unfruitful buzinesse? have not I well bestowed my labor about
this service of my wretched body? has not my time been well imploy^^ (...)
miserable studies, whereof now no comfort remains, but only sorrow and
repentance. (Alas) I heard full often that such as should be dampened, should
greeuouslye repent them selves, and take more displeasure of their misbehauior
then ever they had pleasure before. And yet that repentance then should stand
them in no steed, where a full little repentance taken in time might have
eased them of all their pains. This I heard and read full often, but full
little heed or regard I gave thereunto, I well perceived it in my self, but
all to late I dread me. I would that now by the example of me all other might
beware, and avoyde by the gracious help of God these dangers that I now am
in, and prepare them selves against the hour of death better the^ I have
prepared me. (Alas) what avails me now any delicacie of meats and drinks
which my wretched body insaciabl^ did devour? What avails my vanity or
pride that I had in my self either of apparel or of any other thing (...) unto
me? what avails (...) and unclean delights and lusts of the stinking
flesh, wherein was appearance of much pleasure, but in very deed none other
then the Sow has, waultering her self in ye myerie puddle. Now these
pleasures be gone my body is nothing better, my soul is much the worse, and
nothing remains but sorrow and displeasure and yt a thousand fold more the^
ever I had any pleasure before. O lewd body and naughty which have brought
me to this utter discomfort, O dyrtie corruption, O sachell full of dunge, now
must I go to make answer for thy lewdenesse, thy lewdenesse I say for it all
comes of thee. My soul had nothing need of such things as was thy desire,
what need my soul that is immortal, either cloathyng or meat or drink? what
need it any corruptible gold or silver? what need it any houses or beds, or
any other things yt appertains to these. For thee O corruptible body which
like a rotten wall daily needs reprati^ns and botching up with meat and
drink, and defense of cloathyng against cold and heat was all this study
and diligence taken, and yet now will thou forsake me at my most need, when
account and reckoning of all our misdeedes must be given before the throne of
the Judge most terrible. Now thou will refuse me and leave me to the ieoperdie
of all this matter. O (alas) many years of deliberation suffice not before so
great a Judge to make answer which shall examyne me of every idle word that
ever passed my mouth. O then how many idle words, how many evil thoughts,
how many deeds have I to make answer for, and such as we set but at light,
full greatly shall be weyed in the presence of his most high majesty. O
(alas) what may I do to get some help at this most dangerous hour? Where may
I seek for succor? Where may I resort for any comfort? My body forsakes
me, my pleasures be vanyshed away as the smoke, my goods will not go with me.
All these worldly things I must leave behind me: if any comfort shall be,
either it must be in the prayers of my friends, or in mine own good deeds
that I have done before. But as for my good deeds that should be auayleable
in the sight of God: (alas) they be few or none that I can think to be
auayleable, they must be done pryncipallye and purely for his love. But my
deeds when of their kind they were good, yet did I linger them by my folly.
For either I did them for the pleasure of men, or to avoid the shame of the
world, or else for my own affection, or else for dread of punishment. So that
seldom I did any good deed in that purity and streaightnesse that it ought of
right to have been done. And my misdeedes, my lewd deeds that be shameful
and abominable be without number, not one day of all my life, no not one hour
I trow was so truly expended to the pleasure of God, but many deeds, words,
and thoughts, miscaped me in my life. (Alas) little trust then may I have
upon my deeds. And as for the prayers of my friends such as I shall leave
behind me, of them many peradventure be in the same need that I am in. So
that where their own prayers might profytte them selves, they can not so
profitte an other. And many of them will be full neglygente, and some
forgetful of me. And no marvel, for who should have been more friendly
unto me then mine own self. Therefore I that was most bounden to have done
for my self, forget my own weal in my life time, no marvel therefore if
other do forget me after my departing hence. Other friends there be by whose
prayers souls may be helped, as by the blessed and holy saints above in
heaven, which verily will be myndfulll of such as in earth here have devoutly
honored them before. But (alas) I had special devotion but to a few, and yet
them I have so faintly honored, and to them so coldly sued for favor, that I
am ashamed to ask aid or help of them. At this time in deed, I had more
effectually meant to have honored them, and more diligently to have commended my
wretched soul unto their prayers, and so to have made them my special
friends: but now death has prevented me so, that no other hope remains but
only in the mercy of my Lord God, to whose mercy I do now offer my self,
beseeching him not to look upon my deserts, but upon his infinite goodness
and abundaunt piety. (Alas) my duty had been much better to have remembered
this terrible hour, I should have had this danger ever before my eyes, I
should have provided therefore, so that now I might have been in a more
readynesse against the coming of death, which I knew assuredly would come at
the last, albeit I knew not when, where, or by what manner, but well I knew
every hour and moment, was to him indifferent, and in his liberty. And yet my
madness ever to be sorowed. Notwithstanding this uncertainty of his coming,
and the uncertainty of the time thereof, I made no certain nor sure provision
against this hour. Full often I took great study and care to provide for
little dangers, only because I thought they might hap, and yet happed they
never a deal. And but tryfles they were in comparion of this, how much rather
should I have taken study and care for this so great a danger which I knew well
must necessarily fall unto me once. For this can not be eschued in no wise,
and upon this I ought to have made good provision: For in this hangs all our
wealth, for if a man dye well, he shall after his death nothing want yt he
would desire, but his appetite shall be saciate in every point at the full.
And if he dye amiss, no prouysion shall avail him that ever he made before.
This provision therefore is most effectually to be studied, since this alone
may profit without other, and without this none can avail. O ye that have
time and space to make your provision against the hour of death, defarre not
from day to day like as I have done. For I often did think and purpose with my
self that at some leisure I would have provided, nevertheless for every
tryfelous buzinesse I put it aside, and delayed this prouysion always to an
other time, and promised with my self that at such a time I would not fail
but do it, but when that came an other buzinesse arose, and so I deferred it
again unto an other time. And so (alas) from time to time, that now death in
the mean time has prevented me, my purpose was good, but it lacked execution:
My will was strayghte, but it was not effectual, my mind well intended, but
no fruit came thereof. All for because I delayed so often and never put it in
effect, that, that I had purposed. And therefore delay it not as I have done,
but before all other buzinesse put this first in suertie, which ought to be
chieefe and princypall buzinesse. Neither buildyng of Colleges, nor making of
Sermons, nor giving of alms, neither yet any other manner of buzynesse shall
help you without this.

Therefore first and before all things prepare for this, delay not in any
wise, for if you do, you shall be deceived as I am now. I read of many, I
have heard of many, I have known many that were disappoynted as I am now.
And ever I thought and said, and intended, that I would make sure and not be
deceived by the sodayn coming of death. Yet nevertheless I am now deceived,
and am taken sleeping, unprepared, and that when I least weened of his coming,
and even when I reckoned my self to be in most health, and when I was most
buzie, and in the midst of my matters. Therefore delay not you any farther,
nor put your trust over much in your friends: Trust your self while ye have
space and liberty, and do for your self now while you may. I would advise you
to do that thing that I by the grace of my Lord God would put in execution if
his pleasure were to send me longer life. Recounte your self as dead, and
think that your souls were in prison of Purgatory, and that there they must
abide till that the Raunsom for them be truly paid, either by long sufferance
of pain there, or else by suffrages done here in earth by some of your
special friends. Be y^u your own friend, do you these suffrages for your
own soul, whether they be prayers or alms deeds, or any other penitential
paynefulnesse. If you will not effectually and heartily do these things for
your own soul, look you never that other will do them for you, and in dooyng
them in your own persons, they shall be more auayleable to you a thousand fold
then if they were done by any other: If you follow this counsel and do
thereafter, you be gracious and blessed, and if you do not, you shall
doubtless repent your follyes, but to late.

The ways to perfcet Religion made by John Fyssher, Bishop of Rochester, being
Prisoner in the Tower of London.
SIster Elizabeth gladlye I would write unto you some thing that might be to
the health of your soul and furtheraunce of it in holy Relygion. But well I
know that without some feruor in the love of Christ, Relygion can not be to
you sauerie, nor any work of goodness can be delectable, but every
virtuous deed shall seem laboryous and paynefull. For love makes every
work appear easy and pleasant, though it be right displeasaunt of if
self. And contrariwyse right easy labor appears grievous and paynefull,
when the soul of the person that does the deed, has no desire ne love in
doing of it. This thing may well appear by the life of hunters, ye which out of
doubt is more laborious and painful then is the life of relygious persons, and
yet nothing sustayneth them in their labor and pains, but the earnest love
and hearty desire to find their game. Regard no less my writing, good sister,
though to my purpose I use the example of hunters, for all true christian
souls be called Hunters, and their office and duty is to seek and hunt for
to find Christ Jesus. And therefore scripture in many places exhorts us to
seek after him, and assures that he will be found of them that dyligently
seek after him. Inuenietur ab hijs qui querunt eum. That is to say, he will be
found of them that seek him, well happy are all those that can find him, or
can have any sent of him in this life here. For that sent (as Saint Paul
says) is the sent of the very life. And the devout souls where they feel
this sent, they run after him a pace. Curremus in odorem vnguentorum tuoru^.
That is to say, we shall run after the sent of thy sweet oyntmentes. Seeing
then all devout souls may be called Hunters, I will farther prosecute ye
comparyso^ made before between the life of ye Hunters and the life of the
relygious persons after this manner.

A comparison betvveene the life of Hunters, and the life of religious persons.
WHat life is more paynefull and laborious of it self then is the life of
Hunters which most early in the morning break their sleep and rise when other
do take their rest and ease, and in his labor he may use no plain high ways
and the soft grass, but he must tread upon the fallowes, run over the
hedges, and creep through the thick bushes, and cry all the long day upon
his dogs, and so continue without meat or drink until ye very night drive
him home, these labors be unto him pleasant and joyous, for the desire and
love that he has to see the poor Hare chased with dogs. Uerely, verily, if
he were compelled to take upon him such labors, and not for this cause he
would soon be weary of the^, thinking them full tedious unto him: neither
would he rise out of his bed so soon, ne fast so long, ne endure these other
labors unless he had a very love therein For the earnest desire of his mind
is so fixed upon his game, that all these payns be thought to him but very
pleasures* And therefore I may well say that love is the principal thing that
makes any work easy, though the work be right painful of it self, and
that without love no labor can be comfortable to ye dooer. The love of this
game deliteth him so much that he cares for no worldly honor, but is
content with full simple and homely array. Also the goods of the world he
seeks not for, nor studieth how to attain them. For the love and desire of
his game so greatly occupyeth his mind and heart. The pleasures also of his
flesh he forgets by weariness and wasting of his body in earnest labor.
All his mind, all his soul, is buzied to know where the poor Hare may be
found. Of that is his thought, and of that is his communication, and all his
delight is to hear and speak of that matter, every other matter but this, is
tedious for him to give ear unto, in all other things he is dull and unlusty,
in this only quick and sturryng, for this also to be done, there is no office
so humble, ne so vile, that he refuses not to serve his own dogs him self,
to bathe their feet, and to annoynte them where they be sore, yea and to
cleanse their stinkyng Cannell where they shall lie and rest them. Surely if
religious persons had so earnest a mind and desire to the service of Christ,
as have these Hunters to see a corse at a Hare, their life should be unto them
a very joy and pleasure. For what other be the pains of religion but these
yt I have spoken of. That is to say, much fasting, crying, and coming to ye
quire, forsakyng of worldly honors, worldly riches, and fleshly pleasures, and
communication of the world, humble service, and obedyence to his sovereign,
and charytable dealyng to his sister, which payns in every point, the Hunter
takes and sustayneth more largely for the love that he has to his game, then
does many religious persons for the love of Christ. For albeit, the relygious
person ryseth at mydnight, which is painful to her in very deed, yet she
went before that to her bed at a conuenyent hour, and also comes after to
her bed again. But the Hunter ryseth early, and so continues forth all the
long day, no more returning to his bed until the very night, and yet
peradventure he was late up the night before, and full often up all the long
nights. And though the religious woman fall until it be noone, the which must
be to her paynfull, the Hu^ter yet takes more pain which fasteth until the
very night, forgetting both meat and drink for the pleasure of his game. The
religious woman sings all ye forenoone in the quier, and yt also is laborious
unto her, but yet ye hunter sings not, but he cries, halloweth, and shooteh
all the long day, and has more greater pains. The religious woman takes much
labor in coming to the quyer and sitting there so long a season, but yet no
doubt of it more labor takes the Hunter in running over the fallow and
leaping over ye hedges, and creeping through the bushes then that can be. And
would to God yt in other things that is to say, touching worldly honors,
worldly riches, worldly pleasures, would to God that the relygious persons many
of them might profit as much in myndfulnesse in seeking of Christ, as the
Hunter does in seeking of his game, and yet all their comfort were to common
and speak of Christ, as the Hunters has all their joy to speak of the poor
Hare, and of their huntyng. And furthermore, would to God ye religious persons
would content them selves with the humble service done to their sovereign, and
with charitable behavior unto their sisters, and with as good a heart and
mind as the Hunters acquit the^ to serve their heu^ds. I wisse it is a thing
much more reasonable to love and serve reasonable creatures made to the Image
of almighty God, rather then to love and serve dogs which be unreasonable
creatures. And rather our duty were to speak of Christ, and of things
belonging to his honor, then of the vain worldly matters which be but very
trifles in deed. And also with more attentyue mind we should seek after our
savior Christ Jesus, to know our very comfort in him, wherein rests the
great merit of our souls. Then the Hunters should seek after the Hare, which
when they have gotten, they have no great gains thereby. But as I said the
cause why that so many religious persons so diligently pursue not the ways of
religion as do the hunters, is the want of ye observation of their game which
is nothing else but the lack of love. For verily as I think the earnest love
and hearty desire of game makes all labors and pains pleasant and joyous
unto the Hunter. And if there were in religious persons as great favor and
love to the service of God, as be in Hunters to their game all their life
should be a very Paradise and heavenly joy in this world. And contrariwise
without this feruor of love it can not be but painful, weary, and tedious to
them. My purpose therefore dear sister is to minister unto you some common
considerations which if you will often resort unto by due remembrance, and so
by diligent prayer call upon almighty God for his love, you shall now by his
grace attain it.

The first consideration.
THe first consideration may be this: First consider by your own mind and
reason, that almighty God of his own singular goodness and free will did
create you and make you of naught, whereunto he was not bound by any
necessity, nor drawn by any commodity that might rise upon him by your
creation. No other thing moved him but his very goodness and special favor
yt he bare unto you, long or ever he did make you. This good sister take for a
very truth and firmly believe it, for so it is in very deed innumerable
creatures more then ever were made or ever shall be made, he might have made
if it had been so pleasing unto him. For how many suppose you married men and
married weomen have been and shall be hereafter in this world, that never had
ne never shall have any children, yet they full gladly would have had, and by
possibility of nature might have had many, if it had so pleased almighty God
to have made and to have given unto them children. But all those be left
unmade, and amongst them he might have left you also unmade, and never have
put his hand to the making of you, if he had so would. Nevertheless as I
said it pleased his goodness herein to prefer you of his special favor yt he
bear unto you, leaving unmade other more innumerable, electing you, and
appointing you to be made refusing and setting apart all the^ which would
peradventure have considered his special grace and favor more lovingly the^
you hitherto have don. And would have studied more for his pleasure and service
then ever you did, and you occupy the room and place that some of them might
have occupied by like favor, as almighty God has showed unto you. Ah dear
sister how much should this one consideration move you to the earnest love of
this our so gracyous a Lord, that thus has appointed and chosen you to be
his creature, before so many other where he might have, taken any of them at
his pleasure, and repelled you, and left you as naught, without any manner of
being.

The second consideration.
THe second consideration is this, where there is many manner of beings, some
creatures have a goodly being, some have an ungoodly being. It is a more
goodly being Margarite of a precious stone, then of a peble stone, of the
fair bright gold, then of rustie iron, of a goodly Fesaund then of a venomous
Serpent, of a pretty Faune then of a foul Toade, of a reasonable soul, then
of an unreasonable beast. And it is not to be doubted but almighty God might
have given to any of them, what being so ever he would, and might have
transformed each of those into the nature and kind of any of the other at his
pleasure and will. For of the stones he might make men, as in the gospel our
savior does affirm, potens est deus de lapidibus istis suscitare filios
Abrahe. Almighty God is of power to make of these stones the children of
Abraham. And contrariwise he might of men have made stones as the wife of Loath
was turned into a salt stone. And in likewise me or you or any other man or
woman, he might have made a stone, or a Serpent, or a Toad, for his pleasure.
There is no creature so foul, so horrible, or so vngoodlie, but he might put
you in the same condition that the most loathly of them be put in, and them, in
contrariwise he might have put in the same condition that you be in. Consider
now by your reason, that if you had been made in the likeness of an Owl, or
of an Ape, or of a Toade, how deformed you should have been, and in how
wretched and miserable condition. And thank your Lord God yt has given you a
more excele^t nature, yea, such a nature as excels in nobleness, in
dignity, all other bodily natures: For it is made to the very likeness and
Image of almighty God: whereunto none other bodily creature does reach near.
Metalles ne stones be they never so precious, neither herbs nor Trees, neither
Fysshes, ne fowls, neither any manner of beast be they never so noble in their
kind, does attain to this high point of nobleness to have in them the
Image and likeness of almighty God, but only man. For as much the^ as our
lord God, might have given this excelent dignity to other innumerable
creatures, as to beasts, to Fowls, to fishes, to trees, to herbs, to
mettalles, to stones. And has not so done but before all those has elected
and chosen you to bear his Image and likeness, and to be endued with a
reasonable soul, how much should his loving dealing move you to enfore your
self with all ye strength and power of your heart and mind, to love him
therefore again.

The third consideration.
THe third consideration is this, that where notwithstanding this great and
excelent gift you nevertheless by the reason of original sin wherewith you
were born of your mother into this world, had lost the great inheritance above
in heaven, and purchased everlasting imprisonment in hell, he of his great and
singular goodness had provided you to be borne within the precinctes of
Christendeome, where you have been instructed in the doctrine of his faith, and
received the holy Sacrament of baptism, and have been made a christian woman,
whereby you did receive again your inherytaunce before lost, and have etcaped
yt most horrible danger of everlasting dampnation. How many suppose you in
all the world that be not instructed in this law and faith of Christ, ne
have not received the holy Sacrament of Baptism, both noble men and women,
both Knights and Princes, which have great wisdom and reason, and many such
as peradventure if they were taught it, would more readilye apply their
minds to Christ's faith then you do, and more heartily serve him, honor and
love him, the^ ever you did. And yet lo thus graciously has he provided for
you before all them, and has appointed you to be a Christian woman, and to be
partaker of all those graces and benifites that belong unto the christian
people, which be so many and so great, that it passes the wits of men, not
only to number, but also to think? And here good sister do deeply consider
in your soul, how much this loving preferment of our Lord God should stir
you to love him again, when he suffers so innumerable a multitude of men and
women to perish and to be lost for ever, amongst whom many do pass you in
all natural virtues, both of body and soul, and also would farfarther pass
you in profiting in the law of Christ, if they were received thereunto, and
yet I say he suffers them to perish everlastingly and perpetually to be
dampened to: And for your safegarde has provided of his singular goodness and
mercy toward you, for the which since it is not possible of your part to
recompense, why shall you not with all your power enforce your self to love
his most gracious goodness again, and after your possibility to give unto
him most humble thanks therefore.

The fourth Consideration.
THe fourth consideration is this, that where since that time of your
baptism and that you were made a christian woman, you have many times
unkindly faulne into deadly sin, and broken his laws and commaundeme^ts,
setting at naught all these benifites which he before had given to you
following your wretched pleasures, to the great dyspleasure and contempt of his
most high majesty. And yet he furthermore did not strike you, ne yet revenge
him self upon you rigoriously, punishing the transgressors and breakers of
his law, as he might and should by his righteousness have done. But
contrariwyse he did long spare you by his excele^t mercy, and mercifully he did
abide your return to him again by sorrowful repentance, and askyng of him
mercy for your abominable offenses. And where you so did with good hearty
mind at any time, he received you to his grace, and by the Sacrament of
pennaunce you were taken into his favor again, and so yet escape the horrible
pains of Hell due for your outrageous unkindness: No reason may judge the
contrary but yt you of good right have deserved them for your foul
presu^ption, in breaking of ye laws of your Lord God: and preferring your
wretched appetites before his pleasure, and following your own wilful desires
before his most high commandments. (Alas) what miserable condition should you
now have been in, if he so incontinent after your offenses had strike^ you by
death, and had sent you to ye horrible payns of hell, where you should not only
for a time have bidde^ but for ever, and without all remedy. No prayers of your
frinds, no alms deeds, ne such other good works should have releued you. Ah,
sister imprint deeply in your soul this inestimable mercy of your Lord God
showed unto you through his most gracious and merciful abidi^g for your return
to him by true repe^ta^ce and asking of his mercy. For inumerable souls of men
and weomen for less offenses then you have done, lie now in ye prison of hell,
and shall there co^tinu without end: which if they might have had as great
sufferance as you have had, and so long leisure to repent them, they would
have taken more sorrowful repentance then ever you took, and do now more
sorowfully repent them the^ ever you did, but yt as now ca^ not profit the^,
for yt sorrow and repe^ta^ce is now to late. But to my purpose, how may you
think yt this loving suffera^ce and gracious abidi^g of your ame^dme^t and
merciful accepting of your sorows and repe^ta^ce, for your great sins comes
not of a singular love showed unto you by your lord god, before all them. And
shall not this consideration pearce your heart, and move you much to love him
again.

The fifth consideration.
THe fifth consideration is this: Peradventure after that thus by your
repentance and askyng mercy, you were taken to this grace of your God, yet far
more grievously, and far more unkindly you fell again to sinnne, and kept
not ye purpose and promise that before you did make, but more without shame and
dread of his highness, took your liberty in your sinful ways, abusing his
gentleness, and presuming upon his mercy, not regarding any benifite or
kindness showed by his most excelent goodness unto you before, so defiling
your soul by innumerable ways, and making it filthy and more ungoodly then
is the Sow that waltereth her self in the foul myrie puddle, and more
pestilently stinketh in the sight of God, then is the stinking carrion of a dead
dog, being rotten and lying in a ditch, yet nevertheless for all these
misbehauiors, your Lord God of his far passing goodness has called you again
from your sinful life, and has graciously stirred your soul to forsake your
sin, and to leave this wretched world, and to enter the holy relygion. Whereby
after the sentence of holy doctors, your soul is made as clean as it was at
your baptism, and restored again to the purity and cleanenesse of your first
innocence: And not only that, but also he has appointed you to be of the
number of them, that be assigned for his best beloved spouses. And what high
point of singular favor is this? How many weomen far better then you, be
left behind in this world not called to this high dignity, nor admitted to
this most special grace? When the noble King Asuerus as it is written in the
scripture commanded many fair young maidens to be chosen out, and to be seen
unto with all things yt might make them fayr^ and beautiful and pleasant to
his sight, to the intent that they at all times when it should like him to
appoynte any of them to come to his presence and to be his spouse, they might
be ye more ready. This thing no doubt of it, was to them yt were thus chose^ a
comfort, that they were preferred before other, and also every one of them
might live in hope to come to ye kings presence, and have some likelihood to be
accepted for his spouse in so much yt all other but they were excluded. In like
manner it is with religious women. All they by the gracious calling of the great
king of heaven be gathered into Gods religion and disseuered from the other
seculer women that be of the world, there a season to abide, until they be
sufficiently prepared by the holy sacraments, and the holy obseruacions of
religion to come to his gracious highness presence, and to be brought into his
secret chamber above in heaven, there to abide with him in endless joy and
bliss. Blessed is that religious woman, that so does prepare her self for
this little time that here she shall tarry by prayer, by meditation by
contemplatio^ by tears of devocion, by hearty love and burning desire yt after
this transitory life she may be admitted to the most excellent honor and not
with shame and rebuke be repelled therfro, when ye day shall com.

The sixth consideration.
THe sixth consideration that you call well to your remembrance, who it is yt
does thus exhort you for to love, verily he is ye person that if either you
will freely give your love, or else sell your love, he is most worthy to have it
above all other. First if ye were of that mind to give your love free, it were
good yet there to bestow it, that you should choose such a one, as both in
goodlinesse of person, as also in prowess and wisdom and good gentil manners
may be worthy your love. For if there be any deformity in him who^ you would
love, it is an impediment and great let for to love him: But in our savior
Christ the son of God is no deformity, for he is all goodlye and
surmounteth all other in goodlynesse: And therefore of him the Prophet David
affyrmeth in this manner. Speciosus forma pre filijs hominum: that is to say, he
is goodly before the children of men. And of truth much goodly must he needs
be that has made so many goodly creatures. Behold the Rose, the Lilly, the
Uyolet, behold the Pecockes, the Feasaunt, the Popingaye: Behold all the other
creatures of this world: All these were of his making, all there beauty and
goodlinesse of him they received it. Wherefore this goodlinesse discribeth that
he him self must needs of necessity be very goodly and beautiful. And for
that in the book of Canticles the Spouse discribeth his goodlinesse saying:
Dilectus meus candidus et rubicu^dus, electus ex millibus. That is to say, he
that I love is white and read, chosen out amongst thousands. And this beauty
and goodlines is not mortal, it can not fade ne perish as does the goodlinesse
of other men, which like a flower to day is fresh and lusty, and to morrow
with a little sickness is withered and vanishes away. And yet it is sensible
to the goodlinesse of man's nature, for the which also he is more naturally to
be beloved of many. For likeness is the ground of love, like always does
covet like: and the nearer in likeness that any person be, the sooner they
may be knit together in love. The same lykenes he has and you have, like body
and like soul, touching his ma^hood, your soul is also like unto him in his
godhead: For after ye Image and similitude of it, your soul is made.
Furthermore of his might and power you may be likewise a certain season. He
made this world by the only commandment of his mouth, and gave to the herbs
and all other creatures their virtue, and might that they have. And may also by
his power save and dampne creatures either to lift them up in body and soul
into heaven above, or else to throw them down into ever during payns of hell.
If ye doubt of his wisdom behold all this world, and consider how every
creature is set with an other, and every of them by him self, how the heavens
are apparelled with stars, the air with Fowls, ye water with Fishes, ye
earth with herbs, trees and beasts, how the stars be clad with light, the
Fowls with feathers, ye fish with scales, the beasts with hear, herbs and
trees with leaves, and flower with sent, wherein does well appear a great and
merueilous wisdom of him yt made the^. Finally his good and gentil manner is all
full of pleasure and comfort so kind, so friendly, so liberal and
beneficious, so pittious and merciful, so ready in all oportunities, so
mindful and circumspect, so dulcet and sweet in communicatio^. For as
scripture says. Non licet amaritudinem conuersatio vel tedium co^uetas illius,
Sed letitiam et gaudeum. That is to say, his manners be so sweet and pleasant,
yt the co^uersacio^ of him has no bitterness, yea, his company has no
loathsomnes, ne wearines in it, but all gladness and joy. Here peradventure you
will say unto me, how may I love yt I see not, if I might see him with all ye
co^ditio^s ye speak of, I could with al my heart love him. Ah good sister yt time
is not come yet, you must as I said now for ye time prepare your self in
cleanness of body and soul, against ye time, so that when that time comes,
you may be able and worthy to see him, or else you shall be excluded from him
with the unwise virgins of whom ye gospel tells yt they were shut out from
his presence with great shame and co^fusio^, because they had not suffitiently
prepared themselves. Therefore good sister for this time be not negligent to
prepare your self with all good works, that the^ you may be admitted to com
unto his presence, from ye which to be excluded, it shall be a more grievous
pain, the^ any pain of hell. For as Chrysostom says. Si december mill
gehe^nas quis duerit nihil tale est quale ab illa beata visione exadere, that
is to say, if ^ne would rehearse unto me ten thousand hels, yet all yt
should not be so great pains as it is to be excluded from the blessed sight
of the face of Christ.

The seventh consideration.
THe seventh consideration is this: where now it appears unto you, that if you
will give your love freely there is non so worthy to have it as Jesus ye son
of the virgin Mary. I will further show unto you that if you will not freely
give it, but you will look peradventure to have some thing again, yet there
is none so well worthy to have it as he is, for if an other will give more for
it then he, I will not be against it, take your advantage. But sure I am there
is none other to whom your love is so dear, and of so great price as it is
unto him, nor any that will come nigh unto that, yt he has given or will give.
If his benifits and kyndnesse showed toward you, whereof I speak somewhat
before, were by you well pondered, they be no small benifites, and especially
ye love of so great a prince, and that he would thus love you, an^ prefer you
before so many innumerable creatures of his, and that when there was in you no
love, and when you could not skill of love: yea, and that, that more is, when
you were enemy unto him yet he loved you, and so wonderfully that for your
love and to wash you from sin, and to deliver your soul from the extreme
perrill he shead his most precious blood, an^ suffered the most shameful, the
most cruel, and the most painful death of the cross, his head to be perced
with thorns, his hands and feet to be thorough holed with nails, his side
to be launced with a spear, and all his most tender body to be torn and rent
with whippes and scourges. Believe this for a very truth good sister, that for
your sake he suffered all, as if there had been no more in all the world but
only your self, which I will declare more largely unto you in the next
consideration following. Believe it in the mean time certainly, for so it is
in deed, and if you believe it not, you do a great injury and show a full
unkindness unto him that thus much has done for you. And if this belief
truly settle in your heart, it is to me a marvel if you can content your
heart without the love of him, of him I say, yt thus dearly has loved you,
and does love you still. For what other lover will ^^e thus much for your
love? What creature in all the world will die for ^our sake? what one person
will depart with one drop of his heart blood for your sake? when the^ the son of
God, the prince of heaven, ye Lord of Angels has done this for your sake,
which thing no other creature will do, what frost could have vngeled your heart,
that it may not rele^t against so great an heat of love? if he so excele^t in
all nobleness should have given you but one favorable countenance from the
heavens above, it had been a more precious benifit then ever you could
recompense by your love again. It were impossible for your love to recompense
that one thing. But now much rather when he has descended into this wretched
world for your sake, and here has become man, and has endured all misery
pertaining unto man, save only sin and ignorance, and finally has suffered
this great horrible death for your love, how shall you ever now recompense this
by any love or service to be done for your pity? And he has not only don all this for your sake, but also has prepared for you after this transitory life a
reward above in heaven, so great that never mortal eye saw the like, nor any
tongue can express, nor yet any heart can think. Ah sister when your wretched
soul shall hence depart, which can not be very long here, who shall give
you refreshing the space of one hour. Good therefore it is that you look unto
your self, and upon him bestow your love, yt which hitherto has done most
for you, and best has deserved it beyond all other, and yet after this life he
will give for it a reward so inestimable that it shall never fail you.

The eight consideration.
THe eight consideration is this: yt albeit, there are many other which also
are beloved of christ Jesus, yet ye love yt he shows to them, nothing
minisheth his love toward you, as if there were no more beloved of him in all
ye kind of man. This may evidently be showed unto you by this example
following. If before any Image of our savior were disposed and set in a long
row many glasses, some great and some litlle, some high and some low, a
convenient distance from the Image, so that every of them might receive a
presentme^t of the Image, it is no doubt but in every of these glasses should
appear the very likeness of the same Image I will not say but this likeness
should be longer in the great glasses then in the less, and clearer in the
better cleansed glasses, and in them that were nigh unto the Image, then in the
other that were not so well cleansed, and much farther of. But as to the
likeness it self it shall be as full and as whole in every one glass as
though there were but one. Now to my purpose, if you consider likewise that all
ye good souls that be scourged from deadly sin, be in the manner of glasses
set in an order to receive the love of our savior Christ Jesus. Such souls as
by true pennaunce doing, by sighing, by weeping, by praying, by watching by
fasting, and by other like, be ye better scoured and cleansed from the spots
and malice of deadly sin, they be the brighter glasses and more clearly
receive this love, and such also be near unto our Savior, for nothing puts
us far from him but only sin. And therefore they that have more diligently
scoured their souls from the rust of sin, be nearer unto him, then the other
that so have not done. Such souls also as of their part enforce them selves
to a great love and to a more ample feruor, they do enlarge the capacity of
their souls, to receive a more large abundaunce of love again, those that
less enforce them, have a less capacity in receiving, and therefore so much
the less they receive of this love. Even as a man that opens his bosom wide
and enlarges it, is more able to receive a greater thing into it, then he
that does not. But yet as I have said before of the glasses, every one of the
souls receive as full and as whole a love of Jesus Christ, as though there were
no more souls in all the world but that one alone, for the love of Christ Jesus
infinite. And therefore when innumerable of souls have every one of them
received as much the love of Christ Jesus, as to every one of them is possible,
yet has he still in him self love suffitie^t for infinite more, and this his
love thereby is not in any point diminished nor lessened, though it be divided
unto many be ye number of them never so great. None of them yt be beloved
receive ye less because of the multitude of his fellows, nor if he had no more
but him self he should not thereby have any more abundance of love to his
part, but according to the cle^sing and capacity of his soul and nighnesse
unto Christ, his part in love shall be the less or more. Wherefore good
sister I pray you be you dylygent to scour your soul clean, and to enforce
your soul on your part fervently to love your spouse Christ Jesus, and draw
nygh unto him with entiere devotion, and then undoubtedly you shall be partener
to ye more plentuous abundance of his love, notwtsta^ding any other multitude
which beside is beloved of him, for he nevertheless is as studious of you, and
as mindful, and as ferue^ly cares for your weal, as though there were no mo
beloved of him but you alone in all this world.

The ninth Consideration.
THe ninth consideration is this, where peradventure you would object to me
again and say, Brother if it be thus as you say, that my Lord Jesus loves me
so much, and is so mindful of me, and so fervently ente^deth my weal, what
need me to care whatsoever I do, he will not cast me away, he will not forsake
me nor suffer me to perish. Good sister without doubt as I have said, our
savior Christ Jesus is in love toward you, and he is myndfull and more loving
toward you then I can express. And sure you may be, yt he will never cast
you away, ne forsake you, if you before cast not your self away, ne forsake
your self. But if you give any place to sin in your soul, and suffer it to
enter upon you, verily then you forsake your self and cast your self away,
and willingly destroy your self, that is your deed and not his: for he
never forsakes any creature unless they before have forsaken them selves. And
if they will forsake them selves were they never in so great favor with him
before, they then incontinently lose his favor, the which thing well appears
in his first spiritual creatures the noble Angels Lucifer and his comp^nie,
which were created in excelent brightness, and were much in the favor of
almighty God, they presumptuously offended him in pride for the which not
only, they lost his favor, but also their merueylous brightness became
inco^tinently horrible, foul, and were expelled out of the glorious kingdom of
heaven that they were in, and thrown into perpetual darkness into the
prison of hell. The first man Adam also who was created in singular honor, and
was put into Paradise a place full of gladness, there to live in comfort of
all pleasure, the which was done to him for a singular love yt almighty God
had toward him, yet anon as h^ fell to sin he was in like manner expelled
out from that pleasure, and sent into this miserable world to endure misery
and pain. If those noble creatures which were lift up into so great favor
with almighty God, so lightly by their misdemeanor in sin, lost his gracious
favor, let none other creature think but if they admit any sin to their
soul, they shall be likewise excluded out of his favor. For sin is so odible
unto almighty God, that not the dearest friends that ever he had in all the
world, but if there were found in their souls any deadly sin after death,
they should never be received into the joy of heaven. Not the blessed Mary
Magdalen for all her love toward him, nor yet his own blessed mother that
bare him into this world, if one deadly sin were found in their souls, they
should incontinent be thrown into ye dark dungeon of hell. Wherefore good
sister say not, if his love be so much upon you, and he so desirouslie
entendeth your profit, that you may do what you list, you need not to care
what you do. But contrariwise the more that he loves you, the more you
should take heed unto your self and beware that you offend him not, for so
did the blessed Mary Magdalen of whom I spoke before. She notwithstanding the
great love that both our savior had to her, and she unto him again for the
which also her sins were forgiven her, yet after his death she fled from the
company of men, and lived in the wilderness far from any worldly comfort,
in great wayling, fasting, and prayer, and such other painfulness of her
body, and was nothing ye less diligent to keep her self warely from sin,
for the great love that our lord and savior had to her, but for yt the more
studiously she did avoid and eschu every thing whereby she might run into any
displeasure against him.

The tenth consideration.
THe tenth consideration is this: it were well done and much it should farther
this cause if you truly esteem of how little value your love is, how vain, how
light, and how triflelous a thing it is, and how few there be yt would much
regard it, or set much price thereby, for few there be or none to whom it
may do any profit or auail. Contrariwise you should consider the love of your
spouse ye sweet Jesus, how excele^t it is, how sure, how fast, how constantly
abiding, how many have much specially regarded it, Martirs innumerable both men
and women for his love have shead their blood, and have endured every kind of
martirdom were it never so cruel, were it never so terrible. No pain, no
tormentrie, might compel them to forsake his love: so desirous were they of
his love, yt rather then they would forgo it, they gave no force of ye loss of
all this world beside, and their own life also. So dear and precious was that
love to them, that all ye honors, pleasures, and possessions of this life, they
recompted as very trifles in comparion of that. And what be you in comparison
of the^, but naughty, wretched, and miserable? where then they which be now
glorious saints above in heaven, so much have valued and so greatly esteemed
this most excele^t love, and you may have the same love for yours, that is so
naughty and so little worth, what should you do of your part? how much
should you enfore your self not only to obtayn this love, but studiously to
keep it, since that you have it once, and for nothing to depart therefro.
He of his goodness does not repel any creature from his love, but permits
them assuredly that if any draw nigh unto him by love, he will love them
again, and give his most precious love for theirs, he says, Ego diligentes
me diligo: That is to say, I love them that love me. And in an other place. En
qui venit ad me no^ equam for as: That is to say, what person so ever comes
unto me, I will not cast him away. Sister if you consider this deeply, it should
move you to fall down upon your knees, and with all your heart and mind say
unto your Spouse in this manner. O my blessed Savior Lord Jesus thou ask my
love, thou desire to have my heart, and for my love thou will give me thy
love again. O my sweet Lord, what is this for thee to desire, which art so
excelent, if my poor heart were of so much value as all the hearts of men and
weomen that ever were, if they were put together in one, and if it were as
precious and noble as there is price and nobleness in all ye orders of Angels,
if furthermore it did contain in it all bodelie and spiritual treasure that
is within the compass of heaven or without, yet it were but a little gift to
give unto so great a lord, for his most delicate and precious love to be had of
him again: much rather my love and heart as it is now naughty, wretched, and
miserable, so is it but a small gift and of little value. Nevertheless such as
it is, since it is thy pleasure to have it, and thy goodness does ask it
of me saying, Prebe mihi cor tuum, That is to say, give me thy heart, I freely
give it unto thee, and I most humbly beseech thy goodness and mercy to accept
it, and so to order me by thy grace, that I may receive into it the love of
nothing contrary to thy pleasure, but that I always may keep the fire of thy
love avoiding from it all other contrary love that may in any wise displease
thee.

The final conclusion of all.
NOw the^ good Sister, I trust that these considerations, if you often read
them with good deliberation, and truly imprint them in your remembrance,
they will somewhat inflame your heart with the love of Christ Jesus, and that
love once established in you, all ye other points and ceremonies of your
religion shall be easy unto you, and no whit painful, you shall then
comfortriblie do every thing that to good religion appertains, without any
great weariness. Nevertheless if it so fortune that you at any time begin to
feel any dullness of mind quicken it again by the meditation of death, which
I send you here before, or else by some effectual prayer, earnestly calling for
help and succor upon the most sweet Jesus, thinking as it is in deed, that is
your necessity, and that no where else you can have any help but of him. And
if you will use these short prayers following, for every day in the week one,
I think it shall be unto you profitable. For thus you may in your heart shortly
pray what company so ever you be amongst.

The Prayers be these.
O blessed Jesus make me to love thee intierlie.

O blessed Jesus I would feign, but without thy help I can not.

O blessed Jesus let me deeply consider the greatness of thy love toward me.

O blessed Jesus give unto me grace heartily to thank thee for thy benifites.

O blessed Jesus give me good will to serve thee, and to suffer.

O sweet Jesus give me a natural remembrance of thy passion.

O sweet Jesus possess my heart, hold and keep it only to thee.

THese short prayers if you will often say, and with all the power of your
soul and heart, they shall merueylouslie kindle in you this love, so that it
shall be alway^ fervent and quick, ye which is my especial desire to know in
you. For nothing may be to my comfort more then to hear of your furtheraunce
and profiting in God and in good religion, the which our blessed Lord grant
you for his great mercy. Amen.

FINIS.
A Sermon very fruitful, godly, and learned, upon thvs se^te^ce of the
Prophet Ezechiell, Lamentationes, Carmen, et vae, very aptely applied unto the
passion of Christ: Preached upon a good Friday, by the same John Fissher,
Bishop of Rochester.
THe Prophet Ezechyell tells yt he saw a book spread before him, Ize. 2.
the which was written both within and without, and there was written also in
it, Lamentationes, Carmen, et vae, that is to say, lamentation, song, and woe.
This was a wonderful book, and much to be merueiled upon. Much comfortable
knowledge and sweetness this Prophette gate by this book, (as he says in the
Chapter next ensuing, Eze. 3.
factum est in ore meo sicut mell dulce, this book was in my mouth as sweet
as honye. This book to our purpose may be taken unto us, the Crucifixe, ye
which doubtless is a merueylous book, as we shall show hereafter. In the
which if we do exercise our admiration, we shall come to wonderful
knowledge. Meruayling was the cause, why that the Philosophers came to so
great knowledge, as they had. They beheld and saw many wonderful things,
and effects in this world, as the marvelous earthquakes, Thu^ders,
lightnings, Snow, Rain, and Frostes, blasinng Stars, the Eclipses of the
Sun and of the Moon, and such other effects. And those marvelous wonders
moved them to search for the causes of the same. And so by dyligent search and
inquisition, they came to great knowledge and cunning, which cunnyng men call
Philosophy natural. But there is an other higher Philosophy which is above
nature, which is also gotten with marueyling. And this is the very Philosophy
of Christian people. And doubtless amongst all other things concerning a
christian man, it is a thing much marvelous, and most wonderful, that the
son of God, for the love that he had unto ye soul of man, would suffer him
self to be crucified, and so to take upon him that most vyllanous death upon
the Cross. Abac. 1. Act. 13.
Of this the Prophet Abacuck says. Admiramini et obstupescite, quia opus
factum est in diebus vestris, quod nemo credet quum narrabitur, marueyle, and
wonder you, for a work is done in your days, which when it shall be showed,
no man will believe.

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he which is most to be dread and feared,
would be in so much fear, that for very fear and dread of pain he had to
suffer, he swet water and blood.

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he yt was most inestimable in price, and
most precious, would suffer his body to be sold for so little a price, as
for the value of thyrtye pence?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that is the Lord of heaven and earth,
and all other creatures, would suffer him self to be bound of those vyllaynes
with ropes like a thief?

Is it not a wonderful thing that he that has so great might and power, would
suffer him self to be taken of his cruel and mortal enimyes, and so led unto
all these pains?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that is the Judge of all the world,
would thus wrongfullye be judged?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he yt had in hymall wisdom, would thus
be mocked and reputed as a fool?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that is so strong and mighty, would be
made so weak, and feeble, that he fell under the wayght and burden of the
Cross?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that is the Lord of Angels, would be
spytted and bobbed of a sort of Lorrelles in that most dispytefull manner?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that is the King of everlasting glory
would suffer his head in mockery to be crowned with thorns?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he that gives life to every creature,
would suffer this most shameful, sorrowful, and so painful death?

Is it not a wonderful thing, that he yt is the Lord, and Aucthor of all
liberty, would thus be bound with ropes, and nailed hand and foot unto the
Cross?

Thus who that list with a meek heart, and a true faith, to muse and to
maruayle of this most wonderful book (I say of the Crucifixe) he shall come
to more fruitful knowledge, then many other which daily study upon their
common books. This book may suffice for ye study of a true christian man,
all ye days of his life. In this book he may find all things that be
necessary to ye health of his soul. Saint Fraunces could pass his time with
this book, and was never weary thereof, and his great study was in the
compass of a few words. Quis tu, et quis ego domine. That is to say, who
art thou Lord, and who an(...). This thought always did run from him self to
Christ: And again, from Christ unto him self. And so ever he meruayled of the
most excelent nobleness of Christ, and compared it with his own naughtynesse,
always meruaylynge that Christ being of so incomparable worthynesse, would
suffer that most paynefull death for so unworthy sinners, which lesson is so
plain, and so common, that every man (be he never so simple,) may somewhat
profit in it. And again, it is so high, that few can attain to reach to the
special fruit of it. This holy Saint Frau^ces so profited in this lesson,
that it caused in his heart such a fervent love, such a devotion, such an
affection to Christ, that the capital wounds which he beheld in the hands
and feet, and side of Christ, ware by miracle imprinted in his own hands and
feet. This thing the B. of R. Innocent and his Cardinals did see, and had
very proof thereof.

The meditation and imagination of this book was so earnest, and so
continual, that the token of the five wounds of Christ, were imprinted and
ingraued in this holy Saynctes body. But to this high fruit (as I said) few
or none besides him does attain. It is a singular gift of almighty God, and
not common to be looked for of other persons. Nevertheless, who that will
exercise this lesson, though he come not to this high point of perfection, he
shall nevertheless greatly profit in ye same, and come to a great knowledge
both of Christ and of him self. A man may easily say and think with him self
(beholding in his heart the Image of ye Crucifixe, who art thou, and who am I.
Thus every person both rich and poor* may think, not only in the church
here, but in every other place, and in his business where about he goes.
Thus the poor laborer may think, when he is at plough earyng his ground,
and when he goes to his pastures to see his Cattayle, or when he is sittyng
at home by his fire side, or else when he lies in his bed waking and can not
sleep. Likewise the rich man may do in his business that concerns him. And
the poor women also in their business, when they be spinning of their rocks,
or serving of their pullen. The rich weomen also in every lawful occupation
that they have to do. It is an easy thing for any man or woman to make these
two questions with them self. O my Lord that would dye for me upon a
Cross, how noble and excelent art thou? and again, how wretched and
miserable am I? Doubtless O thou christian soul, he that hunge for thy sake
on ye Cross, was verelie the son of God, as the noble Centurio said, when
at the death of Christ he saw so many wonderful tokens. He saw ye sun
withdraw his light, and the air in darkness, and felt all the earth
tremble and quake, and the stones brake a sunder, then he said, vere filius
dei erat iste. ^at. 27.
That is to say, verily this person was the son of God. Think with thy self, O
christan soul, how great a person he is that is the son of God? And think
again how vilaynous and how wretched thou art, in comparison of him. What art
thou but ashes, ciuis es, Gene. 3.
and unto ashes thou shall return, et in cinera reuerteris. Abraham which was
a man of high perfection, yet when he should speak unto almighty God he
said, quu^ sum puluis et ciuis loquar ad dominu^, Gene. 18.
that is to say, I am but dust and ashes, and yet I must speak unto my Lord.
David also says, Psalm. 38.
vniuersa vanitas omnis homo viuens, that is to say, man contains in him all
vanity. Furthermore Job speaks of man saying in this manner, Job. 14.
Qui puasi flos egreditur, et co^teritur, et fugit velut vmbra. Man is like a
flower, he does issue forth into the world, and soon after he is trodden
down, and so finally he passes like a shadow. Man is but earth and ashes,
and shall pass away like a shadow, and like a mere vanity.

Contrarywyse Christ, was, is, and ever shall be, the prince of heaven, the
Lord of Angels, and the creator of all creatures, Act. (...)
Qui fecit coelum et terram et omnia que in eis sunt, Psalm. 145.
He made heaven and earth and all that is in them. His power is infinite, and
most to be dread, Omnipotens rex, et metuendus nimis. His wisdom is
incomprehensible. O altitudo diuitiarum sapientiae et scientiae dei. Romans 11.
His greatness passes all measure, Psalm. 47. Psalm. 144.
Magnus dominus et laudabilis nimis, et magnitudinis eius non est finis.
Shortly to say, when a man has spoken or thought all that can be to the
praise of his excellency, yet he does far pass and surmount all that, as
the Scripture says, Excle. 43.
Glorificantes dominu^, quantum cu^que poteritis super valebit ad huc et
admirabilis magnificentia illius. Now then, O thou sinful creature, marvel at
his excellent worthiness, that was thus crucified. And marvel also at thy
naughtiness, for whose love he was thus crucified. Thus I say did the holy
saint Francis, Quis es tu et quis sum ego domine, Who art thou my Lord so
excellent, and who am I, for whom thou would endure all this pain.

O Christen soul often behold this book, and say with this holy man, Quis
es tu et quis sum ego. Marueyle that his inestimable goodness would thus dye
for so miserable a vanity. And so maruelinge, thou shall profyt in a gracious
knowledge of Christ, and thy heart shall taste marvelous sweetness, and be
replenished with a devout savor of his most excelent goodness. But you
marvel peradventure why I call ye crucifix a book? I will now tell you the
consideracion why? A book has boardes, leaves, lines, wrytinges, letters
booth small and great. First I say that a book has two boardes: the two
boardes of this book is the two parts of the cross, for when the book is
opened and spread, the leaves be cowched upon the boardes. And so the blessed
body of Christ was spread upon the cross. The leaves of this book be ye arms,
the hands, legs, and feet, with the other members of his most precious and
blessed body.

Never any Parchement skin was more strayghtlye stratched by strength upon
the tentors then was this blessed body upon ye cross. These lorells that
crucified him, drew by vyolence his most precious arms, with ropes unto
either branch of the cross, that the sinowes burst in sonder, and so nailed
his hands fast with spykinge nails of iron, unto the cross. After they
stretched his feet likewise unto an other hole beneath in the cross, and
there nailed them with the third nail thorough both his feet. And so they
reared up this body a loft against the sun, even as a parchment skin is
set forth before the heat of the Sun for to dry. It was set up a loft to
the intent that all the world might look upon this book.

This book was written with in and without. First within was written but one
word: nevertheless this one word compryseth in it, as says saint Paul, the
whole treasure of al cunning and wisdom partayning unto God, In quo sunt omnes
thesauri sapientiae dei, Col. 2.
in whom are all the treasure of the wisdom of god. Of this word Saint John
speaks, John. 1.
saying, In principio erat verbum, the word was in ye beginning before all
creatures, this word is the second person in the godhead, the son of God
which by the holy Ghost was written in the inward side of this parchment. For
the Godheade of Christ was covered and hid under the likeness of man. The
holy Ghost was the pen of almyghtie God the father, He set his most mighty
word unto the body of Christ, within the womb of the Uyrgine Marye, and so
this book was written within. For as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 2^
si cognouissent nunquam dominum gloriae crucifixissent, That is to say, if
they had known the son of God, which was and is the Lord of everlasting
glory, they would never have crucified him. They saw his manhood which was
in outward sight, but they saw not his Godheade which was covered within the
same. The Godhead was the inward side, and the manhood was the outward side.
Furthermore when a book is spread, you see that in the leaves are many lines
drawn. And many letters, some read, some black, and some blewe, so in this
book, (the most blessed body of Christ) was drawn many lines, for it was
all to scourged with whippes, so yt every where ye print of ye cords of ye
scourges, was left behynd, and that in every place, from ye neck downward unto
the soles of his feet, so yt there was no margent left in all this book,
there was no void place, but every where it was either drawn with lines, or
else written with letters, for these scourges filled not only his most
precious body with lines drawn every where, but also left many small
Letters, some black, some blewe, some read. For the blood by the vyolence of
the schourges sprunge out in every place. And for because no part of this
book should be unwritten, his head also was pearsed with sharp thorns.
These cruel Jews put upon his head a Crown of thorns, and pressed it down
upon the same, as hard as they might press it by vyolence, beatyng it down
with a strong Reed. Mat. 2^
Et Arundine percuciebant caput eius. And his blessed head so Crowned, they
did beat it down with a gadde, or a hard Reed. Thus you perceive that this
book was full of lines and small Letters, which were of diverse colors, (as I
said) some black, some blewe, some read, some blewyshe, that is to say, full
of strokes, and lasshes, where by the skin was toarne, and rent in a
thousand places. Besides these small letters, yet was there also great
Capytall Letters precyouslie illumyned with Roset color: Roset is a read
color like unto the color of a Rose, which color that most precious blood,
which issued out of his hands and feet, does represent unto us, with this
most precious blud was illumined the five great Capital letters in this
wonderful book. I mean by these capital letters ye great wounds of his body,
in his hands, and in his feet, and in his side.

These five great wounds were ingraued with sharp and vyole^t pens, that is
to say, the sharp nails, and the spear. And they do represent unto us the
five capytall Letters of this book. Thus then you may perceive what be the
boardes of this book, and what be the leaves, how it is written within, and
without, how it is lyned and leathered, and what be the Letters, as well the
small as the great. Now we shall hear what manner of writing is contained in
this book. But first here, let us make our prayer for grace, beseechyng
almyghtie God, to give unto our hearts the gracyous light of his beams,
whereby we may the more clearly perceive the writings of this book, and that
they may bring forth some good fruit to our souls health.

Now you shall hear what wrytings be contained in this book, in the book
which Ezechiel did see, was written three manner of things. Lame^tationes,
Carmen, et vae, which is to say, Lamentations, songs, and woe. And the same
three things, in like manner be written in this book of the Crucifixe. First is
lamentation, and this very conuenientlye is written in this book of the
Crucyfixe. For whosoever will joy with Christ, must first sorrow with him. And
by sorrow and lamentation he may come unto joy: But he that will not sorrow
and lament with Christ here in this life, he shall come fynallye to the place
where is everlasting woe, I say woe that shall never have end. Here therefore
is written all these three, lamentation, song, and woe.

First then we will speak of lamentation.

Lamentation aryseth of four affections, either of a great fear, or dread,
or of a great shame, or of some sorrow, or else of some hatred. When
Holophernes with a mighty power was entered into ye country of Jury, and
terribly threatened to distroy all before him, the people were in a great fear
and dread to be oppressed, and so fell down before almyghtie God, and with
great lamentation, did call for his help, omnius populus cetidit in facie^,
Judith. 4.
adorantes dominum cum lamentatione et fletu, all the people fell on their
faces, worshyppyng our Lord with weepyng and lamentation.

The cause of this lamentation, was the great dread which they were in. Here
first then let us learn to dread, and doubtless thou Christian soul, thou
may here learn greater matter of dread, then the Jews then were in. For
the Jews then were only in peril of temporal death, thou art in peril of
everlasting death.

Consider man how greeuouslie thou have sinned: And also behold how grievously
sin was revenged, and punished in the blessed body of Christ. And thou shall
anon find here great cause and matter of dread. The stories tells of
Cambises the King of Persia, yt where one of his Judges had given a false and a
wrong judgment, he deprived him of his office, and made an other in his place
their Judge after him. Furthermore because of his falsehoode he caused him to
be slain, and his skin to be hanged up before the place of the commen
judgment, to the intent that this new Judge beholding ye grievous punishment
of his predecessor, might beware of falsehood, and always dread to give any wrong
judgment. In like manner ye Image of the Crucifix is hunge up in every Church,
to the intent that we may see how greeuouslie sin was punyshed in that most
blessed body of our Savior Christ Jesus, not for him self, nor for his own
sin, but for ours was he thus cruellye entreated, we were the cause, we
committed the sin. But yet nevertheless he bare the pains, and burdens of
our sins upon his back.

As writes Saint Peter, Peccata nostra ipse pertulit in corpore suo super
ligium crucis. 1. Peter. 2*
And therefore when we behold the Image of the Crucifixe in any place set up,
we should think how grievously sin was punyshed in the body of our savior
Christ.

And there by learn to dread the grievous punishment of sin. (Alas) man
thynkest thou not, that this was matter of dread. This I say, that the very
son of God, was for thy sin put unto this cruel death of the Cross: If
thou believe not this, thou art worse then the dyuylles* For as Saint James
says, demones credunt et contremiscunt, ^^cob. 2.
the diuilles do believe, and tremble. And if thou verily believe it, thou
may thereby think and learn how much our savior and his father both
does hate sin. For since almighty God the father would give his most
dearly beloved son unto such an horrible death, only for to quench and to
extincte sin, thou may be sure that he hates sin very much.

Our Savior also must needs hate sin when he rather would suffer this
most vyllanous death, then that sin should have domynion upon our souls,
seeing then that thou know that both they hate sin? How should thou
dread to receue any sin into thy soul. If sin were so displeasant to
almighty God the father, that rather then he would suffer it, he would give
his own son unto death for the expulsion of it. How much rather now does it
displease him, when his son has suffered death therefore, and yet sin
rayneth nevertheless, and more generally then ever it did before. Furthermore,
if sin was so grievously punished in him that never did sin, how bytterly
shall it be punished in thee O sinful creature, the which haste done so many
great outrageous sins. Surely where he has one nail in his hands and feet,
thou sinful creature have deserved one hundredth. And for every one thorn,
that he suffered in his head, thou have deserved a thousand. And for every one
lash that he felt of the scourges, thou art worthy to have innumerable. Who yt
deeply considerith this that I have said, and with an earnest study resorteth
often to look upon this book I marvel if he do not find here in, great
cause and earnest matter of dread.

Here also may every sinner quicken his sin, if any be within hist breast,
for it is marvel that a sinner can with out shame behold this blessed Image? If
a sinner call to remembrance his great unkindness, and repute the same
unkindness any manner of vice, I trow that he wylbe much ashamed of his most
unkind and ungentle dealing against so loving a Lord. Say to me thou sinful
creature, will thou not look that other men, when thou haste been unto them
in any thing beneficial, I say, wylt thou not look that they shall be
kind and loving unto thee again? And if any person be unkind unto thee, wylt
thou not rebuke him fully, and lay it unto his reproof to make him ashamed
thereof? I am suer that thou wylt. Now then let me see, where is thy shame?
behold and view every part of this blessed body, what pain it endured for thy
sake?

See thou not his eyes, how they be filled with blood and bitter tears?
See thou not his ears, how they be filled with blasphemous rebukes, and
obprobrious words?

His cheek and neck with buffets, his shoulders with ye burden of ye cross?
See thou not his mouth, how in his dryghnesse they would have filled it with
Asell and Gaul?

See thou not, how his back is payned against the hard Cross?

See thou not his sides, how they were skourged with sharp whyps? See thou
not his arms, how they were strayned by the violence of the ropes?

(...) thou not his hands, how they be nailed just unto ye cross? See thou
not his legs, how they be wearyed with labor?

See thou not his feet, how paynefully they stay and bear up the wight of
his whole body?

O most unkind sinner, all this he suffered for thy sake. No greater kinds
ever was, or could be showed to thee by any creature, then this which sweet
Jesus did show for thee and for thy sake, and where is now thy kindenes again?

No kyndnesse thou can show, but much unkindness thou haste often showed
unto him, and yet thou art not ashamed. Alas man where is thy shame? Think
with thy self how many abominable sins thou have done against his pleasure.
I do a certain thee that the least of them stryketh him more paynefully unto
the heart then any unkindness that ever was done unto thee in all thy life. For
as Saint Barnerd says in the person of Christ, when he has rehearsed all ye
grievous pains of his passion, he puts unto these words, Extat interius
plauctus pregrauior, quum te ingratum experior, that is to say, but inwardly
mourning is much more grievous because I perceue thou art to me so much unkind.
So many sins so much unkindness. And the more heinous, and the more
accustomable that they be, the more abominable is thine unkindness.

If the least of many of thy sins had come to light, and to the knowledge of
men, thou would have been sore ashamed of them, Christ knows them, and
saw thee do them, for Omnia vnda et aperta sunt oculis eius, Heb. 4*
All things be naked and open before his eyes: and yet thou art not ashamed of
all thy vnkinddes.

Alas man, hear what the King and Prophet says, Psalm. 43.
Tota die verecundia mea co^tra me est, et confusio faciei meae cooperuit me,
All the day long my shame is before me, and my face is covered with confusion.
Thus said this holy King, when our savior as yet had not suffered his passion
for him. This high point of kindness was not as yet showed unto this man by
our savior Christ, and he nevertheless was ashamed of his sin. Thou have
peradventure done much more outrageous sin, and have been much more unkind
after this his most wonderful passion suffered for thy sake, then ever that
king was, and that also makes thy sin much more horrible. Thou have after
thy promise made unto him, falsified the same promise and untruly broken it,
by multiplying of many foul and abominable sinz, and by often renewing of ye
same Thou dyddest promise once at the sacrament of baptism to keep thy faith
and truth unto thy savior, and to forsake the devil and all his works? An
honest man, or an honest woman would be much ashamed to brek their promise, and
specially to their friend? Albeit the world is now full of such lorrells, yt
do no more regard to break their promise, the^ for to dri^k when they be dry.
How often have thou broken thy promise? Alas man learn to be ashamed and say
with the Prophet Esdras, Deus meus, co^fundor et erubesco leuare faciem meam
quoniam iniquitates nostrae leuatae sunt super caput nostrum, ^. Esdr^ea. 8
that is to say, O my god I am confounden and ashamed to lift up my face unto
thee, for our sins be risen far above our heads. Ye women when there is any
black spot in your faces, or any moole in your kerchiues, or any myer upon your
clothes, be you not ashamed? yes forsooth sir? But I shall tell you, where of
you ought to be ashamed. Surely if your sowls have any spots of deadly sin in
them, for when our savior so dearly with his most precious blood, and with
all these grievous pains did wash and wype, and cleanse our souls from every
spot of deadly sin, ye should be much ashamed to defyle them again? If you
be ashamed for a foul myrie shoo, and not of a foul stinking soul, ye make
more dearer your shoes, then your souls. If ye be ashamed of a spot in your
clothes and have no shame for many great blots in your souls. What shall I say
but Frons meretricis facta est tibi, Iere. 3.
noluiste erubescere, that is to say, thou have taken upon thee the face of a
brothell, thou wylt not be ashamed. If you then depely consider how many
shameful blots of sin be in thy soul, before ye eyes of almighty God, and
all the glorious court of heaven, and how by them thou have utterly broken thy
promise unto god, and committed so great unkindness against this most loving
charity, that was showed unto thee for thy love and for thy sake by our
savior on ye cross I suppose thou shall find matter, and cause of great
shame, if any sparkle of honesty be yet left in thy soul? Thirdly thou may
here take matter enough of sorrow, for here your savior pitiously cries and
complayneth of his great sorrows, saying, O vos omnes qui transitis per viam
attendite et videte si est dolor similis sicut dolor meus. Lamen. Hier. ca. 1.
All ye that pass forth by, take heed and see whether any sorrow was ever
like unto mine. Alas to see so noble a man, so gentle, and so innocent, so
cruelly entreated in every part of his most delicate body. And to here him so
pitiously complayninge, who shall not be sorry? surely none, except his heart be
harder then any flynte stone or Adamant stone. These same four points alone
may suffice to stir any gentle heart to sorrow. I say his excelent
nobleness, his innoce^cie, the cruelty that he did suffer, and his pitious
complaining.

If thou saw (O Christian man) thine enemy thus mangled and wounded, it might
stir thee to take compassion upon him? If thou saw any Jew or Sarazin thus
tormented, it might move thee to pity? But much rather to see thy Lord, thy
savior, and for thy sake thus cruelly entreated, thus with out any pity
crucified, and payned, hanging on a cross, should move thee to compassion. For
say to me, for whom supposest thou that our savior Christ Jesus suffered all
those grievous pains? surely for thy sin, Pro impijs Christus mortuus est.
Romans ^^
For sinners Christ Jesus died, there was no cause but sin. Thy sin was the
cause of his death. Thy sin gave him his deaths wound. O sinful creature,
how much cause have thou for to be sorry. For thy sin was the root and
fou^tayne of all his sorrow, and yet thou ceasest not daily by thy sin to
encrese his sorrow. O what flood of tears did the blessed Magdalene shed,
remembering her grievous sin. She first conceived a great dread in her soul
for her sin. Secondly, she was greatly ashamed of her abhominacyons, with in
her soul, for she regarded much more the inward shame of her conscience, then
ye outward shame of the world. And therefore she let not in the presence of many
persons to come to the feet of our savior, and to show her self a sinner.
And there took great sorrow, and wept full bitterly for her sin. Thus after
dread and shame followed her sorrow. And when had she this dread, shame, and
sorrow? truly before that our savior hung on the cross? yet she knew not
that her sin was cause and occasion of his most cruel death.

But when she saw him hang so painfully on the Cross, and considered that
for her sin he suffered all the pains, her heart was then so full of sorrow
that for very pain it might have brast.

O thou sinful creature? If thou can not sorrow, come learn of this blessed
woman, to sorrow for thy sin. Think that thy sin was the cause and occasion
of all this pain and sorrow, that thy Lord and savior did suffer on the
Cross.

And not only she gives ye example of sorrow, but his blessed mother
abundantly the^ sorowed at his death. Saint John sorrowed, Saint Peter
sorrowed and wept bitterly. Luke. 2.
All the Apostles were in sorrow.

But whereunto speak I of reasonable creatures, the unreasonable, and the
insensible creatures shows a manner of sorrow. The earth quaked. Math. 27
The mighty stones brast in sunder. The monuments opened, ye dead courses
issued out of their monuments.

All these were moved with compassion. And only thou wretched sinner, for
whose cause he suffered all this pain and greeuance, have no pity nor
compassion upon him.

(Alas) how great is thy hardness? How obstinate is thy heart, that will
suffer no pity to enter in to it? Uerely, thou art more harder then are the
stones? for they were moved by his passion, so myghtely that they brake in
sunder.

Petrae scissae sunt. Math. 27.
When then the hard stones, and all the other unreasonable creatures were thus
moved, and stirred to take some compassyon of the paynfull death of Christ, and
yet felt no profit by his death.

Thou much rather should be moved, for whose love he did endure all this
grievous pains. Look thou therefore upon this book, and thou shall here find
great cause and matter of sorrow. Fourthly, if thou can not sorrow, yet thou
may here learn to hate. Thou maiste learn to hate sin, which was cause
of all this trouble. It is not for naught that ye scripture says, 21.
Quasi a facie colubri fuge peccatu^, dentes leonis, dentes eius interficientis
animas hominum. Flee from sin even as thou would flee from the face of an
Adder, for as the teeth of the Lion deuoureth ye body of man, so death does
sleay their souls. Sin is so odious, and so great an injury to god, that it
was necessary for the recompense of this injury, yt the son of god should
suffer this most paineful death of the cross. Sin so provoked almighty god
ye father so deeply to displeasure, and wrath, and to take vengance upon
sinners that without the sacrifice of his own son in ye gybbet of the
cross, he would not be appeased, ne reconciled unto sinners again. Sin so
deadly wounded and blotted the soul of man, that with out shedding of ye most
precious blood of our savior Christ Jesus, no life could be restored unto
sinners, nor the souls might be washed from the foul abominable corruption
of sin.

Sin so debarreth and shuts from sinners ye gates of heaven, that they
might not have been opened, but only by the merit of this most bitter
passion, and suffering this most painful torments on the cross. Sin set the
gates of hell so wide open, and brought all this world into that danger, and
thraldom of the devil, that all we should have been deuowred of the pyt of
hell, unless we had been rau^somed with this most precious treasure, that was
shed for us on ye crosse-O sinful creature have thou not great cause to hate
sin, that has brought thee into that miserable condition, that by thy sin
thou have done, and committed high injury against almighty god, and have
provoked him to vengeance. That by thy sin, thou have thus mortally wounded
thine own soul. That by sin, thou haste brought thy self into the danger of
the dyuill, and be dampened in hell perpetually. That by thy sin thou have
shut the gates of heaven against thy self. (Alas) man where can thou find
greater occasion of hatred.

If thy neighbor do unto thee but a light injury, thou can anon hate him,
yea, and so hate him, that thou will say thou may not find in thy heart to
love him.

Sin has done unto thee, all these great injuries, and yet thou loueste
sin and canste not hate it?

(Alas) what madness is this? Ioab said unto King David, ^. Reg. 19.
dilegis odientes te, et odio habes diligentis te.

Thou loueste them that hate thee, and thou hate them that love thee. The
same word may well be said unto every sinner that follows the course of
sin. And likewise vice does procure the dystruction of sinners, and yet the
sinners do follow after them.

Our savior with all grace and virtue procures ye salvation of sinners, but
him they will not hear, nor take any ways after his counsel. And this is
nothing else but an extreme madness, for they should contrarywyse love our
savior, that so lovingly for their weal endured the grievous pains of the
Cross, and hate the diuill and sin which was the very cause of death.

By this then you may perceive that in this book ye may find matter enough of
lamentation, since you may read in this book so much cause of dread, of shame,
of sorrow, and of hatred. And this is the first writing whereof we promised for
to speak.

The second writing that I said was also written in this book, was Carme^,
that is to say, Song. Surely if either love or hope, or joy, or comfort, will
make a soul to sing, here he may take great occasion to sing.

First here is great matter of love, and so great, that if any person will
either give his love freely, or else for some certain price sell it, he that
died on the cross, is best worthy to have it. If thou search in heaven, and in
earth one person upon whom thou may best bestow thy love. Thou shall find
none comparable unto Christ Jesus, so wise, so mighty, so gentle, so kind, so
amyable, far passing all other, and there to he is much desirous of thy love,
for when Moses had rehearsed the great benifites which almighty God had given
unto man, (...) 10.
he says, Et nunc audi quid dominus deus tuus requirat a te, nisi vt diligas
eu^. Now here what thy Lord God does require of thy part, truly but that
thou love him.

So now if thou wylt freely give thy love thou can not more wisely, nor
better bestow it then upon him which is so excelent and has all the conditions
above said, and there to also is so desirous to have thy love.

And if thou wylt sell thy love, I trow there is none that will give unto thee
more liberally for the same than he has done. Where shall thou find him that
will shed one drop of blood out of his heart for thy sake. Where shalt
thou find him that will give his own soul and life for thy love. There can
no more be asked of any man then that, John. 1^.
Maiorem charitatem nemo habet nisi vt animam suam ponat quis pro amicis suis.
No man can show greater charity, then for to put his own life in ieopardie
for his friends.

But thou peradventure wilt say, Sir if he had done this for me alone, I had
been bound then to have given him my love whollye again?

Why man art thou so enuyous, that thou would have no parteners, of this
most precious death with thee, but thine own self? This were a very
malicious desire to exclude all other, and specially when thy profit and
merit shall not be mynished.

Albeit, there be never so many besides, that take commodity there by. I say
unto thee O man, and I assure thee that as fruitefully he dyed for thee (if
thou will dispose thy self to be partener of this death) as if there had been
no more, but thy self in all this world. Truth it is, there be many more
besides thee, that be parteners of this death. But all they, yea, and if there
were a thousand thousand times innumerable more then there be. All that
multitude shall nothing mynish any one crum of merit of this most blessed death
belongyng unto thee. And again, if thou take much more fruit thereof, then
any one of them, yet shall they take no impayrement, or receive the less
because thou have so much.

Will thou see by some example that this is truth that I now say?

When thou see a torch light in an house where many persons be, does not
that torche give as much light to them all, as if there were but one person
there? Every person after the quickness of their sight, takes more or less
profitte of that light, then does an other, but yet he that takes more,
hyndereth his fellows nothing in so taking, nor he yt takes less gives
thereby any occasion for his fellows to take any more. And if it be thus of
the light of a torche, much rather it is so of the merit of this most
gracyous death, and of this most precious blud, which by the reason of the
godhead abundauntly suffyseth for the redemption of innumerable souls, were
their sins never so many, never so horrible, never so abominable. Surely as
Saint John says, ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris, 1. John. 2^
non pro nostris tantum sed et totius mundi. He was and is a sacrifice
abundantly sufficyent, for the sins of all this world.

When then for thy sake, and for thy love, he suffered this most horrible
death, which was so painful that the only remembrance of it made him to
sweat bloody sweat, and that in so great abundance that it trickled down by
his side unto the ground. If the only thinking of this death was so painful,
how paynefull was the suffering of ye same in deed. How might he more
evidently express unto thee, ye love of his heart, then by this means. Or what
might he more have done for thy love, as he says himself, quid vltra facere
debui, et non faci, what might I further have done, which I did not for thy
love.

Thou may then find here in this book great matter of love.

Here is also great matter of hope, and specially to sinners and will utterly
forsake their sin, and amend their lives for Christ Jesus sake. Doubtless for
such he suffered this most bitter death. Romans 5.
Pro impijs Christus mortuus est, for wicked sinners Jesus Christ dyed. And in
an other place, ye same s. Paul says. 2. Tim. 1.
Christus Jesus venit in hunc mundu^ saluos facere peccatores. Christ Jesus
came into this world for to save sinners that will amend their lives.

O christian soul take thou upon thee, the cross of pennaunce, and be
crucyfied with him, and then without doubt thou shall be partener of the the
merit of his crucifying, and of his most fruitful passion.

What shall exclude thee from his merit? Romans 8.
Almighty God the father? Nay, qui proprio filio suo non peporcit, sed pro
nobis omnibus tradidit illum, quomodo non cum illo nobis omnia donauit. He that
did not spare his own son, but gave him unto the death for us all, what shall
he deny us? what greater evidence can thou ask? that almighty God the
father will forgive thy sin, then this that he would not forsake to give unto
the death his own son, I say his own most dearly beloved son of whom he
said, Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo mihi co^placui. 2. Pet. ^.
This is my well-beloved son in whom is all my pleasure. What greater euydence
and proof may thou desire, that he will forgive thy sin, then yt he would
put this most inestimable Iuell into such a danger for thy sake, and send it
unto this most painful and shameful, and sorrowful death of the Cross.

But peradventure thou thynkest that our savior because thou haste bin so
unkind unto him, will not receive thee unto his mercy? I say therefore forsake
thy sin, and accuse thy unkindness, and be sorry for it. And doubt not but he
will forgive and forget thine unkindness, and receive thee again unto his
great mercy.

And therefore he says by his Prophet Hieremie, when a woman (says he) is gone
from her husband, and has accompanied her body with an other man, will her
husband receive her again? As who say, that it is not very like, but yet
hear what comfort he gives to a sinner, Hiere. 3.
tu autem fornicata es cum amatoribus multis tamen reuertere ad me et ego
suscipiam te. Nevertheless (he says to the soul of a sinner.) Albeit, thou
have forsaken me and playde the brothell with many other, yet return thou
again unto me, and I shall receive thee. But here, thou sinful soul deceive
not thy self. Thou may dissemble a returning, and be not in deed returned.
And if thou set not thy back toward all sin, and turn thy heart fully unto
thy savior, thou art not returned. But be thou truly returned and doubt not.

Behold earnestly the manner how thy savior Jesus hanged on ye Cross, and thou
shall see great cause of hope of his mercy if thou thus return. Saint Barnerd
says. Quis non rapiatur ad ^pem, impetrandique fiduciam, qua^ do considerat
corporis cius dispositionem, caput inclinatum ad osculum, brachia extenta ad
amplexandum, manus proforatas ad largiendum, latus opertum ad diligendu^ pedum
confixionem ad manendum nobiscum corporis extensionem ad se nobis totaliter
impendendum. Who may not be ravished to hope and confidence, if he consider ye
order of his body, his head bowing down to offer a kiss, his arms spread to
embrace us, his hands bored through to make lyberall gifts, his side opened to
show unto us the love of his heart, his feet fastened with nails, that he
shall not starte away but abide with us. And all his body stretched, forcesing
him self to give it wholly unto us. Surely O man, he that would thus and after
this manner exhibit his body unto thee on the Cross, (if thou will indeuer
thee upon thy part, he will not refuse thee, but take thee unto his mercy.

This most precious blood yt he shed on the Cross, cries always mercy for
sinners, that do thus rereturne. And therefore Saint Paul says. Hebr. 12.
Accessistis ad sanguinem melius loquentem quam Abel. Ye become, and have
returned you unto the blood, that speaks more graciously, then did the
blood of Abell. The blood of Abell cried vengeance before almighty God. As
almighty God said unto Caine in the book of Genesis, Sanguis Abell fratris
tui clamat ad me vindictam de terra. Genesis 4.
The blood of thy brother Abell cries vengeance in mine ears from the
ground where it is shead.

But the most precious blood of our savior Jesus Christ cries mercy for all
sinners that does repent. And our savior now before ye face of his father
shows his wounds, and shows his most precious blood, and cease not to
procure mercy for them.

This plainly does affirm ye blessed Apostle Saint John saying in this manner,
^. John. 2.
filioli hec scribo vobis vt non peccatis, sed et si quis peccauerit aduocatu^
habemus apud patrem Jesus Christum iustum et ipse, est propitiatio pro peccatis
nostris. That is to say, Children I write these things unto you, to the intent
that you should not sin. Nevertheless if it fortune any man to sin, we
have an advocate for us Christ Jesus, before ye face of his father. And he is
rightuous, and without sin, and a very satisfaction for all our sins. Who
the^ attentively does behold this Crucifix, and verily believes that on the
Cross was paid the rau^som of all sinners, how may he not fully trust that if
he ask mercy for his sins, they shall be forgiven him. So that here every
sinner may find great matter and occasion of hope. In the Cross is also
matter of joy. Here is occasion of such excessive joy, that a soul which
verily tastes it, can not but highly rejoice in the same. And therefore Saint
Paul did say Mihi autem absit gloriari nisi in cruce domini Jesus Christi,
Gala. ^.
God forbid that I rejoice in any other thing then in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Here doubtless is great cause for every true Christian man to
rejoice, and specially for three points.

The first is that by the death of our savior on the Cross, and sheding of
his most precious blood on the Cross we be fully reconciled to almighty God,
as often as we do true repentance, with a fast purpose of amendment. Thus
Saint Paul says, ad Col Complacuit per eum reconciliari omnia in ipsum per
sanguinem cruicis. It has pleased God the father, that by his son and by his
blood shed on the Cross all should be reconciled.

But you will ask me what means this word reconciled? It is as much to sai,
as to be made atone with almighty God and to be at friendship with him. As two
men when they have been at variaunce to be made lovers together again. So the
displeasure which he had against us for our sin, is taken away. And his great
wrath against us is fully pacified. And where we were by sin the children of
the devil, now we have recovered to be made again the children of God, and
consequentlye the inheritours of heaven.

O thou Christian man is not here great cause to rejoice.

If thou have a ritche man to thy father which had loved thee much, and he for
thy misdemaner had cast thee out from his favor, and so thou werte in
ieopardie to lose thy enherytaunce, if by means of a brother of thine thou
might be brought into his favor again, and be taken for his son as thou
waste before and restored thereby to thine enheritance, haddeste thou not great
cause to be joyous and rejoice, that by this means, thou have recovered again
thy fathers love, with all the commodities belonging unto the same? In like
manner it is of every sinner, for he by his lewd demainer and by his sinful
dealing has so displeased his father, that he is cast out from the favor of
his father, and is in perrill to lose his inherytaunce, which his most loving
father had provided for him.

Nevertheless his only begotten son by his inestimable goodness and
charity suffering the most painful death of the Cross, and shedding his most
precious blood for amends and recompense of our ungracious dealinge, has
reconcyled us again, and made us at one with his father, and set us at a
perfect peace, concord, and unity. And this is concerning the first point.

The second by the virtue of the cross, and of his most blessed passion, ye
power of our enymies be much broken, for on the Cross our savior by his death
gatt the victory upon the^, for the which Saint Paul said, expolians
principatus et potestates traduxit confidenter, triumphans cos in seem tipso.
Col. 2^
Christ Jesus spoiling ye mighty power of the diuill, has openly detected
their frauds, and gotten a very triumph of them in his own person. And
therefore nothing is yet more tirrible unto them, then is the sign of the
Cross. A blessed virgin saint Christian had such a confidence in the token
of the Cross, that when she feelt her self tempted with her ghostly enemy,
she marked her self with the same token, and at every temptation she gatte
the better of the diuils. And by this holy token chased the^ away, and put ever
to flight. Thirdli by the virtue of the cross, and of this most fruitful
death, our hand writing the which made most against us, was clerly put out.
When where was it written? In the book of our own conscience, there is no
manner of sin that we do, but it is written in the book of our conscience.
And if we repent us not of the same, and be heartily sorry for it before our
death, this book of our conscience shall be showed against us in ye dreadful
day of judgment. Nevertheless if we repent us and confess us, and do true
repentance therefore, then by the virtue of this passion it shall be scraped out
of the book of our conscience. Therefore Saint Paul calls sin our own
hand writing, Col. 2.
Deleuit quod aduersu^ nos erat chirographum decreti quod erat contrarium
nobis, et ipsu^ tulit de medio affigens illud cruci. Christ Jesus (he says)
put out the hand writing of ye decree which was against us, and so withdrewe
it fastening it unto the Cross. When thou perceiuest (O sinful creature) that
by the Cross of Christ, and by that most precious blood which was shed on the
cross thou art reconciled and made at one with God, and that the power of
thine enemies be greatly represt. And fynallly that thy sin which was most
against thee was crucified on the same Cross, so that thou may clearly see
that here is great matter of excessive joy and to rejoice in the most blessed
Crucifix.

Finally in the Cross is also matter of great comfort, when a person has
deserved a great open shame, and is brought even to the plunge of the matter,
and yet by the means of help he is delivered from the same, is not this his
deliverance from this open shame, a comfort unto him? yes doubtless?

The noble woman Susanna, as the Prophet Daniell tells, Daniel. 17.
all be it she was giltlesse, yet for because she would not assent to the
wretched desire of two lewd priests, she was by them wrongfully accused, and
put to great shame, for they wrongfully slaundered her, that she had taken an
other man besides her husband, and that she had committed adulterye.
Nevertheless, when the matter was tried by the goodness of almightye God, and
she was clearelye discharged from this terrible occasion, and clearly
delivered from this shame, it was a great comfort unto her.

Luke. 7.
The blessed Magdalen which by her wretched living had deserud great sha^e, yet
when she came to our savior Christ and wept at his feet, and so by his great
mercy was excused of her shame, her heart was set at a great rest, and in great
comfort. The woman of whom the gospel tells, yt was taken in aduoutery by
her enemies and so brought before our savior Christ, Psalm. 21
and there in his presence, and before al his people, her shamfull dealing was
published, who may think but yt she was sore acco^bred with that open shame,
but yet when our souiour had confounded her enemies and delivered her from yt
shame, she was restored to much ease and comfort of her heart. Why tell I this?
Truly to the intent that we may see great matter of comfort in the Cross, for
we sinners have deserved great shame for our abominable sin, surely so
great that if we verily knew the greatness of the shame, that we have deserved,
we might never sustain the remembrance thereof. And yet that most inestimable
goodness of Christ by that horyble shame that he suffered on the Cross,
delivered us from everlasting shame. He took there upon his back all the burden
of our sin. There wanted no circumstances of horrible shame, for then the
death of the Cross was the most shameful manner of death, that was put to any
villain. It was the^ the most vilanous death to be hanged on ye gebbit of the
Cross. And this was done in no secret place, but high upon an open mountain,
that all the people might behoulde and look upon him. And he was hanged there
naked and between two thieves as though he were a prince and captain of
misdoers. And against ye feast of Easter, when the most number of people did
assemble unto ye temple of ye Jews, Ezech. 16.
nigh unto the City of Jerusalem, that all the people might commodiouslye
resort to gase upon this cruel spectacle. This thing was done also in the
open day, for from the midst of the day he thus did hang alive on the Cross by
the space of three hours and more. And all the strangers as they passed foreby
did wonder upon him. The soldiers opprobryously rebuked him. The priests with
words of derision and mockerye assaulted him. The thieves that honge besides
him blasphemed him. Finally al his enimes rejoiced in their victory against
him. Alas what creature might be more shamefully entreated, then was our
savior christ Jesus hanging thus on the Cross. A troth it is, now the Cross
is made honorable by his death, but then as I said, Psalm. 31.
it was more shameful then any gibbet or gallows, or any other instrument of
death. And moreover, and besides that he was hanged on the same with the most
dispight and villainy th^^ could be thought or devised for any creature to be
put unto. O thou christian soul, Christ Jesus the son of God took upon him
all this shame, for thy love, to ye intent that if thou will amend thy life, and
forsake thy sin and do true penance, thou shall by his shame be delivered from
al shame. His shame shall hide thy sins. He was there naked and spoiled of all
his clothes, to the intent yt thou should be covered under his mantle fro
thy shame. And therefore by the prophet Ezechiell he says, Expa^di amittum meum
super (...), et operui ignominiam tuam. I did spread my mantle upon thee, and so
covered thee from shame. Let every person here think with them selves what
deeds they have done worthy of great shame, which if they had come to light
and been openly known, they should have been blotted with open infamye here in
this life, and with out the special mercy of god in the day of judgment they
should thereof have an open shame before all the world, and fyfally in hell an
everlasting shame. But from al those shames by ye gracious mantle of Christ
many be covered. He has mercifully spread his mantle over them, and kept them
from those importable shames. Of this covering also the Prophet David says,
Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata. Blessed are those whose sins be covered. O
thou sinful creature, if thou might see what shame thou have deserved for
thy sin, thou should reckon this a singular comfort. But thou see not
the abhominacion of thy sin, and therefore thou perceyuest not what shame thou
have deserved. Why does a common brothel take no shame of her abomination?
what is the cause, why that she regards her infamye no more? Truly as far
as I can judge, the cause is for that all the light of honesty is quenched in
her, she is so blinded with her wretched pleasure that she is paste all
shame, and has not left in her one spark of ye light of honestye, where by
she may value and esteem ye horriblenesse of her offenses. She reputeth more
a little spote in her kyrchefe, or in her face, the^ a thousand blots of deadly
sin in her soul. But if she had any honesty wtin her heart to think how foul
and abominable her lif were, surely she would be much ashamd of her self.

Thamar the daughter of King David, when her brother Amon would have oprest her,
2 Reg* 13.
she said. Noli facere hanc stulticiam, ego enim far non potero opprobrium
meum. O my brother said she, do not this folly, for this reproach that ye
enforce to do unto me is greater then I may suffer. This woman had some light
of honestye, within her breast, whereby she was moved to resist, and to
withstand this shameful deed batweene her and her brother.

A Roman woman also, whose name was Lucretia, whom by force and against her
will in the absence of her husband, one man called Sextus Tarquinius, had abused
her, albeit the thing was (...), yet she was there of so much as^amed in her
own mind that she might not bear the shame. But when her husband came home,
she took a knife and in his presence slew her self. This noble woman had the
light of honesty in her soul, she saw how abominable a thing it was to
commit adultery. But a brothell has in her no spark of honesty whereby she can
take any shame, nor she does not consider the foul abhomynacion of, her
wretched life, and therefore she is shamles. And in like manner every sinner, yt
lacks ye light of faith, neither considers ye greatness of his sin, nor
the presence of almightye God, which looks upon the same. He regards
nothing the blessed Angels the which does behold the^ abominable conscience,
to their great discomfort, nor the deuilles his mortal enemies which be full
joyous of his shameful demainer. If the sinner clearly considered al these
things, (as they be matter in very deed) he would be doubtless greatly
ashamed of him self, and in a great discomforte. Nevertheless a penitent
soul, yt is sore pressed and wrong with utter shame, like as was the women of
who^ I spoke before I mean Susanna and Mary Magdalen, and the woman that was
apprehended in aduoutry. I say such a soul being holde^ in such distress of
shame, and considering that by the approbrious and shameful death, which our
savior did suffer on ye Cross. He that delivered all true penitent sinners,
from the shame which he deserved for their sin, and that he there by took
all their sin in his own neck, has great cause (as me seems) to take a
wonderful comfort in the most blessed Cross. So yt here also (as I said) is
great matter and cause of very comfort, and of solace incomparable. Wherefore
to conclude my tale as touching this second writing, if either love, or hope,
or joy, or comfort will make us sing. Here in this book of the Crucifixe is
great occasion of song. If thou first truly lament with Christ, thou shall
after joyfully sing with him, and each of these shall induce other, hatred of
sin shall bring into thy heart the love of Christ, dread shall bring in
hope, sorrow shall bring in joy. And shame here taken for thy sin, shall bring
into thy soul perpetual comfort. And thus much I have said for the second
writing.

The third wrytinge that is written in this book, I said is ve, that is to
say woe, ve betokens in scriptures everlasting dampnation. And doubtless this
woe may such sinners here read, that neither will lament, nor sing with Christ
on the Cross, as he said unto the Jews Cecinimus vobis et non saltastis,
lamentauimus vobis et non planxistis, that is to say, Mat. ^^.
we sunge unto you, and you sorrowed not. And soon after the Gospel tells,
that he reprochfully spoke unto ye cities, to ye which he had showed many
great miracles. And they for all that did no manner of pennaunce for their
sin, to such there he tirribly threatens saying, Vae tibi Corozaine, Vae
tibi Bethsaida, Mat. 11.
woe shall be to thee Bethsaida, by this we may learn that such which will not
stir in them selves these affections above rehearsed, whereby they may lament,
or else singe with Christ on the Cross they shall come to everlasting woe.

I say who that will not stir in their hearts, dread, shame, sorrow, and
hatred, of their sin, and so truly lament with Jesus, either else quicken in
their hearts love, hope, rejoicing, and comfort and so singe with Jesus,
doubtless they shall come to the woe of everlasting dampnation, which woe is
the third writing that as we said before is written on the Cross.

Behold O thou christian soul ye extreme pains, yt our savior suffered on ye
cross, for thy sin. And if thou will not by such aflictions, as I now have
rehearsed enforce thy self to be made parteiner of ye same pains in this
life, thou shalt in the life to come endure like manner of pains and that
everlastingly where he suffered them on the Cross for a time. Let us therefore
deeply consider what pains he did endure and suffer on ye cross. The first,
when he was crucified he was spoiled and made naked of al his clothes. And so
violently thrown down upon the hard timber, and his hands and feet cruelly
dug in with nails, as he says in the 21. Psalm. Foderunt manus meas et
pedes meos, Io. ^.
they have dug my hands and my feet, this he suffered for thy sin O
sinful creature, and if thou will not amend thy life be times, thou shall be
spoiled of all thy clothes, and so cast down into hell, upon a more painful
couch, then was the Cross. The Prophet Esaias says unto such a sinner. Subtus
te seruatur timea et opera mentum tuum verinis. Esaias. 14.
The mothes that shall tear and gnaw thy body, shall lie under thee acd the
burninge worms and serpents shall sprale above thee and dig away part of thy
body. O think what an horrible pain it were for to lie in a bed full of
snakes, adders, and todes, creepinge and sprawling, and biting, and pinching
thee on every part.

The second, when our savior was reared up aloft on the Cross, that same
hanging there was very paynefull unto him, O what pain was it unto that most
delicate and tender body of his to hang so long in that tormentrye. But
where he did hang here but for a time, if you amend not thy life, thou sh^^^
hang in the gibbet of hell for evermore. For be thou well assured that if thou
shall suffer for thine own sin in hell, thou shalt suffer a more grievous
tormentry then he did, and that without seasing. For as it is said in the
Apocalipses, fumus tormentorum ascendet in secula seculorum, Apoca. 14.
the smoke of the tormentries of that place shall ascend by innumerable
worlds, that is to say without end. The torments which he suffered on the
Cross, was the nails, the thorns, the rops, the schourges, the spear. But
ye torments that thou shall suffer, shall a thousand fold pass them. Look
how far the malice and wit of the diuils passes the malice and wit of the
Jews, so far exceed the engynes which the diuilles have conceived and
forged for the dampened souls to be tormented. Above them that ye Jews
maliciously devised against our savior Christ. The third, our savior endured
an extreme heat, and fervor, when he for the great affliction and (...) agony
which he did suffer, was constrained for yt grievous anguish to sweat water
and blud. But this heat is nothing to ye heat of the burning fire of hell which
never shall be quenched, Ignis ille non extinguetur, As the gospel says, that
fire shall never be quenched. The Prophet Esaias says, Quis ex vobis poterit
habitare cum ardoribus sempiternis which of you may continually inhabit with
the heates that never shall cease.

O sinful creature think with thy self ye largenes of these two words. Ever
and never, think with thy self how paynefull it shall be ever to be in that
brenning fire, and never to be released of thy pain.

If thou should be compelled to lie but one sennight upon a soft
featherbed, I suppose thou would be weary thereof. But how weary shall thou
be ever to lie stewing and brenning without ceasing.

The fourth, our savior Christ endured also cold not only for his
nakedness, but also when his natural heat by death, left his body. But the
dampened sinner shall endure in hell a more excessyue cold. Job says of such,
transibunt ab aquis niuis ad calorem nimirem, they shall be shyfred out of ye
cold snow brought into the outrageous heates. O Jesus, a tender hand wherein ye
froste and snow it has been made extreme cold and suddenly is brought into
the heat of the fire, it feels a greater pain, but nothing comparable unto
that shyfting from that cold into that heat which is in hell.

The fifth, our savior in his cross hard blasphemous and opprobrious words, and
much insultinge of his enemies against him, which doubtless was very paynefull
unto him. But the damned sinners shall in hell hear nothing else but continual
outcryes, opprobrious insulting, blasphemes of the devils and other that be
dampened. Blasphemabunt deum caeli doloribus, they shall blaspheme the god of
heaven for continual pain and sorrows. And they shall see before their faces
continually the most horrible and ireful countenance of their immortal enemies
the devils.

The vi. our savior wept on ye cross for ye sins of other, as s. Paul
says, cu^ clamore et lachimis, Heb. 5.
with crying and teres but the damned sinners that would not here weep with
Christ, such tears as might wash their sins, shall weep in hell for their
own sins, such tears as shall skalde their bodies, and yet they shall be
never the better. Ibi erit flectus et stridor dentium, There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Math. 22.
the smoke of ye Fire shall make them for to weep, and the coldenesse of the
snow shall make their teeth for to gnashe, and chytter in their heads. Yea and
that is more merueilous, neither the cold shall attemper the heat, nor
contrarywyse, the heat shall attemper the cold, but either of them shall
increase the violence of the other. Even as in the forge of a Smith, the cold
water when it is cast into the Fire, causes the Fire to be much more fearse
and violent. The seventh, our savior on the cross had extrem drighnes, for ye
which he complained and said, Scitio, I am dry, And no marvel though he were
dry, after so much pain and travail, after so much bleeding and sweting,
whereby no moisture almost was left in his bodi. But how unmeasurable
drighnesse shall ye dampened souls endure in the fire of hell? The rich glutton
yt was buried in hell teaches us what drighnesse is there, for he would have
given all this world to have had one drop of water or lycour to have refreshed
his tongue, that was made so dry with the flame of that fire.

The eight, our savior on ye cross had much sorrow and heaviness. If he for
the only remembrance of the pain for to come was in so great an agony that he
sweat water and blood, who can express or think what sorrow and heaviness he
suffered when all the pains were present, and presently did oppress him.
Nevertheless every dampened person, by the reason of their continual and
everlasting pains shall have much more sorrow and heaviness, for the which
it is written in the book of Sapience, penitentiam Agentes et pretristitia
spiritus gementes, they verily lamentably repent them selves, and for extreme
heaviness of spirit mourn and sorrow, thinking, for how brief and
transitory pleasures, they lost the joys everlasting, and gate ye pains that
ever shall endure.

The ninth, our savior on ye cross did suffer much infamy and shame. And
specially to deliver (as I said all sinners that would amend the^ selves, and
forsake their sin,) from everlasting shame. But such as will not, shall
suffer their own shame, as they have deserved. The true penytent soul shall
be sacyate with perpetual glory, But he that will not repent him self shall
have perpetual shame and infamy.

Almighty God says, to such by his Prophet Naum, Reuelabo pudenda tua in
facie tua. I will make open all thy shamefulnesse and evil dealyng in thine
own face. And the Prophet Hieremy says, saturabitur opprobrijs* he shall be
sacyate with opprobryous shame.

The tenth, above all other pains that our savior did suffer on the Cross,
was to be desolate of all comfort, yea of his father, and to be as a person
forsaken of almighty God, and destitute of all help and succor, for the which
he sore complayneth on his Cross, crying unto his father Deus meus Deus meus,
vt quid dereliquisti^ me, O my God, O my God, why have thou forsaken me. But
this forsaking was but for a season, for within a short time after, he was
raised again to immortal glory. But the dampened sinners which shall be
punished for their own sins in hell, shall ever be forsaken, and fully be
depryued, not only from all joy and comfort, but from that most glorious
sight of the face of almighty God, wherein stands all blessedness and
consummation of all comfort. And this shall more pinche the dampened souls,
then all the other torments of hell besides. For the which Chrysostom says.
Ego autem multo grauiores cruciatus duco, quam gehenuam, remoueri et ab duci ab
illa gloria. I think (says he) that to be removed and cast out from that
everlasting glory, is more grievous torments then all the other pains of hell.

Finally, our savior on the cross, suffered the pains of death for our
sins, whereby we had deserved death. And therefore he suffered death to
deliver us from the death of sin. Nevertheless he remained no long time in
the bonds of death. But the dampened sinner that must pay his own debtes in
hell, shall suffer everlasting death, not so that the sinners shall have no life
nor feeling in them, but because that they shall be ever as though they were in
the extreme pains of death, and yet they shall have no perfect sense of the
pains, and never dye. The pains shall be to them so vyolent, that they shall
perish a thousand times, and desire continually for to dye, but death shall fly
away from them, desiderabunt mori et mors fugie ab eis, they shall desire death,
and death shall fly from them. O Jesus in what myserie shall they be in, that
ever shall covet death, and never may fully dye.

The Prophet David speaking of their pain says. Mors depascet eos, which
words may have three senses, one is that death shall be their pastor and
heardman, he shall order them, and lead them to their pastures. In hell is
two pastures, the one is all full of snow, the other full of fire, for the
which Iobe says, Ad calorem nimium transient ab aquis niuium, they shall
walk from the snow unto the fire. And again from the fire unto the snow, this
may be one sense, an other may be this, they shall be the continual meat of
death, as ye see in the pastures, where ye sheep feed. They croppe the grass
ever as it ryseth and keeps it low, and so the grass is ever in eating, and
never full eaten.

In like manner death shall continually croppe the dampened persons in hell. And
he shall ever be gnawyng and eating upon them, and yet they shall never be
fully consumed. The third sense may be this, death shall be their continual
meat, for they shall ever long and desire for to dye, they shall ever above all
other things covet to have death, and their desire shall always be a like fresh
and fervent. An other comfort and refresshing besides this, they shall have
none, but whatsoever the sense of these words be, thou may well perceive by
them. O thou christian soul) that if thou shall come to that place to pay thy
debtes of thine own sins, it shall be to grievous and to importable for thee
to sustain, for as I said, look any manner of pain that our savior Christ
suffered on the cross for all our sins. If we be not before our death by
such affections (as I before did rehearse) made perteyners of his sufferyng, we
shall suffer all the same pains in hell perpetually.

And therefore it is a troth, we may read in the book of the Crucifix great
matter of woe, which is the third writing that we had to speak off. Now thou
sinful creature, have often before thine eyes this wonderful book which as I
said is written within and with out. In the which also thou may read three
manner of wrytings, that is to say, lamentation, song, and woe. If thou will
begin to lament with Jesus, thou shall thereby come to sing with him. And thereby
thou shall be made so fully parteiner of his passion, that the debtes of thy
sins shall be thoroughly paid, and that thou shall escape everlasting woe.
But if thou do refuse this remedy, and follow the desires of this world, and
of the flesh, be thou well assured that then thou shall pay thine own debtes
amongst the diuils in hell, with everlasting woe. From the which he defend us,
that for our love as this day suffered on the Cross, his most paynfull and
sorrowful death, our savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

Per Iohannem Fyssher Episcopum Rofensem. Memoria crucifixi: vitia crucifigit.
Grego Quecumque momorderit astucia sathanae aspiciat Christum inligno pendente^
August


