A DEFENSE OF THE LITVRGIE OF The Church of England, OR, Book of Common Prayer.

In a Dialogue between NOVATVS, AND IRENAEVS


BY Ambrose Fisher, sometimes of TRINITY College in CAMBRIDGE.

Coecorum men's oculatissima.

Read him that never read; for, by this wise The Blind leads thee to Church,
who have thine eyes.

LONDON; Printed by W. S. for Robert Milbourne in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Greyhound. 1630.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FRIEND SIR Robert Filmer, Knight.
SIR,
IT was your care that preserved this Treatise; and it will be your honor
that you have preserved it. From you I had it in writing; to you I return it
printed. Pity that he, who was deprived of sight in his life, should be
deprived of the light of his true-worth after his death: Pity that he, who
(though his eminent abilities could not altogether be hid) lived in some
obscurity, if not unregarded, yet unrewarded; should (having left this
Monument of his Learning, and Love to his and our Dear Mother, the English
Church) be utterly forgotten as if she never had brought forth such a son. I
confess, many of Our Worthies (and be they ever acknowledged and remembered
with honor) have, by parts, upon occasions, vindicated and justified Our
Common Prayer Book against opposers, but a through defense thereof never met I
withal before this.

It was conceived in the brain and breast of this learned Author in your Uncle
Argall's house at Colchester, and the first draught thereof was there made.
Perhaps the Laconicall brevity thereof; the Socraticall disputing, on Irenaeus
part; and the Ramisticall Dichotomies, on the part of Nouatus, may perplexe
some Reader, but questionless to the Learned, as familiarly therewithal
acquainted, they will be acceptable. To gather, and contriue much into a little
was his ordinary course, and he was happy in it. It was his labor in like
manner rather to speak to the understanding, then to the affections, yet
closely withal (in a Crypticke Rhetoric) he moves them.

Brought up he was in his tender years among those, whom he here confutes,
and by them was designed to uphold the faction. His conuersing with them
(besides their Books printed) made himself acquainted with their plots, and
arguments, and had wel-nigh framed him for their purpose: But the
Great-Ouer-Ruler of all plots and purposes, gave this Blind-Man, when he came
to maturitie, Inward-Light, and drew him out of that Schism, which even with
the milk was instilled into him, and under the ferule was pressed upon him. It
was his happiness to come to Cambridge, and, in Cambridge, to that Renowned
College sacred to the Sacred Trinity. There (as your self remembers) we were
coequalls in time, and companions in studies. There attained he to the
knowledge both of the Tongues and Arts; and improued them (by his vndefatigable
industry) even almost to a Miracle. This deepe-learned-man was ready,
euer-readie, to impart his knowledge, whether in Philosophy, or Divinity,
freely, vnrestrainedly, cheerfully. To many young Scholars there, and at
Westminster afterward (where he lived in my brother Doctor Grant's house) was
he a lightsome Guide, though his own eyes were dark.

Knowledge and Charity strove in him which should exceed the other; so that
his departure hence so soon, was a great loss to many, if I said to this
Whole Church of Ours, I said but the truth.

It was his Charity (grounded upon Knowledge) that compiled this Dialogue. And
the like Charity excites me to draw it out of obscurity into the public
light and view of the Church. And I am encouraged the rather hereunto by His
Majesty's late Blessed-Instructions for the countenancing of the
to-much-neglected-Prayers, and despised Rits of Our Church. This occasion
justly, me thought, called for it; and would have laid sacrilege to my charge
had I withheld it. It attends on the Scepter; and good success God send it,
that the Public Liturgy of Our Church may henceforth justly be valued, and
duly observed. I confess ingenuously, that it is Catechizing and Preaching,
which enable us to the required performance of God's Worship; but Prayer it is
(especially Public Prayer in the House-Of-Prayer) which is
God's-Immediate-Worship. The more Public this is, and the more frequent,
the-more-likely (yea more then likely) is it to divert judgments, and draw
down blessings. And my private Prayer shall ever be, that Public Prayer in
Our Church, as it is revived, so it may be continued while the World continues,
even till Our Jesus returns in glory. So prays

Saint Barthol. Exchange, London, April 5. 1630. Yours in the same Jesus, who
is ever the same JOHN GRANT.

TO THE Reader.
WHat Master Fisher was, these three Epitaphs may further show: Two in Latin:
the Last in English, On his- Marble (in Westminster Great-Cloisters, near the
Library) they could not be engraued. This Book (his truer Monument) may
preserve them too. The first Latin One was made by that Honorable Knight Sir
Robert Ayton, then Secretary to Queen Anne, and now to Queen Mary: The other
by Dr. Thory, that Worthy French Physician: the English by a True Lover, and
Knower of this Author, Master John Harris, sometimes one of the King's
Scholars in Westminster, and afterward of Christ's Church in Oxford.

EPITAPH. I.
AMbrosius iacet hic Piscator, coeperat hamo
Ambrosio pisces queis Deus esca fuit:
Hoc and agens, vitam non lucem liquit, ab ista
Annos vix natus quinque relictus erat:
Octo tamen vixit, non vidit, lustra, nec vlli
Men's oculata magis, vitaue sancta magis:
Historiae, Sophiae, Vatum sacra abdita norat,
Norat Adae, atque Remi, and Cecropis ore loqui:
Et nunc est positus mutam prope Bibliothecam,
Ipse loquens quoniam Bibliotheca fuit.
EPITAPH. II.
Nisi lapis es,
AVdi, Viator, loquentem lapidem:
Hic cubat propter Aedem Sapientiae,
Merito mayor quam fama,
Sapiens Immortalis Piscator.
Is, cito amissa oculorum luce perspicacior,
Quantum homini fas est animo penetrauit
Omnis Diuinae and Humanae Scientiae adyta.
Oculatis Caecus facem praetulit:
Mundo merso^ coelesti radio ad Deum sustulit:
Generosae Iuventutis quasi Parens:
Miserorum consolator:
Sui Dominus.
In terra extra terram; auribus, ingenio intentus;
Deo, sibi, and Patriae defaecato semper animo.
Idem vixit.
Tandem, nullo vnquam lucis ablatae desiderio tactus,
Aetate integra, ex haec vita velut illustri nocte ad Patrum Luminum
Lubenter translatus, quod mortale fuit, tumulo,
Immortale sui desiderium bonis reliquit.
Gaudete caeci veniet and vohis Dies.
EPITAPH. III.
MEn, Women, Children, all that pass this way
Whether such as here Walk, or Talk, or Play,
Take notice of the Holy-Ground you are on,
Least you profane it with oblivion:
Remember, with due sorrow, that here lies
The-Learned-Fisher, He, whose darkened eyes
Gave light (such as the Midday emulates)
To either Sex, each Age, and all Estates:
For, as on the Full-Sea, soon His-Brest
All-Vessels rode All-Wayes (He vnopprest
And deepe-enough for all:) Men, Old, or Young
Well or Ill-grounded; What Art or what Tongue
Soever they durst profess, hearing his name
Blushed, here returned to school, and it was no shame:
By Lectures of fair virtue, by discourse
Rich, sacred, and well couched, he adding force
(Fair Dames) to your Great Beauty, yet his debtor,
Sweetened your sweets, and made your goodness better.
The Little Wantons made their Mothers weep
To see their forwardness, so could they keep
The Blind-Man's powerful Forms; for by their looks,
They knew their letters ere they knew their Books;
So rare his Methods were, so sweet so free
The Nurses milk was not so good as He;
For all the Learned Tongues, Philosophy,
All Humane-Arts, Poesy, History,
They had been Wonders Singled, had they bin
So full, as they met in this Magazin;
And for the Great Theology, just fame
Gave him all the Art and Power of his A Fisher of Men.
Name.
Now, if that any Tongues, or any Arts,
Goodness, or Virtue's loss, may pierce our hearts,
Why should these marbles weep alone? In you,
Reader, it is sacrilege not to weep too:
Sigh's are but Rites, a Punctuall-Sacrifice
And Voluntary, were not Tears, but Eyes;
And, twere a profitable loss to thee,
That thou might so become as Blind as He:
As for that light thou read'st these cold lines by,
Know it is but Envy keeps the Sun so dry:
For it is presumed the Day-Guide could not love him,
That saw so much without him, and Above him.
A Table of the Chapters in general, and Contents in Particular.
Of the first Book.
CHAP. I. General arguments against the Liturgy, page 1. THe salutation of
Bonum mane, and (...) p. 1. The name of Christmas, p. 3. Our Liturgy no
Masse-booke, p. 4. Preaching of Sermons not hindered by our Liturgy, nor the
zeal of the people thereby quenched, p. 7.
CHAP. II. Of set Prayer imposed by men, and of subscription, page 9. Of Set
Prayer, p. 10. Of Subscription thereto, p. 12. Of things indifferent, p. 15.
CHAP. III. Of Feasts, and Fasts, page 17. Of appointing Festiuals, p. 17. Of
dedicating them to creatures, p. 18. The names of Months, p. 20. Saints Days,
p. 22. Michael the Archangell a creature, p. 23. The Apostles Holy Days, p.
27. The Children slain by Herod, whether Innocents, p. 27. And how Martyrs, p.
28. Of Set Fasts, p. 29. Of Lent, p. 31. Of Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and
Saturdayes Fast, p. 32.
CHAP. IV. Of Place; and Ornaments, page 32. Whether Churches, abused to
Idolatry, ought to be destroyed? p. 33. Of Universities, p. 34. The Dedication
of Churches, p. 37. Of Chancels, ibid. Of the Surplice, p. 39.
CHAP. V. The Preface. Of the Common Prayers, page 43. Of these words in the
Preface Inuitatorie (At what time so-euer, etc.) p. 43. Of that (saying after
me) p. 45. The Confession of Faith repeated, p. 47.
CHAP. VI. Of the Lords Prayer, page 48. Of repeating the Lords Prayer, p. 48.
And omission of the Doxologie, p. 52.
CHAP. VII. Of short Prayers, page 54. Of Short Prayers, p. 54. Of the word
Priest, p. 55 Of the Peoples Responsals, p. 60. Of Gloria Patri, etc. p. 61. Of
those words among the Responsals, (there is no other that fights for us but
only thou O Lord) p. 63
CHAP. VIII. Of the Letanie, p. 65 Whether the Letanie want Thanksgiving? p. 65
Whether these words, (By the Mystery of thy holy incarnation, etc.) be an
Oath, or Magical Exorcisme? p. 67. Of that prayer, That God would have mercy
upon all men, p. 69. Whether we pray for the Dead in these words? (Remember not
the offenses of our Forefathers) p. 70. Of that (Illuminate all Bishops, etc.)
p. 74. Of that (from fornication, and all other deadly sin) p. 76 Of the
number of Prayers for Temporal blessings, p. 79 Of Lightning and Tempest, p.
83. Of sudaine death, p. 84.
CHAP. IX, Of Hymns, p. 86 Of Music in Churches, p. 86. Of Magnificat,
Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, p. 91. Of Te Deum, and Benedicite, p. 92. Of that
(When thou had overcome the sharpness, etc.) p. 93
CHAP. X. Of Collects, and Creeds, page 93 Of those words in the Collect (Grant
that this day we fall into no sin) p. 94. Of those (in the power of the
Majesty to worship the Unity) p. 95. The term of Penance, p. 96. Of Chance,
p. 97 No merit intimated in those words of the Collect upon Ashwednesday (that
we worthily lamenting our sins, etc.) p. 98. Nor despair in those, in that
Collect upon the twelfth Sunday after Trinity Sunday, and in that fifth after
the Offertorie, p. 99 The often Rehearsal of the Apostles, Nicene, and
Athanasian Creed, page 102, Of equalizing them to the Canonical Scripture,
ibid. of standing at the Creed rehearsed, p. 103
CHAP. XI. Of God's speech in the Liturgy, p. 104 Of omissions in the
Commandments, p. 104 Of the prayer used by the People between every
Commandments, p. 108. Of the Commination, ibid. Of those words in the
Catechism (redeemed me, and all mankind) p. 109
CHAP. XII. Of the Sacraments in general: and of Baptism, p. 110 Of the two
Sacraments, generally necessary to salvation, page 211. Of the visible sign,
113. Of their necessity to salvation, page 115. Of those words in Baptism
(unless a man be borne of water, etc.) p. 117. Of the sanctification of water
in Baptism, page 125. Of Godfathers, page 126. Of the naming of Children, page
128. Of private Baptism, p. 129. Of Women's baptizing, page 131 Of conditional
Baptism, p. 132
CHAP. XIII. Of the Cross in Baptism, p. 134 The Cross in Baptism, no
breach of the Commandments, no Idol, p. 134. No Idolothite, p. 142 As we use
it, there is no Superstition in it, p. 143 neither cause of Scandal, p. 146
CHAP. XIV. Of Confirmation, p. 150 Of Confirmation, both in the sign thereof,
p. 151. and grace thereby, p. 152. Not preferred by us before Baptism, p. 154
CHAP. XV. Of the Lords Supper, p. 157 Of those words (least after that holy
Sacrament, etc.) and whether Judas received the Lord's Supper? p. 157. Of
kneeling at the Communion, p. 160
CHAP. XVI. Of the Visitation of the Sick, p. 173. Of the necessity of the
Communion, p. 173. Of the Communion in private, p. 174. Of Absolution with
authority, and to particular men applied, p. 175
CHAP. XVII. Of Matrimony. p. 177 Of the strait charging of the parties to be
married, p. 177. The Oath ex Officio, p. 178. Of the consent of Parents before
Marriage, p. 179. Of error in the Person, p. 180. Of Eunuchs, Hermaphrodites,
Leprosy, Falling Sickness, etc. ibid. Of separation by death, p. 181. Of
infidelity, and adultery, and how they make separation after Marriage, p.
182. Of those words (with my body I thee worship) p 184. Whether Saint Paul
were the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, p. 185. Of asking Banes in the
Church, page 187. Of the married parties kneeling before the Communion Table,
p. 189. Of those words (consecrated to such a mystery) ibid. Marriage not
acounted by us a Sacrament, ibid. toward the end, and so to the end of the
Chapter. Of the Ring in Marriage, p. 195
CHAP. XVIII. Of Churching: and Burial, p. 196 What purification is abrogated,
p. 196. and how, p. 197. Our Churching of Women, no Iudaisme, and of the Veil
then used, p. 198. and of the Offering imposed. p. 199. Of Tithes, ibid. They
are God's Stipends, not Alms, p. 200. They are not Iewishly Ceremonial, p.
201. They are due to Ministers, and so proved, ibid. Of competencie, p. 204.
City Tithes, p. 205. The Apostles were not maintained by Alms, ibid. Priests
bury not, but assist the Funeral, p. 207. Of Prayers then used, and of
Sermons, p. 208. The place of Burial, p. 209.

The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Book of Tobit, p. 211 THe Apocryphal Books no Canon with us
for Doctrine, p. 211. And yet, upon good grounds, read in our Church, p. 212.
As namely, for the explanation of the Canonical Scriptures, p. 215. Why they
are called Apocryphal, page 216. Of the Angel Raphael, in the Book of Tobit,
p. 220. Of the seven Angels in the twelfth Chapter of Tobit, p. 221. That
number is neither Magical, nor Popish, p. 223. The Office of Angels, p. 224.
Whether they pray for us? p. 225. Whether the Angels eat really? p. 227. Of
the Angels speaking, p. 228. Of Asmodeus, the evil spirit, p. 230. Of the
Nature of Angels, both in their Affection, ibid. any limitation, in respect of
the means, and manner, p. 232. Of Alms, and how they purge sin, p. 235 Of
contract before Marriage, p. 237
CHAP. II. Of Iudeth: and the Song of the three Children, p. 241 Of the word
Titans, and of borrowing words from Peets, p. 241. The time of Iudeth's Story,
p. 249. Of Bethulia, p. 248. Iudeth's fasting, whether superstitious? p. 249.
Her prayer whether impure? p. 251. Her craft whether wicked, p. 254. Her
course is warranted by the like of Iael, in the Book of Judges, p, 257. Of the
Song called Benedicite, and the use thereof, p. 259. The clearing of that
Historical Fragment from objections, p. 260 The Story of Susanna vindicated,
p. 262. The Story of Bell, and the Dragon opened, p. 264
CHAP. III. Of Wisdom: Ecclesiasticus, and Baruch, p. 265 Of the Book of
Wisdome's, Author, p. 265 The explanation of those words (But rather, being
good, I came into an undefiled body) p. 266. And of those (when a Father
mourns grievously for his Son, etc. p. 268. Of Tammuz, ibid. Of the
Argument of Ecclesiasticus, p. 269. Of the Prologue, p. 270. Of the Treatise,
p. 272. How Enoch is said to be taken away, p. 273. Of Samuels death
foreshewed, ibid. Of Elias, page 274. Of the time when Jerusalem was burnt in
Baruch's account, p. 276. What he means by those words (Hear the dead
Israelites) p. 277. Of Ieremies Epistle, p. 278.
CHAP. IV. Of the Translation of the Psalms, p. 280 Of the Psalmes-Tiles, p.
280. Of words detracted, p. 283. The sense not corrupted in that 68. Psalm,
verse 27. p. 284. Nor in the 105. verse. 28. p. 285. Of additions to the Psalms
in sentences, p. 287. In words, 288. Of the obscurity in translation (or ever
your pots be made hot, etc.) p. 291 And of that (humbly bringing pieces of
silver, etc.) p. 292. And of that (it shall not break my head) page 293. Of
falsehood in translation, as in that (thou shall learn frowardness) page 294.
And in that Psalm 125. 3. shall not fall) ibid. And in that Psalm 107. verse
40. (though he suffer them to be evil entreated of Tyrants) ibidem. And in
that, Psalm 68. 6. (Men of one mind) p. 295. And in that Psalm 75. 3. (when
I receive the Congregation) ibid. And in that (then stood up Phinees and
prayed) page 296. And in that (make me to delight in good) ibid.
CHAP. V. Of the Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels. p. 297. Of the omission of
Chapters, p. 297. The term of Lesson, p. 299. Of that translation, Luke 1. 36.
(this is the sixth month that is called barren) ibid. Of cutting the Bible into
Epistles and Gospels, p. 300. Of those words left out, Col. 3. 12. (Holy and
beloved) p. 101. Why we call Prophecies, Epistles, p. 302. The place Galat. 4.
5. cleared p. 303 How we are the natural sons of God, ibid. How Paul
calls Timothy his natural son, ibid. God, in a different degree, loves us
as his son Christ, ibid. John 1. 1. Cleared page 304. Of that Gal. 4 25.
bordereth for answers, page 305. Of that Ephesians. 3. 5. (Father of all that is
called Father) ibid. Ephesians 5. 13. cleared, p. 306. Heb. 9. 25. cleared,
ibid. Romans 12. 11. cleared, page 307. Luke 1. 48. cleared, ibid. 1. Cor. 9. 27.
cleared, ibid. Phil. 2. 7. cleared p. 308. 1. Pet. 3. 20. cleared, ibid.

A Dialogue concerning the Liturgy OR The Book of Common Prayer.
The Speakers. NOVATVS. A curious Corrector, of things indifferent. IRENaeVS. A
peaceable Conformer to the state of the present Church.


CHAP. I.
General arguments against the Liturgy.
I. GOod morrow to you friend Nouatus, how have you fared this cold Christmas.


N. Brother Irenaus, as my body is in health: so my mind is ill apaid to hear
your good morrow; sauouring of Paganism (being drawn from Bonum mane, used by
the Romans) and your Christmas of Popery, which joins the Mass to Christ,
as an Ass to an Ox; or Dagon to God's Ark.


I. The Latin word mane properly seems to signify nothing but gracious or
peaceable: whence we translate Manes, good spirits: and immanis Cruel. In
which sense if we interpret Bonum mane: it shall betoken nothing but grace or
Peace be with you: which kind of salutation sounds more of heavenly
Scriptures, then of earthly heathens. But if mane be taken for the morning, as
being the most gracious time of the day: wherein the brain is Cooled: the
stomach strengthened: the heart tempered: and the spirits repaired: How can
this greeting of good morrow more displease then hail, or (...) used by Luke
1. 28.
the Angel to the Virgin: which as it seems to be deduced from Ionice (...)
pro (...). vt in (...).
(...), a season: So before Luke used it, the heathens did usurp it. For
Agylla (chief City of Hetruria) was called Coere (as some think) of (...).
which was used by a Citizen in scorn to a Pelasgian besieger, the same day the
City was surprised.


N. To let your Latin and Poetry pass: prayer in common talk bewrayes little
reverence. Again John 10.
we ought not to salute or pray with them, whose religion is to us unknown.


I. To let pass your hard Censures, by which you cut out the tongues of
tongues: and pluck out the hearts of arts: Is there not a prayer expressed in
the common talk of Ruth. 2. 4.
Boaz and his reapers? Though the phrase hail were abused by hypocritical
Judas, and the profane heard of the people, (which prefer their salutations
before their saluations:) Can it not therefore with convenient reverence be
used by the Angel? Are not some sudaine ciaculations, reverent prayers? As for
your Scripture it is wrested. For Saint John forbids only familiar greetings
of known heretics. The same Apostle elsewhere, permits us to pray for
all, (except the 1. John 5. 16.
sinners against the holy ghost.)


N. I esteem not what you speak of prayer, who seem to be ignorant of the
meaning thereof: forasmuch as you love the mass, a fatal enemy to all true
prayer. And this appears not only, because you familiarly name Lammas:
Michelmas: Christmas: Candlemas: But also because (I take it) you have there in
your hand an English Masse-booke.


I. The Saxons used this word Mas, or Mes for a feast: in which sense these
times are so termed by us, without any imitation of the Popish mass. Now if
you can prove that the book of Common prayer is a Mass book, I shall not be
so backward as not to consent: nor so froward as not to confess the truth.


N. First in general I thus object against your Liturgy: That which is taken
out of the Mass book of the Pope, who is an Idolater, Antichrist, and out of
the Church: the same is to be reputed as the Mass book. But such is your
Liturgy. Ergo, etc.


I. I answer to your Mayor: First, that the two former attributes which you
ascribe to the Pope are impertinent: except your speech be thus limited. That
which is drawn from the Pope as he is an Idolater, etc. For else Saint Acts
17. 28. 1. Cor. 15. 33. Titus 1. ^2. James 1. 17.
Paul and Saint James had erred in borrowing the speeches of heathenish and
Idolatrous Poets.


N. But it is written Deuteronomy. 12* 4.
thou shall not do so: Therefore we may not pray as Idolaters do.


I. If we refer that precept to the fifth verse: where the Hebrews are
forbidden to sacrifice elsewhere then at the Tabernacle: it is merely
Ceremonial neither can bind us: But if it be referred to Images in the third
verse, it is moral indeed, but forbids only communion with idolaters in
that wherein they are such, and not otherwise. For example kneeling in prayer
before Jupiters image is forbidden. Here simply and absolutely in prayer
kneeling is not interdicted. For it is a Dictate of nature that kneeling is a
gesture agreeable to Gods worship: But to do this before the idol of Jupiter
(who was but a King, or is but a Planet, that is only prohibited as idolatrous.


N. We shall dispute more largely of the particular objections, wherefore I
proceed; The Pope is Antichrist: Therefore whatsoever is taken out of his
Portuise, is Antichristian.


I. This is not unlike an argument of a certain Arrian, confuted by Zanchius.
The Trinity is Defended by the Pope who is Antichrist, It is therefore
Antichristian. In like manner we might thus reason: The Turk (whom some count
Antichrist, and all an Apostate) yea the Devil acknowledges one God: The
Pagans also believe that there is a God. To acknowledge therefore and believe
these things is Turkish, Deuillish, Heathenish. In all these arguments there
are the same Ab accidente. A dicto simpliciter. Principij petitio non causa,
etc.
fallacians for ignorance of a limitation.


N. Antichrist is an Arch-heretique, whatsosoeuer therefore he maintains is
heretical.


I. To the old error you add a new, like Drunkenesse to thirst; the old
appears in the Consequence. For heresy (as the Greek (...), to choose.
word shows) is a choice of some error direcly impugning the foundation of
Religion. Now, where election is, there must needs be some refusal, so that he
which reuolteth from all points of truth, cease to be an heretic, and
becomes an Apostate, A Pagan, An Atheist: or some other monster. Your new
error is in the antecedent, wherein you say that Antichrist is a chief
heretic: For antichristianitie consists not so much in error, and heresy.
as in tyranny over men's Consciences: to which it joins things indifferent, as
necessary to Salvation.


N. I am glad you have swallowed this bait: For I shall hereafter prove by this
definition that your Service Book is Antichristian: Mean while tell me is the
Popes third attribute (namely that he is out of the Church) impertinent also to
the matter?


I. More pertinent, but less true: For though the Pope, were neither in nor
of, the Catholic: Better Catholic.
yet certainly he is in the visible Church; As thus may appear. First
Antichrist (whom you take to be the Pope) sits in the Temple of God; that
is, in the Church visible: Secondly, the Pope (by your confession) is an
heretic. Now, that an heretic is in the Church, we know, both because none
can be excommunicated but tbose that are within the Church. Neither will any
deny that heretics do deserve excommunication. As also because heretics,
repenting after excommunication, are received into the bosom of the Church,
without new Baptism: which could not be, if they werc vttterly cut off from
the Church. Thirdly no Baptism can be out of the Church: But in the Popes
jurisdiction is true baptism, which by no means can be iterated, unless
there come some violent Smith at Amsterdam.
spirit which for haste will rebaptise himself. Not unlike a frantque man, who
though meat be present: yet, upon pretense of hunger, eats the flesh of his
own arm. The Pope therefore remains within the territories of the visible
Church. Hitherto of your Mayor. Now to your Minor we say. That we extract our
Liturgy, not from the loins, or lines of the Pope, but from Gods Word, and
the primitive Church: howsoever the Pope may seem to have used, or usurped the
same.


N. Let not him that puts on the Sword boast as he that puts it off: For
I hope shortly to refell what you have said. Now from the Platform of your
Liturgy, I come to treat of the Second general objection: the Liturgy a
Lethargy.
end and purpose thereof: which seems to be, first, the hindrance of
Preaching Sermons.


I. Prove that, and then rail your ^^ll.


N. That, whose length is such, that it takes from the Minister, both
conueniencie of time, alacrity of mind, and strength of body, in regard of
preaching; the end thereof is the hindrance of preaching: but such is your
Liturgy: Ergo.


I. A cloud without rain. Your minor is untrue: For first oftentimes the
Preacher is not the same with the Reader: Especially in Catherall Churches and
Chapels, as also where there is a Curat, or Coadiutor. Secondly, one of the
Chapters is in many Churches read by the Clark. Thirdly, part of the Psalms,
and other answers, are dispatched by him and the people. Fourthly, the
Commination; Letany, the Nicene and Athanasian Creedes, and diverse other things
are not appointed at all times to be read. Fifthly, many things may be omitted
at the Ministers discretion, according to times, places, persons, actions. By
all which it appears that the Minister is not so much tired before he begin
to preach, as you pretend.


N. In stead of medicines, you reckon so many diseases: as shall hereafter
appear. Now the second end of your Liturgy is to quench all zeal in the
people by the wearisome prolixitie thereof:


I. Your faction (so infamous for long prayers, under color whereof widows
houses are deuovred) should in this point have been more silent. Again the
length of this duty should breed a certain reverence in vulgar minds, which
use to contemn those things that are passed over with perfunctory brevitie:
Lastly, the variable delight which comes by hearing, singing, answering, does
rather kindle, then weary devotion.


CHAP. II.
Of set Prayer imposed by men, and of subscription.
N. IT follows now: That we produce those special arguments which impugn
the Liturgy. Which Book is of two sorts. The old, compilde in the days of
Edward the Sixth: which wanted the Psalms, Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels: and
the new composed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and now established.


I. Remember by the way, that you oppose your self not only to Religious
Princes: but even to the glorious Martyrs.


N. Princes and Martyrs might err. And it may be that Hooper, and some other
Martyrs, did afar off descry this land, which now we have found out. Upon
whose authority notwithstanding I rely not; but proceed to the old Liturgy.
Wherein I will handle, First, the Circumstances, then the Substance. The
Circumstances are four. First, the person inioyning. Secondly, time. Thirdly,
place. Fourthly, Ornaments enjoined. Concerning the Person inioyning, or the
authority thereof, three questions may seem to be moved: First, whether
Prayer may be set? Secondly, whether it may be imposed by men? Thirdly, whether
Subscription may be yielded thereunto?


I. As in that which is called Parelius, though three Suns appear, there is
but one true Sun; the other being only reflections thereof. So these
questions three in appearance, are but one in substance. For if prayer may be
set, it may be imposed by men. Neither may we refuse to subscribe to that
which authority does lawfully impose.


N. Confound you the questions as you please. I will first thus argue against
Set Prayer. Every thing lawful is commanded in the Scripture: Now; Set Prayer
is not commanded. Ergo.


I. Your Mayor I thus oppose. Things indifferent are not commanded and yet
lawful: Some lawful things therefore are not commanded.


N. I mean things lawful in Gods worship.


I. To bring a Bible to the Church is not commander. Nevertheless it is
lawful in Gods worship. Ergo, etc.


N. It is commanded not Directly, but by Consequence: as being an help to Gods
worship.


I. To sit, or stand in Preaching is not commanded by the Consequence, and yet
lawful in Gods worship, as being used by Christ: Ergo. Besides your Minor
fails. For Set Prayer is commanded. As appears by Scriptures. Numb. 6. 23.
Deuteronomy. 26. 13. and 15. Psalm 78. in John 7. 37. and 18. 12.
the title. Ier. 10. 11. Matthew. 6. 9. Luke 11. 1.


N. These testimonies shall be examined, when we entreat of the Lords Prayer.
Now further, I thus reason. True Prayer has the spirit of Prayer. But Set
Prayer has it not. Ergo.


I. The Spirit of Prayer is double. First, by infusion, which gives ability
to invent extemporall Prayer. Secondly, by Assistance. Thus a man may read a
Prayer, with the spirit of him that devised it. With this spirit of serching
diligence being assistant, Saint Luke wrote Luke 1. 3. Jude 3.
his Gospel, and Saint Jude his Epistle.


N. Set Prayer to private men may be granted. But that it should be imposed
upon Ministers, who should not be destitute of the spirit of conceiving prayer;
cannot be affirmed without blushing. And that it may not be imposed I thus
prove. No part of Gods worship may be imposed by men's authority: But such is
set Prayer. Ergo.


I. Prayers in Hebrew may be commanded, and yet are parts of Gods worship, as
being parcels of the Bible. Ergo.


N. They may be commanded among the Jews, not amongst us. For though Prayer
be a substantial part of Religion; yet the language is only a Circumstance.


I. No less is the setting of prayer, but a circumstance thereof.


N. Surely such a one as deuoures the substance, for it quenches devotion.


I. Nay, it reuiueth devotion, being most auailable to three things: Order,
Decency, Edification. Order is helped two ways. For first, by reason of Unity
comes Uniformity, which is the pith of Order. Consider I pray you if every man
might at his own arbitrament devise prayers, would there not be as many
Liturgies as there were gods among the Ethiopians, where each man had a
peculiar god? Secondly, order in Prayer, that is a methodicall disposition of
Petitions, gratulations, and the like, is most readily found in Set Prayer.
Whereas your extemporall and undigested prayers are ordinarily as uncertain as
the sands of Hammonia. The decency of Set Prayer is manifest by the unseemly
Tautologies, which carry the mind of him that prays without praemeditation,
like Paul's ship between two Seas. Edification is two ways ministered by Set
Prayer. First, the hearers mind is called to concur with the Minister.
Secondly, a full complement of Petitions is hereby purchased, which on the
sudaine could not be conceived.


N. To grant you that Prayer may be imposed by authority, yet subcription to
the Liturgy is an iron yoke.


I. Before you attempt to prove this, observe these two things. First, that as
the furies were the three daughters of the same night: So from the same night
of error do issue the Separatists denying Set Prayer. The Anabaptist
renouncing humane authority. The Noualist denouncing war to subscription.
For when the Barrowist will admit no meditation in prayer, does he not seem to
harken after the revelations of the Enthusiast? And when the all purging
reformer will not subscribe to authority. Does he not sing the same catch with
H. N.


N. I regard not the Brownist nor Familist: but only the truth in sincerity.


I. We ought to mark, not what you follow in words, but what follows of your
words.


N. To let go your carping consequences: we detest the Anabaptist: and protest
against the Barrowist.


I. I will demonstrate the former, upon an other occasion to be most untrue,
or improbable. Against the latter I thus reason. Of them that think the Church
of England to be no Church; they less transgress against their conscience
which do forsake it. But the Barrowist and you, imagine so of our Church: The
Barrowist therefore is more excusable then you.


N. Your Minor is uncharitable. For we hold it to be a true, though a corrupt
Church.


I. You condemn her Liturgy, Ministry, Government. Ergo.


N. What we condemn shall be tried in due place.


I. Mean while take this second observation. Do you impugn Subscription in
Word, or Deed? for many Conform which will not Subscribe.


N. We approve not them: For a daily public Conformity, is more then a
single, and almost solitary Subscription. Now generally against Subscription I
thus dispute. To subscribe to a thing that shall be altered is unlawful: But a
new Translation is expected: and new Homilies promised to be set forth by
common authority. Ergo.


I. If your Mayor were firm. How might Ceremonia dicta est, a (...) and (...),
to remain for a time.
the Jews in ancient time have subscribed to the Ceremonies in Moses Law,
which were to be altered by Christ. Or how may Subjects swear to the
observation of a Law, which is repealable at the next Session of a Parliament?
Again your Minor does rely upon two dreams. For first you suppose that in the
new Translation all things shall be innouated according to your doubts, as
Polycletus made an Image according to the mind of the multitude. Secondly,
whereas one and twenty Homilies before promised are now extant, you still
suspect that some errors shall be obtruded upon you by authority.


N. We have as little cause to hope the first, as just to fear the latter. My
next reason then is this. To subscribe to known errors, is little better then
heresy. But in your Seruice-booke is a mass of Errors. Ergo.


I. The Mayor of this reason is refelled by the Minor of the former argument.
For if the Translation shall be corrected by reason of some errors supposed
therein. It is clear that the intent of Subscription is only to oblige us, to
think that no fundamental error is lurking in it: seeing no Book (save the
authentic Canon of the text) can claim to it self simple immunitie from
error. The mass of errors Errorum massa Missa.
mentioned in your Minor, will be to massy a work for you to prove.


N. My last argument does thus proceed. It is a crying sin to subscribe to
antichristianisme. But such is your Liturgy according to your own former
definition, as being imposed upon the Conscience with pretended necessity.
Ergo.


I. Your Minor is a misprision: For I said that Antichrist imposes things
indifferent as necessary to salvation. But you, altering the state of the
question, entreat about necessity of Conformity, under the penalty of
Deprivation, Ignorantia Elenchi.
not of eternal life, but of a momentanie living: And yet all both Nations and
Religions have urged this uniform order.


N. Does not then Subscription bind the Conscience?


I. It binds, as it is an oath tendered to God directly: and yet indirectly
also, as it is an humane constitution. So ill Positive Laws tie the Conscience
by virtue of the fifth precept of the Decalogue.


N. Things indifferent cannot bind Conscience: But Ecclesiastical Laws are
about things Figura dictionis and quatuor termini.
indifferent. Ergo.


I. Your double medium causes your argument to play fast and loose. For
Obedience in things indifferent is necessary, not indifferent.


N. What, then are we bound to obey our lawful Superior in all things?


I. In things necessarily good, we do immediately obey God: men only by
consequence. If men command things evil, we obey by tollerating what they
inflict, not by performing what they inioyne. In the first they declare what
God commands to be done: in the latter, what to be endured. Wherefore it
remains that things indifferent alone, are the proper object of humane
Commandments.


N. No action is indifferent, but each thing commanded is an action. Ergo.


I. Your medium has two faces like Ianus. For an action is to be considered,
either simply and alone: and so it is good; as being a motion depending on the
first mouer. Or jointly, with Circumstances, and that in a double manner.
First, in regard of the ability or possibility whilst it may be done.
Secondly, in the act, when it is performed. Before it be done, it is
indifferent; but once breaking out into act, it becomes distinctly good or
evil, according to the Circumstances which determine the same. Now an action
commanded, is supposed as not yet done (whereupon the Hebrews call the
Imperative Mood, the first future) and so remains many times indifferent.


CHAP. III.
Of Feasts, and Fasts.
N. TO omit your winding Sophistry, and sundry other arguments against
Subscription, not as feeble, but expecting a fitter place: From the person
commanding, I pass to the things enjoined: Time, Place, Ornaments. Time I
divide into Feasts and Fasts. Against your Festiuals I argue thus. Days made
holy by men, are lawless; But such are your holidayes. Ergo.


I. Your Mayor is refuted by Ester 9. 21. 1 Mac. 4. 59. John 10. 22.
the Text.


N. These Feasts were appointed by Prophetical inspiration; therefore not
merely by men.


I. This answer is like that of Sympathy, and antipathie, or influence of
Stars, and the like refuges of ignorance. How know you that Queen Hester was
a Prophetess? or Mordecai a Prophet? Would you trust the Story of the
Maccabees, if there you should find it written that Judas was a Prophet? Is
not this one of the Books that you would hiss out of the Church? Nay, may we
suppose that Judas (had he been a Prophet) would have translated to Leui, that
dignity which appertained to the Tribe of Judah.


N. Days wherein God has permitted man to labor; may not by men be
sanctified: But such be your Church Holidayes. Ergo.


I. Your Mayor is doubtful, and dangerous. For if you mean, that days which
are not consecrated by God, may not by men to him be dedicated, you will soon
deface all the outward face of Religion: whereof the most noble act has, and
does consist in dedicating Goods and Lands to the Church. But if you intend
that days because they are indifferent, may not by authority be restrained
and determined; then do you bring into the Church an anarchie. In the one you
follow Swingfeldius, in the other the Anabaptist; against which rock, I
perceive you often rush.


N. I let slip your captious inferences, and hasten to the third proof. Your
holidayes are dedicated to creatures; therefore unlawful. My Antecedent thus
appears: The Sabbath or Lords Day, you call Sunday, giving it to the Sun:
which as it is reproved by Papists: So some have Rhemists upon Apoc. 1. 10.
ignorantly turned it to the Son of God. With the like vanity you give
Monday to the Moon. Tuesday to Tuisco, or Mars. Wednesday to Woden, or
Mercury. Thursday, to thundering Jupiter. Friday to Frico or Venus. Saturday to
Saturn: which Devils were adored by Pagans.


I. We do no more dedicate our days to creatures by whose names we term
them, then the Hebrews did the month Abib to an ear of Corn: for so does
the word import. Further I marvel that you call the Lords Day the Sabbath: for
the men of your rank were wont to style this a Jewish name. But there be some
opinions that be as short lived as certain creatures by the river Hyppanis,
which live but a day. Yea but the Rhemists do mislike the name Sunday. By this
you may conjecture that our Liturgy was not borrowed from the Missall. Besides
what needed Alesius to turn it into Latin, if it had bin before extant in the
Portuise? Whereas you pretend, some have derived Sunday from the Son of God:
true it is, they deduced it from the Son of righteousness, who is indeed the
Son of the living God. Lastly, those Devils which you pretend were, and are
Planets, of whom every day is named, according as the Planet rules at midnight
before: As upon Saturday night from twelve to one the Sun reigns, so the
day ensuing is called Sunday. Besides that; a Musical reason is rendered:
Namely, that the fourth Planet is inclusiuely to be reckoned from the former.
For example, Saturn has his dominion upon Saturday, then omitting Jupiter and
Mars, you shall come to Sol, whose Dion in Augusto.
most effectual working is upon Sunday.


N. What speak you of the Superstitious ruling of Planets: or ridiculous
Music of Stars?


I. As it is idolatrous to worship Stars, or prophecy by them; ^o to deny
all their natural operations and dominions in things inferior, is wilfully to
repeal the Statutes enacted in the Parliament of experience. No less
frivolous is it, to deride the long observed harmonious consent of Planets.


N. With the same boldness, have you consecrated the months to Ianus.
Februus, Mars, Julius and Augustus Caesar: which names you have borrowed from
the Heathens: whereas the numerall names of months were thought in Scripture
most convenient.


I. Why may not months be styled according to Planets, as well as Saint Luke
named a Acts 17. 19. (...) is a hill of (...) a Doricke word, for a Spring:
because Springs issue out of hills. Acts 17. 34 and 18. 24. Romans 16. 1. and 14.
Phil. 2. 25. Col. 1. 7. Acts 28. 11. Joshua 15. 10. and 41. Dan. 1. 7.
place Mars his Street or Hill? Or why not as well as men have retained the
names of Planets after their Baptism; For example, Denis was surnamed of
Bacchus, Apollos of the Sun. Epaphras and Epaphroditus of Venus, Hermes, and
Mercurius of Mercury. So Phebae of the Moon: Was not the badge of the ship
wherein Paul failed, called Castor and Pollux? Is not the like to be seen in
the Old Testament; both in the names of Places: as Bethshemesh, the house of
the Sun: and Beth Dagon, the house of Dagon? As also of Persons? I will not
insist, as some might do upon this: That January is not named of Ianus, but of
Ianua, a Gate, as being the entrance of the year. Nor February of Februus, but
a febribus of Agues, being a month obnoxious to that disease. No, nor March of
Mars; but because things bred therein are martial and valiant, agreeable to
the Planet, not to the Idol Mars. Now whereas you are displeased that months
have their appellations from Julius and Augustus Caesar: Why might not this be
endured, as well as the City of David; or Gibea of Saul? 2. Sam. 6. 10. Esaias
10. 29.
If Places, why may not Times be termed after men? But these names are
borrowed from Heathens. Did not the Hebrews borrow the names of their months
from the Chaldeans? (Except we think the fourth month Tammuz Ezekiel. 8. 14.
was taken from the Egyptians) Was not Abib the first month, surnamed Nisan?
Tisri, the seventh, Ethanim? Chisleu, the ninth, Bull? Of these some are
appare^tly, Chaldean words. Lastly, whereas you pretend, that the numerall
names of months (as the first, second, etc.) were thought most convenient.
This to be untrue, you partly now perceive, by the other names attributed to
them in Scriptures. Also you know that September, and the three months
following, have names from number: and that in old time July, and August were
called Quintilis and Sextilis.


N. To let pass your Heathen names of Days and Months: I proceed to your
Popish names, by which you honor Creatures: and especially Saints.


I. Religious worship of Saints, is against the stream of our Church Doctrine.
If we praise them, and God, in and for them; If we propound them as triumphant
lights and marks of imitation: with what viperous teeth can envy carpe at us,
unless the same also do gnaw out the bowels of the Primitive Church?


N. Observation of days is forbidden by Paul. Gal 4. 10.



I. Namely, as parts of Gods worship, or as such necessary works, as without
which salvation cannot be obtained.


N. Two days you observe in honor of the Virgin, which you hold as merely
necessary: the Purification, and the Annunciation.


I. We ascribe to them no necessity but of order. Now whereas four days
were kept in Popery, for the Virgin Mary, we have abolished two. First, the
day of her Conception. Secondly, of her Assumption; the one being blasphemous,
the other fabulous. Concerning the other two, we consecrate them not to the
Virgin, but to Christ: whose Conception is remembered upon the day of the
Annunciation: and Presentation in the Temple, in the day of the Purification:
as may be collected both by the Collect; as also because we reckon the year
of our Lord from the Annunciation Day.


N. Besides this; you celebrate a day for Michael the Archangell; whom you make
a Creature.


I. If some of your own spirit were present they would reprove your method,
for placing the Virgin Mary before the Angels.


N. I did it, because I suppose you prefer her before them: her that sinned
before them that were ever sinlesse.


I. Some doubt not, but that all men elect are in Christ his humanity exalted
above Angels. How much more does this agree to her from whom did immediately
proceed that which was assumed by the Godhead through the personal Union?
Again Christ took not Angels but the seed of Abraham.


N. The Elect indeed are said to be equal to Luke 20. 36.
Angels: wherefore it seems they are not superiors to them.


I. They shall be equal to them in immortality, as also in that they shall
not need procreation. Nevertheless in some other respect, they may exceed
them. But now, that Michael is a creature, appears first by Daniel: where Dan.
10. 13. and 22.
Michael is called one of the chief Princes: and therefore may not be Christ.


N. The Hebrew word which you translate Chief, may be turned former.


I. First, this cannot agree to Christ, who is not one of the former, but the
first Prince: unless you make three Princes of the three Persons in the
Trinity; which speech will not endure the Hammer of a good construction.
Secondly, neither will it accord with Gabriels relation, who had not made
mention of any former Princes.


N. If this your interpretation should be granted, yet Michael is but one of
the Chief, not absolutely the chief Angel, or the Archangell, as you seem
to insinuate: which as it contradicts your Communion Book, mentioning
Archangels: So can it not be balanced with reason.


I. Observe: First, that by this place in Daniel, we prove Archangels to be;
which some have disliked. For Chief Princes and Archangels seem to us
equipollent. Secondly, though we style Michael an Archangell: yet by this we
do not simply pronounce him to be Chief of all Angels. For though many Chief
Priests do seem to be reckoned: yet each of these was not High Priest, but
some one, or at the Mat. 26. 3.
most two, in the corruptedst times. The like may be said of the word
arch-heretique, or Patriarch. Thirdly, nevertheless, we do probably think,
both that there is one Chief created Diabolus found only in the singular
number. Demon and Daemonium plurally.
Angel: seeing Beelzebub is the Prince of Devils: as also that this Archangell
is Michael: not only because no other name of any Archangell is extant in
Scripture, but principally because the last and greatest work of Angels 1 Thessalonians 4. 16.
(namely, the raising of the dead) is said to be committed to his Ministry.


N. But Michael is called the Prince. Now the Prince and Captain of the Church
is Christ.


I. Though we should yield that story in Joshua to be meant of Christ, (which
yet hardly will Joshua 5. 14.
be euinced) notwithstanding we deny it here to be so taken: First, because a
Prince may either be absolutely so named (so is Christ alone) or by power
delegate (and this may as well agree to an heavenly Angel, as to an earthly
King.) Secondly, because he is called here Prince, with a term diminishing
(at least in your construction, as you shall hereafter understand) for the
Angel says, There is none that holds with me in these things, but Michael
your Prince. Again we prove Michael to be a creature out of the Thessalonians
before cited. For first, the word Archangell seems to signify rather a
principal Angel, then the Prince of Angels. Secondly, it is there said, The
Lord shall descend with the voice of an Archangell: by the Lord, we understand
Compare John 17. 3. with 1. Cor. 8. 6.
Christ, as being opposed in relation to God. This speech then will have no
Coherence, Christ shall descend with the voice of the Archangell, that is of
Christ.


N. It seems the latter words; (the trumpet of God) do interpret these that
come before (the voice of the Archangell.) Besides it is certain that Christ's
voice shall raise the Dead. Ioh. 5. 26. and 28.



I. It is the voice and trumpet of God the Father, and the Son, in regard of
the authority and power thereof: and yet of Michael in respect of his
Ministry. As the same is termed the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. Again
we prove the same by Saint Jude, where Judges 7. 20. Jude 9.
it is said Michael durst not: which word little beseems the majesty of
Christ.


N. The Greek word may be translated he could not endure, that is, he could
not abide to revile because it was a sin. And it may seem the Story is taken
out of Zachary: So that by the Zach. 3. 1.
body of Moses, it may seem we are to understand the Religion of the Jews.


I. That signification is new to Interpreters: As for your exposition it is so
violent, as if it were allied to the Inquisition. The Literal sense may not
be relinquished, till necessity do enforce. Lastly, we confirm the same by
the Prophecy of Michael, where it is said that Apoc. 12. 7. 11.
he and his Angel, overcame the Dragon, by the blood of the Lamb.


N. But the name Michael signifies who is like God: which appellation can
agree to none but Christ.


I. This reason is weak, being built upon the sand of Etymology. Again, why
may not this word signify who is like to the strong one: and so fitly be
applied to a created Angel.


N. From Angels I come to Apostles: Where I observe first, That you have
disanulled the holiday of Paul's Conversion; as also of Barnabas: and yet to
them have ye assigned Epistles and Gospels.


I. It was thought convenient, that the Church should not be oppressed with
multitude of holidayes: wherefore only the twelve Apostles were remembered, of
which number Paul and Barnabas were not.


N. You seem to intimate that Barnabas was an Apostle: and so indeed you style
him in his Collect.


I. The reason thereof is: First, because he was chosen with Saint Paul: yea
and seemed at that time to be preferred before him. Secondly, because he chose
Mark the Evangelist for his attendant; as well as Saint Paul did Silas. Acts
13. 2. Acts 15. 39, 40. 1. Cor. 9. 5. 6.
Thirdly, because he seems to be reckoned amongst the Apostles.


N. Next after the Apostles, I descend to the Martyrs: amongst whom you have
placed the Children of Bethlehem, whom I wonder you term Innocents.


I. Were they not innocent, whose Parents were Jews, who were in the Covenant
of Circumcision.


N. But it may seem: That this Divine judgment ouertooke them because their
Parents inhumanely refused to lodge Joseph and Marie.


I. Saint Luke yields a milder censure: Luke 2. ^.
namely, because there was no room in the Inn: as it might be by reason of
the multitude of them, which hastening to be taxed, prevented their coming.


N. Could they be Martyrs who could not understand, much less acknowledge
Christ?


I. Martyrs they were not, either as Saint Stephen in will and suffering: or as
Saint John, in will but not in suffering: yet they were Martyrs insuffring for
Christ: as the Children of the Israelites drowned by Pharao were in like manner
Martyrs under the Law.


N. Not the punishment but the cause makes a Martyr, which they could not
understand.


I. The cause was Christ, a most fit cause of martyrdom; which though they
understand Math. 18. 10. Heb. 1. 14.
not, yet because Gods Angels defend infants, as well as the rest of the Elect,
God upon his divine knowledge might avenge upon Herod their blood, as well as of
other Martyrs.


N. Your division of Martyrs is untrue: For Matb. 20. 23. compared with Ioh.
18. 11
John died a violent death as appears by the prophecy of Christ concerning
him.


I. First, it may be; the Cup may signify as well affliction as death. Now that
Saint John was afflicted, it appears by his confining in Pathmos; which is
said to be under Domitian. Secondly, the speech of Christ may be conditional,
not positive; as if he had said, though you should drink of the cup of my
death, yet might you not sit at my right hand, etc. Now an hypotheticall speech
does not infer a positive assertion. Thirdly, though Saint John were a Martyr
like Stephen: yet because Steven was the first voluntary Martyr; Saint John
(though best beloved) must be placed after him: yea and after them both, the
Innocent Children; as being Martyrs in another kind, dying for Christ besides,
or before knowledge.


N. But Herod's daughters child (who then was at nurse in Bethelem) is said to
be slain with them: Could he also being the uncircumcised Nephew of a
usurping Tyrant, an be termed an innocent Martyr.


I. First, if the most part were innocent; we draw the denomination from them:
even as we name them the Psalms of David, howsoever Psalm 90. was made by
Moses, and Psalm. 137* was framed in the captivity of Babylon long after David.
So we say the Acts of the Apostles: and yet in that book are described
actions of Stephen, Silas, Apollos, and others which were not Apostles.
Secondly, what if God would hereby show, that he intended to have Martyrs
as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews: yea, and of infants as of men in
years; seeing Christ is the Savior of them both. Thirdly, may we not say,
that he which descended from Herod, was in a sort a Martyr that is, a witness
of Gods power, who made Herod to kill his own Son for rage, and yet
delivered Christ? Is not the like said of infants upon a far less respect by
David?


N. From your Feasts I proceed to your Fasts: Psalm 8. 2.
and first I wonder at your Set Fasts?


I. Mean you by Set Fasts, as you did by Set Prayers? Have not many Ministers
of your opinion proclaimed and set sundry Solemn Fasts?


N. I mean your set yearly, and weekly Fasts: which should not be celebrated
but when occasion Math. 9. 15.
of sorrow is presented. Now it may be that some occasion of public joy may
be offered at the time of your Anniuersary Fast.


I. God appointed a yearly Fast in the tenth Leuit. 16. 29. and 23. 29.
day of the seventh month: and it might be that some occasion of common joy
might then have fallen out: So that you must either acknowledge a dispensation
of Gods precept for a time: or that a particular and accidentary joy could not
prejudice a statarie and general sorrow for sin. Whereas you pretend that
Christ said, his Disciples should not fast till after his departure, only
because they should not till then have just cause of mourning and Fasting, it
is unsound: Seeing that in the verse following, he renders another reason:
namely, for that they were weak like old garments and bottles: and therefore
incapable of this new discipline of Fasting.


N. I might return you this answer: That the Fast mentioned in the Law was
Ceremonial: But, to grant that God might ordain a yearly Fast; How appears
it that the same liberty is permitted to men?


I. Indeed to fast upon the tenth day of the seventh month was a ceremony;
Nevertheless a yearly set Fast, could be no more Ceremonial then to rest
once in seven days: the terms are altered the quantity remains. Further
that men may decree Set Fasts, it appears by the Jews, who fasted every Year
in remembrance of the siege of Jerusalem, the winning See Iunius upon Zach. 8.
9. Math. 19. 14.
thereof, and burning of the Temple, as also the death of Gedalia. The like is
to be seen in the custom of the Pharisees, and John the Baptist. Lastly, some
gather the same out of the story of Hester. Hest. 9. 31.



N. Though Set Fasts might be allowed: yet your Lent is but an apish imitation
of Chrst his Fast.


I. No more apish then the custom of the Israelites, which they took up in
remembrance of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel* Now the Genes. 32. 32.
custom of Lent, is not only civil, for the preservation of Cattle, and
employment of the Sea, and Rivers: nor merely moral to temper lust, which
rises with the blood in the Spring: to enable men for deeds of Liberality:
but even in a sort Religious (not as a part, but as a help of Religion) first
to kindle Prayer, much dulled with plethorie of the body, and multitude of
business. Secondly, to help us in the acknowledgement of our unworthiness of
Gods creatures. Thirdly, to prepare us for the solemn Communion at Easter:
Besides, that we may fast and pray for the increase of grace, is clear by the
example of Act, 10. 30, 31.
Cornelius.


N. But what shall we think of your Ember weeks?


I. They are preparatiues to the Ordination of Ministers: Before which how
laudable it is Acts 13 2.
to fast is manifest by the separation of Barnabas and Paul.


N. What grounds have your Fasts upon Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and Saturdayes.


I. Friday was by all observed because Christ died on that day. Some kept
Saturday, for that Christ on that day lay in the grave, which was to all
Believers a season of great heaviness. Others chose rather Wednesday, for
that, upon that day Judas sold our Savior for money. Besides these causes a
convenient vicissitude or exchange of Fasting with eating was judged most
requisite. Which also was the cause of our Holiday Eues.


CHAP. IV.
Of Place; and Ornaments.
N. IT is now time; that from Time we should remove our Speech to Place, and
Ornaments, enjoined in the act of Uniformity. Wherein although Chancels only
be mentioned, yet Churches also seem necessarily to be presupposed.


I. This is not unlike Solon or Romulus, who made no Laws for Paricides,
because they hoped such villainy would not be committed. So it may be our
Law-giuers, did not there mention Churches, supposing no Christian would be of
so leaden a heart, and brazen a forehead, as directly to wish the abolishment
of Churches. For what I pray you? Are you one of them that would have Churches
turned into Doue-coates and Alehouses?


N. Though that were justifiable by the example of Iehu: yet it is sufficient
for us, if they were 2. Kings 10. 27.
demolished. Nevertheless I speak not this of mine own opinion, but
according to the intent of some of the Brethren. The first reason is this.
Churches are abused to Idolatry, therefore to be destroyed.


I. By this argument, Salomons Temple being abused by King Ahaz to manifest
Idolatry, should have been razed by King Ezekias? Besides, what need you
accuse the Barrowists? it is your own argument: Will you leave the nest like
the Raven, because the young ones color does not in all points resemble you? Is
not this your own reason: The Cross is abused to Idolatry, therefore to be
abrogated? As for the example of Iehu, it moves us not. For neither was Iehu a
good man: neither is every action of a good man, lawful: though lawful, yet
not necessary in regard of imitation.


N. We insist not upon Iehu his fact. Neither is our only, or principal reason
against the Cross, drawn from the abusing thereof to Idolatry (as shall
appear in due place.) Neither would we simply therefore have Churches defaced,
for that they are so abused: but upon more important causes: Else should we
wish also the ruin of Universities; which notwithstanding we are contented
should remain, if these things only were reformed. First, if humane Arts were
less studied. Secondly, if Degrees in Schools were interdicted. Thirdly, if
Marriages in Colleges were permitted.


I. Arts may not properly be called humanc, seeing they have God for their
Author, and are aides to expound divine Scripture. First, for Grammar. Without
the Hebrew and Chaldee, the Old Testament cannot be understood exactly,
because not only some part of the text is written in the Chaldean tongue: but
principally because the Chaldee Paraphrase is the most apt interpreter of the
Bible. The Greek tongue is also needful in regard of the Septuagint, whom the
Apostles more frequently cite then the Hebrew text. The Greek to be needful
in the New Testament, all acknowledge. The necessity of the Syrian would
appear, if more diligence herein were used. As for the Latin, it is the
tongue of the intercourse of all the Learned in Christendom. Furthermore, he
that will conceive Isaiah without Rhetorique; and Paul without Logioue: the
Psalms without Music and Poetry: the Arc and Temple, without Geometry:
the perfect Chronology of the Scriptures, without Arithmetique and Astronomy:
Leuiticus, Job, and Canticles, without natural Philosophy and Physic: the
Law of Moses without Ethiques, and Civil Law: the Stories of the Kings without
Policy: Daniel, and the Apocalips without History; the same must assay with
Xerxes to sail through the mount Athos; and walk dry-shod over Hellespont.
This age is too superficial in knowledge: Cast it not into a more lazy
Lethargy, with this your unseasoned zeal. Touching Degrees I say. Shall the
meanest Mechanic Trade distinguish the Apprentice from the Iourneyman: him
from the occupier: and all from the Master or Warden of the Company? And shall
there be no difference between Leuit and Priest? Priest, and High Priest?
Lastly, what you say of Marriage, bewrays that you never slept in Parnassus:
so great is the penury of those places: and so dangerous the Marriage of
persons Collegiate, unless they be Masters, Prouosts, or in the like Supreme
place. But now return from our Mother the University, to her Daughters the
Churches: and show us those important causes for which you would have them
violated.


N. Places built for Idolatry; should be destroyed: But such are your
Churches. Ergo.


I. The proof of your Mayor is mistaken. Groves, Altars, Images are by Gods
appointment to be destroyed, or burnt (namely, the Tabernacle, or Temple
remaining.) But that every house or Church built to an Idol should be pulled
down, and by no means converted to a Synagogue, cannot be enforced out of
this place. Again your Minor wants weight: For some of our Churches were built
before, some since the days of Popery. Besides those which Papists did erect,
were built for true prayer to God in Christ: what if much Idolatry were
mingled? Shall the silver be reprobate because of the store of Tin.


N. Churches are those habitations of Antichrist, Apoc. 18. 1.
which are to be ruinated.


I. Some others would interpret them to be the Abbeys, Nunneries, and such
like cages of superstion. But it is not safe to build a doctrine upon so
mystical a prophecy.


N. They are built East and West, which the Ezekiel. 8. 16.
Prophet seems to dislike.


I. No marvel: For they worshipped the Sun rising. As for us, we think that
God is the God of the East, as well as of the North: and of the West, as well
as of the South. Neither have we any such custom as to be content ious for
singularity.


N. Their Dedication savors of Superstiton


I. If in ancient time any unmeet prayers were used, we abandon them in our
Dedications. Notwithstanding, that Churches may be dedicated, both that they
may be appropriated to God, and alienated from all Secular use, so that
occasion of alteration be cut off: As also that more reverence may be added to
Gods public service, appears; First, by the examples of Solomon, Zerubbabel,
and Judas Maccabeus, who consecrated that Temple: the last whereof did then
dedicate it when it had been three years and a half polluted by Antiochus
Epiphanes: whereas by your doctrine he should have leuelled it with the
ground. But our Savior was of an other judgment, who many years after graced
that Feast of Dedication with his own presence. Secondly, the same is clear by
the rule of the Apostle, auouching all things to be sanctified by the Word and
Prayer. The equity of which 1. Tim. 4. 5.
Canon seems to rely upon the Law of God, whereby the builder of an house is
exempted from service in war, till he has performed the Dedication of his
private building. Deuteronomy. 20. 5.



N. Chancels seem to be ordained partly out of Superstition, partly, out of
Pride: advancing the Minister above the people.


I. It was no Superstition among the Jews to separate the wives from their
husbands, by certain partitions in the Temple: as is probably collected out of
the Prophet. The Zach. 12. 12.
like is to be said of parting Minister and People. Neither may we think this
done in imitation of the Jewish Temple only, considering there is nothing like
the Holy of Holies in our Churches: but only a distinction of places, that
hearing, and receiving the Communion, by this difference of place, might beget
a certain diversity of reverence. As for the pride objected; it shows your
disordred mind, who by cutting off all differences of Degrees and Orders,
would soon bring back the people to the Chaos of irreuerence. Think you that
Ezra when he made the Pulpit of wood, whereby he was advanced above the
People, did it Nehem. 8. 4.
of pride, or only that his voice might be the more audible? Might not this
also be intended: That by the height of his place, he might strike a certain
awful reguard into his hearers hearts? Did not God for this cause give to
Moses, a shining face? Did he not therefore allot him, and Aaron the Priest, a
place in the Mountain, distinct from that of the multitude; that there might
be conceived a kind of pre-eminence and dignity of the Pastor above the
sheep? Is any man ignorant that the vulgar sort is led by forms, and
external differences in all affairs? Lastly, the charge of the Chancell being
imposed upon the Minister, may seem to challenge forhim a peculiar allotment
of place.


N. To ouerpasse the place: the next circumstance is in Ornaments: whereof the
most scandalous is the Surplice. Against the which I thus reason. No humane
Rite may be ordained in Gods service: But such is your Surplice. Ergo.


I. The method by your self duly propounded, explaineth your Mayor, but
disclaimeth your Minor. For whereas you placed the Surplice among Ornaments:
and ranked them amid the circumstances: Your Mayor must thus be expounded: That
humane rites, howsoever they may be circumstances of Gods worship: yet ought
not to be enforced as any substantial part thereof: and so your Minor will
not abide the Touchstone; seeing this garment is not ordained in, but about
Gods worship. In sum, we place therein, not necessity of holiness, but
peaceable uniformity of order.


N. You seem to tie certain holiness unto it: and so to incorporate it into
Gods service: both in that you repute sundry Minsteriall actions being done
without it, as not at all performed. As also in that you put a bar of Silence
before their mouths that refuse it.


I. Your first allegation is little less then calumnious: For you know, there
is a maine difference between a nullitie, and a true act unlawfully executed.
For example, if Baptism be administered without this attire, howsoever the
action be disorderly, yet may not the Sacrament be iterated: and therefore
this act cannot be adjudged for a mere nullitie. Your second affection was
refuted before when we entreated of Subscription* To which notwithstanding
this might be added. First, might Solomon put Shimei to death for violating his
1. Kings 2. 37.
commandment concerning a thing in it own nature indifferent* Namely, that he
should not pass over the river Kidron? Nay, might he tender an oath unto him,
to the intent that his obligation might be more firm? And may not we, both
urge you to Subscription to things indifferent? and inflict punishment upon
you, if either you refuse to Subscribe: or if subcribing you afterward
transgress your promise? Might Shimei plead to the King, the thing you require
me to swear to, is in it own nature simply indifferent: and therefore this
oath is but a burden to my conscience? Could the King have wished a more
direct pretense of putting this malecontent to death, then such an unseasonable
allegation as this? Secondly, could Ionadab by his commandment for ever
interdict the Rechabites, the dwelling in houses, sowing of Ier. 35. 6, 7.
Corn, planting Vines, drinking wine; (which all were things indifferent) and
cannot the like necessity of obedience to our Laws in things of equal
indifferency seem reasonable? Thirdly, the rule of Saint Paul ought to be
remembered; If any man consent not to the doctrine, 1. Tim. 6. 3.
according to godliness, he is puffed up, etc. Is not consenting, a kind of
Subscription? Are not things indifferent and convenient agreeable to the
doctrine according to godliness. These 2 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
people therefore that are unorderly, and leave their station: are to be
xeduced to a sound mind, even with some moderate correction.


N. Though the Surplice were indifferent: yet is it not convenient, as thus may
be demonstrated. That garment which was worn by the Priests of Isis, Jews,
and Papists, is by us to be refused as inconvenient: But such is the Surplice;
Ergo. The Minor is plain by Story: and concerning Apoc. 18. 12.
the Papists in part by Prophecy.


I. Your new found story of the women Priests of Isis* refuses your Mayor.
For I trust you cannot prove that the Priests of Israel ware the linen Ephod
before the Priests of Isis. Which if it be so, then consider again your
Mayor. The garment worn by the Priests of Isis, may not be worn by the
Levites. But this is manifestly untrue. The first part of your Minor is
uncertain: namely, that the garment of the Egyptian and Hebrew Priests, was
like our Dalmatique, or Surplice. The latter concerning Papists is weakly
confirmed. For first that word which is translated Linen, by learned men is
avouched to be meant Silk. Now where will you find a silken Surplice? Again
if all linen used by the Whore of Babylon, should be abolished, what should
become of the linen at the Communion Table: nay, what should be done with the
silver Chalices? for they also were abused by her: and are mentioned likewise
in that very. Lastly, it were easy to prove out of antiquity (but that you
reverence not herhoarie head) that the Surplice was, before Popery was hatched.


N. Popery, being Antichristianitie did work in the days of the Apostles, by
sundry both errors and rites: Of which number the Surplice to be one, is
proved by this Argument. Every Rite, or Ceremony should edify (so says your
own Liturgy.) But so does not your Surplice. Ergo.


I. It does edify, not by any proper action thereof: but by a profitable
signification.


N. Humane significations cannot edify: But such are those of the Surplice.
Ergo.


I Kneeling in prayer is but humane, though it signify reverence to God. The
like may be said of sitting at the Passover: And yet some of your own
combination have said, that it signifies a spiritual familiarity with God.


N. They have said so of sitting at the Lords Supper, but not at the Passover,
and yet indeed those two Sacraments are but one in substance. Besides though
the things were humane: yet the significations were and are divine: I mean in
regard of the things themselves, not in respect of the appointment which was
from men, led by the light of Nature.


I. In this sense, the signification of the Surplice is divine: First in
general to testify a reverent distinction between the Minister and People.
Secondly, in more Specialty to be a symbol of Eccles. 9. 8.
alacrity, of Apoc. 3. 18.
integrity, of our long expected Matthew. 17. 2. Acts 10. 20. Apoc. 3. 4. and 6.
11.
glory in heaven.


CHAP. V.
The Preface. Of the Common Prayers.
N. ARguments drawn from Scandal (though very forcible against the Surplice)
yet shall be omitted till we come to the Cross. Now from the Circumstances I
proceed to the substance of the Liturgy. Whereof there be two parts. First,
only Speech. Secondly action, joined with Speech, called a Rite or Ceremony.
Concerning the first, either the people speaks, or God. The people speaks
to God by Prayer, or by Confession. Prayers be either ordinary and common
(which are continually read) or peculiar to some times (termed Collects.) In
the Preface Inuitatorie to the Common Prayers we dislike two things. First, the
words: (At what time soever, etc.) seem to be alleged out of Ezekiell: which
neither be there to be found: and withal, seem to promise salvation to them,
which defer repentance to the very moment of death. For they insinuate, that
a man may repent, at what time soever he will.


I. It is not a just citation of the Prophets words: but an explanatiue
allegation of the sense: For first, the word if, in the Prophet is Ezekiel 18. 21,
22.
equivalent with these words in the Liturgy (at what time soever.) For it is a
Logique maxim, that a temporal proposition is equipollent to a conditional.
Secondly, these words, (from the bottom of his heart) in the Liturgy, are
explained by those in the Prophet (will return from all his sins that he
has committed: and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right) for he that performs these things does indeed repent from the bottom
of his heart. Thirdly, these words in the Prayer Book (I will put them out of
my remembrance) The like citations are in Romans 5. 5 and 1. Cor. 2. 9. out of
Esaias 28. 16. and 64. 4.
are answerable to those in the Prophet (they shall not be mentioned to him or
remembered. The Hebrew word signifying both: By all which it is clear, that
late repentance is as well fished out of the Prophet, as out of the Liturgle.
The truth is, If a man repent at any time, he shall be saved. It follows not
hereupon that a man may repent at what time he will assign, seeing repentance
only comes from God.


N. You have now contradicted a speech delivered by your self: Namely, that
late repentance In a certain Sermon.
is not good.


I. To admit of your own disioynted report. First, That is, late repentance,
which is presumptuously procrastinated to the Catastrophe of life. This is
ordinarily as weak and sick as the body, and is intombed with it. Secondly,
Though this repentance by some miracle might be true, yet is it not good, that
is, dangerous, and 1. Cor. 7. 1.
scandalous. For the repentance of Adam and Solomon, are therefore not
mentioned directly, because their offense did more hurt, then their repentance
did good.


N. The second thing disallowed in the Preface, is in these words (saying after
me.) By which the people are commanded to repeat the Confession after the
Minister.


I. I never heard of any man punished for not repeating this in the Church.


N. If the thing were lawful and convenient, this Commandment might
sufficiently bind. But the inconvenience thereof may thus appeane. As it is
before a Prince, so it is before God: But it is not seemly before a Prince,
that a Mal. 1. 8.
whole Incorporation should speak together. For which cause a Speaker as a
common mouth, is chosen to propound their suite. Wherefore it is unfit that the
people should recite the Confession with, or after the Minister.


I. First, were your Mayor true, then were it unfit to sing Psalms in Gods
presence. For it will be hardly decent before a Prince to declare a suite
singing:) Which argument, some of your feather have taken up against Church
Music: not remembering that with the same they impugn all Psalmodie:
Secondly, this propsition would assist the Popish invocation of God by Saints.
Seeing we hardly approach to Princes, but by manifold mediators. Thirdly, the
reason of the dissimilitude is this. No mortal Monarch can at once understand
all suitors: which is to God most easy: being the eye that sees all: the ear
that hears all; and the hand that writes all. As for the argument of the
Prophet Malachy, it is of an A magis probabili. For it is the meaning of the
place, a maiore ad minus.
other color, and indeed drawn from an other place. He reasons from the
greater to the less: For it is more likely, that a mortal Prince (whose
breath is in his nosthrils) should accept of an imperfect present: then God who
turns the hearts of Kings, as rivers in the South. Your reason is drawn from
the equal, which is a most unequal comparison. Lastly, though the people
rehearse the Confession after the Minister: yet is he their mouth, both in
going before, and instructing them: and so the latter part of your Minor, is
like a broken reed.


N. It seems the unlearned should answer no 1. Cor. 14. 16.
more then Amen.


I. First, from a conceived to a set Prayer, the argument is weak. Secondly,
If this interpretation of the place were rendered (how shall the unlearned say
Amen that is, how shall he understand, and consent unto those prayers, which I
utter in a strange tongue) how impertinent will your reason be? Thirdly, though
it might be proved elsewhere, that the people is bound to answer Amen; will
you hereupon infer, that they may utter no more. But more Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
of this, when you come to the Responsals.


N. But by this practice a woman is allowed to speak in the Church, which Paul
does prohibit. 1. Cor. 14. 34.



I. He forbids women to teach, or propound questions in the Church: but not to
answer Amen, or pray jointly with others.


N. This Confession, as it is repeated by the people; is neither public
prayer (as being rehearsed by private men) neither yet that kind of Prayer
which we term private or solitary (being recited in a public place) and
therefore no true kind of prayer.


I. This is like an ancient plea in Law. A private man's money was stolen out of
a Temple. The question was; whether it were theft or sacrilege? But as I
suppose the latter opinion should there prevail: So here I answer, That this
is public Prayer, as being dictated by a Minister, and repeated only by the
whole Congregation in a place most public.


N. It seems strange, That the people is enjoined to repeat after this
manner only this Prayer: the Confession, in the Communion: and the Creed of the
Apostles.


I. The reason is obuious: because in the Confession of our sins, and faith
there is required a most personal application: whereby many serious motions are
stirred up in the heart, otherwise most adamantine.


CHAP. VI.
Of the Lords Prayer.
N AFter the Preface I come to the ordinary Prayers: which either be
delivered in prose, and pronounced in plain direct speech: Or else are hymns.
Of the former kind, The first we dislike is, the absolution: which of late
has gotten a new name of remission, at the instant request of some of our men.


I. Not unlike the commander of the Turks: who will not be styled King or
Emperor, but Turk, or Great Turk: a name surmounting all ambition.


N. What reason we had for the change of that name, you shall hear when we
treat of the visitation of the sick. Now we will proceed to the Lords
Prayer: Wherein some brethren are displeased, because it is used as a Prayer.
But we not allowing of their Zeal; do notwithstanding dislike your
battalogie: seeing you repeat it eight times at one meeting, upon sundry
occasions. As also that you omit the Doxologie, or conclusion of the Lords
Prayer (for thine Matthew. 6. 13.
is the kingdom, etc.) which is found in the Gospel: And this omission is so
much the worse, because it fetches the pedigree from the Masse-Booke.


I Although you relinquish the brethren of the Separation (which is she English
word for a Schism) yet I pray of all courtesy, let me over entreat you to
answer their arguments concerning this matter.


N. Although you seem to turn the buckler into the sword: and to shoot at
suspicious rouers: yet least you should imagine me to be smoked with
Barrowisme: I will attempt to answer the reasons, if you propound them.


I. The first reason is this: It is said: pray thus (that is in this manner, to
this effect or sense.) It is not written pray this prayer (that is conceive or
take together these very syllables. This interpretation is confirmed; first by
the like in Moses, where it is written, thus shall ye bless (thus I say, and
not this:) Secondly, Numb. 6. 23.
because else we were obliged to use no other form then the Lords prayer.


N. The reason fails: First, because by this Eight times in Amos 1. and 2.
Deuteronomy. 7 5.
argument: when the Prophet says, thus says the Lord, and when God says,
Thus shall thou deal: we should conceive the rehearsal of the very words:
and the performance of the very deed not to be enjoined. Notwithstanding we
know that the Prophets had not only their matter and method, but even their
very words from the never erring spirit; and that Gods Law may not be
illuded: Secondly, it is written in Luke 11. 2.
Luke, Pray saying: so that not only the observation of the matter, but even
the repetition of the words is commanded. The place in Moses is not aptly
paraleld. For in what language will these words receive a good construction.
Bless, this (that is, use this precise form of blessing:) Lastly, whereas
they pretend, that we should be bound to use no form of Prayer, but the Lords:
This only indeed may be insteade thereof: Namely, that we ought to use this
Prayer both as a mirror, and exemplarie direction to all our suites: and as an
absolute complement of our imperfect Prayers.


I: The second argument is this: We read not that this prayer was ever used
by the Apostles.


N. We never read that the Apostles prayed together in public, but once: and
upon a particular Acts 4. 24.
occasion (I mean where the words of their prayers are specified.) Upon this
negative testimony, we may not conclude in a matter of fact. For I have heard
some report out of old Books, that S. Peter used it in Baptism. Howsoever this
be, (for it is uncertain) yet as God commanded a Feast, and Elias promised a
double Leuit. 16 29. 2. Kings 2. 10.
portion of the spirit to Elisha, though the performance of these be not set
down, yet no scruple is to be made of them. So, forasmuch as Christ commanded
his Disciples to use this prayer, we may not doubt of their obedience herein,
though it be not expressed.


I. I render you due thanks for this digression: Howbeit, you shall now
perceive that we have not digressed at all. To come then to your first
exception of Battologie. We answer, that vain repetition is, when words are
repeated, being directed neither with reason of art, neither with zeal of the
heart* neither with a supposall of a justly implied necessity. The two first
seem to be in that famous repetition (for his mercy endures 26 times in the
136. Psalm Matthew. 26. 44.
for ever:) the third in that rehearsal of Christ: All three appear in our
use of the Lords Prayer. For seeing that we know not what to pray as we ought,
we make this prayer as a complement of all our imperfections, and that with
art and zeal (we hope) sufficient.


N. But why do you iterate it eight times at one meeting?


I. It is as rare a thing to come to such a meeting as to behold a Tree bearing
Nuts, Figs, Cheries, and Apples. But first we use it almost in the entrance of
our prayer after the Absolution: Secondly, after the Creed: whereof one reason
may be drawn out of the Queens Injunctions, wherein it was appointed, that
after the second Lesson (if there were no Sermon) the Creed, the Lords Prayer,
and ten Commandments, should be read for the instruction of the ignorant:
Another reason may be this, many are not present at the rehearsal of the
Lords Prayer: seeing the mulet of absence is not inflicted, if men come whilst
the Psalms are in reading. This prayer therefore, being so necessary, is
conveniently then repeated, to aidee there the negligence or necessities of many
comers. Thirdly, we join this Prayer to the Letanie, because it is oftentimes
said alone (as upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes.) Now this (as also all other
Prayers) were imperfect without this supplement of the divine Prayer: which if
you deny, you fall into the quick sand of Brownisme. The other fine times,
namely, at the two Sacraments, Marriage, Churching, Burial) because the
actions are many times distinct and alone, yea and seldom, or never all
concur, may severally seem to require the annexing of this heavenly Prayer.


N. You have invented shifts in appearance for your needless repetitions: But
how can you cleake the omitting of the Doxologie?


I. First, you never heard of any man molested or rebuked for repeating the
same: For indeed the rehearsal thereof is not prohibited: Secondly, it is
omitted, not only in the vulgar translation but even in one ancient Greek C^p^e
(as Beza witnesses.) Thirdly, it is also left out in Luke, who would not have
neglected Luke 11. 5.
an essential necessary part of so exact a Prayer.


N. If this be wanting, Prayer will be defective: as containing Petitions,
but ^^ Thanksgiving.


I. First, some might say: That CHRIST taught us to ask, but not to give
thanks: not because gratulation is less needful, but more east. For to a
man that asks according to knowledge, if his demands be granted, it will be
no great difficulty to bring in the harvest of thanks, according to his own
Seed-time of Petitions: Secondly, some do avouch that in each petition all
kinds of Prayer appointed by Saint Paul, are by 1. Tim. 2. 1.
consequence implied: Thirdly, these words hallowed be thy name, if they be
interpreted as a Thanksgiving, your argument were at an end: Fourthly, this
conclusion of the Lords Prayer will hardly be enforced to be a Thanksgiving,
but rather a Doxologie or Recognition of Gods due.


CHAP. VII.
Of short Prayers.
N. FRom the Lords Prayer, we descend to those Prayers which are invented by
men. These be either but bits of Prayers, and short wishes, rather then
Prayers: Or drawn into length (called the Letanie.) Of the first kind are
these: O Lord open thou our lips. O Lord make haste to help us, and the like,
whose general fault is their curt brevity.


I. I remember you were offended at the length of our Liturgy: and now you are
displeased at the shortness of our prayers? Not unlike them, which being
called Papists, do answer that they should be styled Catholics: And then
being termed Catholics, thus come upon us at the back door, that we be
Heretics, because we contradict them being Catholics. Or not unlike
children which cry for ice, and when they have it, cry because it is cold.


N. Leave your descants: Though your Liturgy be long: yet some of your
Prayers are but cuts, poor pittances, and crummes of Prayers.


I. If these also were enlarged, our Service Book would be longer then a
Westphalian mile, or the Which some have fabled to contain twenty months,
each month twenty days Gene. 19 20. Numb. 10. 35. Joshua 10. 12. Judge. 15.
18. and 16. 28. Matthew. 26. 39. 2. Cor. 13 13. Gal. 6. 18. Gene. 18. 23. 1.
King. 8. 23. 2. King. 19. 15. Isa. 38. 10. Dan. 9. 2. Ion. 2. Hab, 3. Ioh. 17.
year of the Cubans. But now to approach to the matter, we find many short
prayers in the Scripture, not exceeding, nay scarce equalizing these of ours in
length. As for long prayers, besides the Psalms (which yet are not all of them
prayers) we find not many. In all not above nine: whereof three are subdivided
into sundry Sections (namely that of Abraham, Solomon, and the Lords Prayer.)
The other six only seem to have continued length. By which it appears that
we have sufficient presidents, for both kinds of prayers. Again, shortness
of prayer is then most convenient, when we intend some greater action of an
other nature, and yet holy, or at least lawful: For this cause, long Grace, by
discreet men is not allowed Lastly these short prayers, are certain quick
Parce Ciuibus Miles faciem feri.
prouocations to ardent Zeal, not bnlike Caesar's brief Apothegmes.


N. Besides the defect in quantity: These prayers are also vicious, in regard
both of the person uttering; and the matter uttered. The person uttering is
named first a Priest: a term not convenient to the Ministers of the Gospel.


I. Do you term our Ministers Evangelical, being ordained by Bishops; men in
your opinion Petty Popes, and servants of Antichrist?


N. For the present we grant them to be true Ministers. For we contend not
about the substance, but for the title.


I. It seems your altercation is about words, which be the wool of a Goat.


N. The word Priest is, by Consequence, dangerous: and therefore to be changed.


I. Before you change this term, how would you have these men to be entitled?


N. Let them be called Pastors Doctors, Preachers, Ministers, Bishops, Elders.


I. First, if Pastors be translated Shepherds, you will hardly allow the
baseness of that name: Secondly, if Pastors be turned Feeders; and Doctors,
Teachers, how can men, feed or teach, but by preaching? So that your three
first terms are confounded. The name of Minister is in Greek all one with
Deacon: which after your construction is only conversant about alms. The style
of Bishop I can prone to be only proper to him that may ordain Priests.


N. I will not now be entangled with that controversy: Wherefore let them be
called Elders or Seniors; but Priests by no means.


I. First, the name of Elder is given by the Hebrews to the Civil Magistrate:
and by you Deuteronomy. 2. 4. Judges 8. 14. Ruth 4. 2.
to certain Laymen, which assist the Pastor in the Consistory: and by us to
men of another quality then Priests. For who can be ignorant what be Aldermen
in Towns, and Seniours in Colleges? Secondly, the name Priest, is deduced
from the (...).
Greek word, which signifies Elder. And now tell I pray you, why you disallow
the term Priest?


N. First, because it signifies a Sacrificer.


I. First, neither is this the proper signification of the word: for in Hebrew
it betokens Genesis 41. 45. 2. Sam. 8. 18. Hence the Tartarians call their King
Kan of the Hebrew (...) of (...). Sacerdos of Sacer, and Dos. For Dos in old
time was of the masculine gender.
a Prince, as well as a Priest: In Greek, a holy man, or one conversant about
holy things: In Latin, a holy Dowry: of the English you heard before.
Secondly, and though it should signify a Sacrificer, yet were not the term
dangerous. For the Priest of the New Testament, does offer unto God, the
Sacrifice of prayer: and administreth the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which
is also a Sacrifice.


N. How can this be spoken without Popery, which makes men to eat Christ? A
thing more infamous, then either that of the Caniballs, where men eat men; or
that of the worshippers of Moloch, where God was thought to eat men: for here
man deuoures God.


I. The Romish Sacrifice we allow not: And yet in four respecs, the Sacrament
may be termed a Sacrifice. First, because therein we offer our selves to God,
as a reasonable Sacrifice: Secondly, because we present him with ye fruit and
calves Rom 12. 1. Some conjecture that the Hebrew word (...) Hose 14. 3. that
is calu^s was read (...), that is fruits, Heb. 13. 15.
of our lips, the most acceptable sacrifice: 3: For that we give him the
Sacrifice of Alms: Fourthly, and principally because it is the Remembrance,
Sign, Seal, and Instrument of applying to us, the only Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross.


N. The second cause of our disliking this name Priest is, for that the
Scripture does not yield it to the Ministers of the Gospel. I


I. The Prophet calls them Priests and Esaias 66. 2^.
Levites.


N. That is only done in the Old Testament, Mal. 1. 11.
by allusion to the Priests of the Law: as elsewhere Prayer is called a clean
Sacrifice, in the like sense.


I. And yet (as even now you heard) the author to the Hebrews calls prayer a
Sacrifice by virtue of this allusion: whereby also the Prophet was moved to
call our Ministers, Priests.


N. This he did not because they should be so styled: but because they should
succed them, not in action but in Office.


I. Not in action? Did not the Priests of the Law both pray, and teach the
people? Had they not many of the same outward Rites that we have (howsoever
they may seem something to be varied in Circumstances?) Did not they use
Water, Bread, Wine; all which notwithstanding were by Christ retained?


N. But you cannot show in the New Testament, this name, in this meaning.


I. The name is given to all Christians by 1. Pet. 2. 5. and 9. Apoc. 1. 6.
two Apostles: And why should we deny it to Ministers, to whom principally it
does appertain?


N. That name is common to all: and therefore may not be appropriated to them.


I. It may be ascribed to them, though not properly, yet principally: because
they offer to God, not only solitary and private prayers (as other Christians
do) but even the public Supplications of the whole Church. For all true
Israelites, were by the merits of Christ Exodus 19. 6.
(though to come) made true Priests in this general sense: and yet this
hindered not, but that they of the house of Aaron, might be called Priests.


N. But the New Testament does no where attribute directly this name to our
Church Officers.


I. You still reason from negative testimonies which are but dumb witnesses.


N. I reason from the practice of the Evangelists and Apostles: which did of
purpose avoid this name: because the Legal Priesthood and Temple were yet
standing. In like manner should we eschew this term because of the Popish
Priesthood.


I. I hope in Isaiahs time the Priesthood and Temple were not abrogated, and
yet he called our Ministers Priests. As for the Popish Priests, they can no
more hinder us from the use of this name, then the Priests of Tammuz could
hinder the Priests of Israel. Did the Fathers therefore abstain from this
name, because the Priests of Saturn and Juno were at Carthage, or Jupiter at
Rome, Pallas at Athens, and the like?


N. From the Priests we come to the People: which also do utter public
Prayers: For like Priest, like People.


I I had thought you had been satisfied when we treated about the Preface of
the Common Prayers.


N. You did then only endeavor to show that the People might say after the
Minister, not that they might answer him: The reason and end whereof I cannot
conceive.


I. The end thereof: First, is to ease the Priest: Secondly, to raise up in the
People, memory, attention, and zeal: the first to prepare the mind; the
second to make it concur with the Priest: The third, to apply the Public
sayings to each private man's use.


N. If a good intention might make a good action: the money changers in the
Temple might be justified, which helped the people to the money of the
Sanctuary, but where is the warrant of your practice?


I. Our warrant is drawn from proportion: As the Priest would not suffer David
and his followers to taste of the holy bread unless they had been separate
from women, by analogy to Gods Commandments upon Mount Sinai: So we cause
the People to answer 1. Sam. 21. 4. Exodus 19. 15.
the Priest by a proportionable reference to the practice of Miriam and Anna.
Again, seeing diverse of the Psalms are prayers: And Exodus 15. 20, 21 Luke 2.
38. Consider the word (...).
public psalmodie is approved by all men of tempered wits: We know not why
the peoples Responsals or answers in prayer should be rejected.


N. There is no less error in the matter then in the persons. The first fault
of the matter is their using of Gloria Patri, which is but an human: invention.


I. Were it so yet were it tolerable (as we showed when we spoke of Set
Prayer.) But true it is that Athanasius, a man, invented it: and the whole
Church approved it: which (as we think) had the Spirit of God.


N. That whose first use is decayed, ought to be abolished: but the use of
Gloria Patri is now decayed (which was to detest Arrians and Macedonians
denying the Godhead of Christ; and of the Holy Ghost) now therefore it is to
be abrogated.


I. First, the Mayor is untrue: For though the first use of the Arc, were to
preserve Noah with his Family: yet Moses made an Arc for (...) an Arc to
preserve things alive. Genesis 6. 14. whence Thebes was called by the houses
thereof built of Cadmus ships. (...) an Arc to keep things without life.
Exodus 25. 10.
another use: And though the first use of Manna were to feed the people, yet it
was reserved in the Golden Pot many hundred years. The like is to be said of
the Brazen Serpent, which though it healed not them that looked on it: yet was
it kept till the days of Ezekias. Again your Minor is weak: For at this day
we know (by a certain migration of souls, or art of Endor) sundry both
Arrians and Samosatenians and Tritheites, Turks, and Jews, which do no less
impugn the Trinity, then did the Old Heretics. Besides the Grecians denying
the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Son, deny withal (in our opinion) the
Sonne's equality with the Father, which seems to be acknowledged by this
Gloria Patri. Are there not amongst us many Familists, which are said to
disclaim the Godhead of the Holy Ghost? Are there not many stiffenecked
Atheists, which all in their lives, some in plain words, deny the Glory,
Trinity and Eternity of God, which three things are orderly combined in this
Doxologie? Nay, is any man of that tra^scendent capacity, to whom it shall not
be auailable to have this more then Super-celestiall Mystery often inculcated
into his flitting memory?


N. The words we might better endure were they not so unseasonably reiterated
at the end of all the Psalms; and sundry Hymns.


I. You complain (as I hear) that Alleluia (Praise ye the Lord) is omitted
seventeen times in the end of certain Psalms: and yet when we, at the end of
every Psalm, do most distinctly praise God, (which Alleluia does enjoin us
to do) you seem to be in Choler. Again the end of this rehearsal, is,
First, that the ignorant, which cannot read, may be advertised where each
Psalm ends: Secondly, that the true use of Psalms (which is the praising of
God) may be manifested in practice: Thirdly, That many irreuerent persons by
means of this (which seems to be a kind of prayer) may be put in mind of
the duty which is most decent in the hearing of the Psalms, namely, vailing
the Bonnet, which many do (with as little regard) neglect, as they which
depart from Baptism, before the Thanksgiving. Of which kind of Sacrilegious
profaneness, we observe many lamentable trials among the dissolute multitude.


N. The second fault in the matter of these prayers, is found in these words
after the Apostles Creed, There is none other that fights for us but only
thou O God.


I. Are there not sins enough? why make you more? what is the knot in this
bulrush?


N. First, you seem to pray for peace in your own time, without regarding the
posterity.


I. We pray for the one as being a blessing of God promised to two worthy Kings
of Judah: 2. Kings 20. 19. and 22, 10.
the latter we neglect not. Only we dare not presume that peace shall remain
with us with her wings clipped for ever. When we ask bread for this day, do we
neglect to morrow? Do we not tread as near as may be in the steps of Christ,
who forbids us to take care for to morrow?


N. Again, when you pray for peace, because none fights for you but God: you
seem to intimate that you would not fear war if any should fight for you
but God.


I. This is rather our meaning: That we fear no war, but expect an eternal
peace if God defend us, who is the Lord of Sabbath, (that is of Hoasts) At
which word in the Te Deum some have cauilled: not remembering that it is found
in the Greek Text of Saint Paul: For had it been in the Te Deum: Sabbath Romans
9. 29.
not Sabbath might not that also be justified? Did not sundry ancient Jews
term God, the Lord of the Sabbath Day? Is he not indeed the Lord of rest,
which that word implies? But to return from this seeming digression: God is
our Psalm 18. 2. and 121 4 and 127. 2
shield, and Psalm. 73 25.
watchful keeper: him only we have in Heaven and Earth. And now remember you
avouched Dan. 10. 21.
Michael to be Christ. Consider the words there written. There is none that
holds with me in these things but Michael your Prince. If Michael here be
Christ, are not the words the same in effect with these in our Liturgy at
which you stumble? In sum, though Angels and Men fight for us ministerially,
and in the nature of instruments; yet God only fights as principal Agent,
teaching our Psalm. 18. 34.
hands to fight.


CHAP. VIII.
Of the Letanie.
N. THe Short Prayers being handled, I proceed to the Letanie: being a more
continued form of Prayer: which (as I take it) does want things needful, and
abound with things needless or evil. First, then it wants a Thanksgiving,
which is as necessary a part of Prayer as Petition.


I. If there be six or seven Petitions in the Lords Prayer (for there are of
both opinions) I believe the Lords Prayer will have the same defect.


N. The conclusion of the Prayer, in these words (for thine is the Kingdom,
etc.) is a Thanksgiving: so that the prayer is not herein defective.


I. I showed before, that to be no Thanksgiving: But, if it be, then is not
the Letanie destitute of Prayers in this kind. For these words, O holy,
blessed and glorious Trinity: and these, O Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world, are they not a direct Doxologie? Have we not elsewhere
sundry forms of Thanksgiving prescribed both in your larger sense, (as that
of Gloria Patri: and that in the beginning of the Gospel: Glory be to thee, O
Lord; together with Te Deum, Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis, Benedictus, and
Benedicite: as also in the more strict acception of the word (for example after
Baptism:) likewise in the Communion, in Churching, yea and in Burial.) Does
not the Church upon all occasions (besides the yearly Solemnities, which are
nothing but Thankesgiuings to God for his benefits in his Son, Angels,
Saints) appoint many Eucharisticall forms, publicly to be celebrated? What
should I speak of the four and twentieth of March: and five and twentieth of
July: the fifth of August, and November; whose gratulatory memorials, are
observed with all Symbols of Christian joy.


N. But why do you not ordain a continual Thanksgiving to God, whose
mercies are continual?


I. We read the Psalms daily, with sundry Hymns of Thanksgiving. Besides,
if you suppose our gratulations should be as particularly determined as our
petitions, you turn Earth into Heaven: In Heaven there shall be an eternal
Alleluia, and cause or matter of Thanksgiving: But on Earth, though our wants
be many of them, standing and continued, and so our petitions unalterable: yet
the variation of the benefits which we receive, does many ways diuersifie the
forms of our gratulations. In prescribing whereof Our Church is not negligent,
when new occurrences fall.


N. From the want of things needful, I go on to the store of things needless
or evil: and that either in the form or matter, and object of Prayer. In the
form we dislike these words: By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, etc.
which either we take to be Oaths (things most strange in Prayer) or certain
magical Exorcismes, and Coniurations: other sense of these words we cannot
imagine.


I. You have at once, hatched four errors: whereof the two former concern an
oath. The first is, that wheresoever you hear this word by; you presently
conceive an oath. Whereupon, when you read these words, by the life of
Pharaoh: you conjecture that Joseph Genesis 42. 15, 16.
learned to swear in Egypt by the life of a King: whereas the Hebrew has
simply Pharaoh lives: which phrase notwithstanding sounds but harshly in our
English ears: And yet some of your men doubt not to tell the people, that this
was an oath.


N. Therein they do not err. For did not Judah say to Jacob: the man charged
us by an oath? Genesis 4^. 3.



I. First, the Hebrew Text may be thus rendered: the man did in contesting,
contest, or in protesting protest to us, that is, he did charge us with an
earnest protestation. If this sense stand, your oath does vanish: But because
the word may signify to attest* or call God to witness: or to adjure, (that
is, to cause another to swear) though the ordinary Translation be not changed:
yet we may say: that either he charged them to swear they would bring
Benjamin: or himself did call God to witness, if they brought not Benjamin
they should not go unpunished? wherefore seeing Charity craves the most
favorable exposition; no necessity does enforce us to think that Joseph his
saying, by the life of Pharoh was an oath. The second error is: That you make
an Oath and Prayer things repugnant: whereas the two ingredients of an oath
(the attestation of God, or calling him to witness: and the supplication made
unto him, that he would reveal the truth, and revenge falsehood) are both found
in Prayer: wherein we both call for his presence; and use many times as well
imprecation conditional, as postulation.


N. What? then would you have men to swear when they pray?


I Nothing less: But only by this you see that an Oath and Prayer agree in
substance, howsoever they seem to differ in circumstance of terms. Your third
error is, in that you suppose all charging of God by the remembrance of his
former benefits to be mere coniuring. Think you Dido coniured, when she
said, Per Connubia nostra, that is, By our Aeneid. 4.
Marriage I entreat you Aeneas to return to me?


N. I pass not for your Poetical instance. What good construction can you
make of these words in the Letanie?


I. Therein stands your fourth error: For the interpretation of the words be
plain: That we desire God to aid us: by applying to us those fifteen
benefits there rehearsed, as every man of mean capacity may conceive.


N. From the form let us go to the object: according to which your Prayers
may be divided into Intercessions and Deprecations. Your Intercessions are
three: First, you pray that God would have mercy upon all men: whereas Christ
would not pray for the world.


I. Christ knew the number of the Elect; so John 7. 9.
do not we: wherefore his example herein is inimitable. But now (I pray you)
consider this reason. Whom God would have saved, for them we may pray that God
would show them mercy: But God would have all men saved: we may therefore
pray for his mercy toward all. 1. Tim. 2. 4.



N. Though your Minor might be answered The will of the sign is whereby God
offers grace in the preaching of the Gospel. Acts 17. 30.
with those three known distinctions (First, that God wills by the will of
the sign: not of his good pleasure. Secondly, he wills it now: namely,
since the death of Christ. Thirdly, all men: not every particular man: but men
of all orders, to be saved:) Nevertheless, your argument may be thus retorted
upon you: whom God will not save, for mercy toward them we may not pray: But
God wills not that all men should be saved (for then there should be no
reprobation or use of Hell) we need not therefore pray thus for all men.


I. Your three distinctions upon the place of Saint Paul may clear our Letany:
For as God wills all men to be saved: so do we pray for his general mercy.
Nevertheless, I thus answer your argument: First, then to let pass your
faults in reasoning. Your Mayor is ambiguous: For if you mean the secret will
of God: All the Propositions are negative: The Minor negative in the first
figure. So they did in old time to paricides.
put the case your Father were appointed by God, to endure some horrible death:
if you notwithstanding should not pray against it, were you not worthy to be
sowed in a sack, with a Cock, an Ape, a Dog and a Snake, and so forthwith
to be cast into the Sea?


N. But I speak of Gods revealed will not of his secret. Now God has revealed
in his word that Romans 9. 21. 2. Tim. 2. 20.
some are vessels of dishonor, and cannot be saved.


I. Has God revealed that he will not have all men now living to be saved?
As for prayer for the dead, it is repugnant to the doctrine of our Church.


N. Howsoever this point shall be more fully tried in the Catechism: yet it
seems you pray for the Dead in your second Intercession, wherein you say,
remember not the offenses of our forefathers.


I. Through the sides of the Letanie you strike at Baruch, and the writer of
the Macchabees. Baruch 3. 5. 2. Mac. 12 42.



N. We think they all err alike: seeing they defend Popish Prayers for the
Dead.


I. What think you of the Prayer in the Psalm: Remember not against us the
former Psalm. 79. 8.
iniquities: That is (as Baruch expounds it) the wickedness of our Fathers:
which God oftentimes visits upon the children. And so Judas Macchabeus
prayed, that the sin of the slain men might not bring destruction upon the
whole Army: as the sacrilege of Achan did upon the host of Joshua: and as the
sins of Saul, Jeroboam, and Achab brought forth ripe punishments in the days
of their successors: For God punishes the transgression of the fathers in the
children two ways: First, with eternal punishment: when he delivers the
children into a reprobate sense: that they may imitate their fathers fault,
which fault notwithstanding is their own in regard of action: howsoever it be
imputed to their Parents in respect of example. Secondly, with temporal
Chastisement, although the Children be godly.


N. The former iniquities mentioned in the Psalm; may be expounded of those
sins, which men that are here brought in praying, had committed before the
time of this punishment, and not of the sins of their Ancestors.


I. But is this interpretation against the analogy of faith? Does not God
indeed punish the sin both of the Fathers upon the children; and of the Dead
upon the Living?


N. Though this be granted yet Judas Macchabeus 2. Mac. 12. 43, 44.
cannot be justified who both prayed, and offered a sin offerring for the
Dead.


I. Howsoever you trust not us: yet believe some, of whose skill and good
intention herein you cannot doubt. The sum of the answer Reynolds de
Idololatria.
is this: Judas prayed for two things: First, that the offense of the slain
men might not be imputed to his Army? Secondly, He entreated for their joyful
resurrection, charitably hoping that they had in the act of death repented of
their sin. Again the sin offering for the dead may be understood Causally,
not Subiectiuely: For their sins were the cause why it was offered, yet were
they not subjects capable of the benefits arising thereby.


N. This shift is cut off by the last words of the Chapter, which are these,
that they might be freed from sin: And this clause can be referred to none
but the slain men.


I. These words (if they be not corrupted) as the same author coniectureth
(for you know that we neither hold them Canonical, nor read them in our
Churches) must be referred to the men in his Army, which were alive: Again,
some have not doubted to answer that sin may be forgiven after this life,
Because Sir Edward Hobbie against Higgins.
the full pardon thereof is not declared till the general judgment. But now
to return to the Letany; do you think that our prayer is popish?


N. I suspect, that according to the Papists, you think the guilt to be taken
away by death, and yet the punishment in Purgatory to remain.


I. The Papists imagine the guilt of Venial sin only to be removed by
death. Now this sin (wherein the Soldiers of Judas died) was mortal as
cannot be denied: Wherefore we gratify not the Papists in allowing this
History. Again, where is your Charity, when you charge us with purgatory,
seeing the stream of our Churches Doctrine runs against it.


N. I care not for your stream: For you look Eastward, and row Westward: I
will now pass to the third Intercession.


I. Before you pass; let me know what you mean by this word Intercession?


N. What should I mean but a Prayer which we make for other men?


I. When we pray for all men, do we not pray for our selves? And when we
pray that God would not remember against us, the sins of Our Forefathers, is
not this Prayer made in behalf of our selves; that God would not inflict
punishment upon us for their transgressions.


N. I had thought; when you said all men: you meant all but your selves: And
that in the other Prayer you had been Suppliants for the dead. Now your third
Intercession is Illuminate all Bishops, etc. Pray you herein for true, or for
false Bishops?


I. In your opinion we cannot pray for true Bishops* For you imagine true
Bishops to be only ordained by your Discipline which we have not. Also you
think that you are not bound to pray for men of a contrary Religion to your
own: But the truth is, we pray for both: namely, that God would give the
beginning of light to the false; and the increase thereof to the true Bishops.


N. It is unseasonable now to tell what we think in this point: For I will
not at this present be enwrapt in this question: Only we think that you pray
for Popish Bishops: Against which I thus reason. For Antichrist; we may not
pray: But Popish Bishops are the servants of Antichrist: therefore not to be
prayed for.


I. First your Mayor is doubtful to me: For I believe, by Antichrist you
mean the Pope.


N. I mean so: what scruple is there in it?


I. A scruple which you can never remove: As I will thus confirm. Antichrist
is not one man: But a state or succession of men: Now the Pope is only one man:
and therefore cannot be Antichrist. The Mayor is affirmed by all Protestants:
the Minor is confirmed by common sense.


N. By the Pope I mean the Papacy or Succession of Popes: not this or that
individual Pope.


I. What then? May we not pray that this Pope that now sits at Rome may be
converted, although he be in in the seat of Antichrist? May we pray for a
Pope, and not for the Popish Bishops? Again in your Minor you change the
Medium; and turn the state of the question: For from Antichrist, you run to
Antichrist his servants.


N. Between him and his servants there is as much difference as between Hell
and Gehenna.


I. Your charity is too hot, and smells of the Brimstone of that place whereof
you speak: Think you that Antichrist can be saved?


N. I think he cannot No more can his servants.


I. Can they not relinquish his service, and become Reformed Christians.


N. They may, but then they cease to be his servants.


I. You mean then, That we may pray for them as Bishops but not as Popish.
Now we pray that God would illuminate all Bishops, that is, deliver them from
the darkness of Popery, and all manner of errors. Again, why beat you the
bush in this manner? I know you mean that our Lord Bishops are Popish, and the
servants of Antichrist; Neither can you be ignorant, that for their sake
principally this Prayer is intended.


N. If it be so, I am the more sorry, except you mean to pray for their
conversion. Howsoever it be, I will not now enter into that combat. But from
your Intercession I make haste to your Deprecations: which either concern
things spiritual or temporal. Of the first kind is this Prayer: From
fornication and all other Deadly Sins: wherein you seem to make fornication
no sin.


I. Do we pray to be delivered from it as from a Punishment* or as from a
Sin?


N. You made the doubt your self. Be you the Oedipus: sure I am, you make it
no sin as may thus be proved: All sin is deadly (as no Protestant will
deny) But fornication, in your Letanie, is no deadly sin; and consequently
no sin. The Minor thus appears, You say; Fornication, and all other deadly
sins: whereby you distinguish Fornication from the other, as not being of
that kind.


I. When David says, Sheep and Oxen yea, and the beasts of the field: does
he exclude Sheep and Oxen out of the number of the beasts of the field? When
Saint Paul says, As the Apostles and the brethren of the Lord; and Cephas.
Does he deny the Lords brethren and Cephas to be Apostles? Do not the
Papists themselves acknowledge Fornication to be one of the Deadly sins? And
do you vilify us in respect of them?


N. You vilify your selves in making seven deadly sins like Papists: which
some humorous men have applied to the seven Planets, according to the days of
the week: As Pride to the glorious Sun: Envy to the pale Moon: Wrath to
fierce Mars: Covetousness to subtle Mercury: Gluttony or Drunkenness to
prodigal Jupiter: Lust to wanton Venus: Sloth to dull Saturn.


I. I dispute not now whether these men did invent this method, partly for
memory, partly to show that lanets, though they compel not man's mind, yet
they incline his affection unless he break and tame his natural disposition.
Only this I demand: Do the Papists make no other deadly sins then these
seven? Is not heresy with them capital? Do they not make six sins against
the Holy Ghost? Presumption, Despair, Final Impenitencie, Obstinate Malice,
Inuidence, or Envy against Gods grace in our brother: resisting of the known
truth.


N. Yea your self made Envy, not long ago, In a Sermon upon Romans 1. 29
a sin against the Holy Ghost.


I. It was then declared, that there is but one sin against the Holy Ghost:
and therefore that those six things reckoned by the Schoolmen out of Saint
Austine, are rather parts then kinds of that sin. Also it was showed that
Envy was of two kinds. The first, whereby one desires another happiness to
be translated to himself: Another, whereby he is sorry that any virtue
remains in the Matthew. 13. 28.
world. This latter is in him that is called the envious man: and may be a part
of that dreadful sin against the Holy Spirit.


N. But you said in another Sermon that Witches sin against the Holy Ghost.


I. I said it not of my self, but recited it out of the Kings Majesty's Book
called the Demonologie: The worthiness whereof I thought to be such (though
it had been written by a man unknown, or merely private) as might stop all
Cauils. But now what can you allege against it? Do not some Witches plainly
renounce God, and that with a voluntary and direct obstinacy? Do they not
often blaspheme that God whom they have known and acknowledged? Can this
iniquity be distinguished from the sin against the Holy Ghost.


N. It was affirmed (by them that reported it to us) that these were your
assertions: Witches sin against the Holy Ghost: Envy is the sin against the
Holy Ghost.


I. Men of your profession should be diligent hearers, and slow believers. For
you know that Fame is like the urine, which, till it be chafed, and tried, is
as deceitful as an Harlot.


N. Well if the Papists and you make more deadly sins then seven: why are
these seven only reckoned?


I. Let the Papists themselves tender a reason of their own popular division:
As for us, we account all firm in it own nature to be mortal.


N. But you seem to imply the vulgar Popish distribution of Sins into
Mortal and Venial.


I. Do none divide Sin in this manner but Papists? Does not Bellarmine tell
you, Bellar. lib. 2. de peccato.
that Lutherans hold all the sins of the Elect to be venial: of the
reprobate to be mortal? Dare you deny the Public Doctrine of our Church,
that all sins (except that against the Holy Ghost) howsoever, in their own
nature, they be deadly, yet are made through the merits of Christ, venial, and
pardonable.


N. From spiritual things I come to temporal: Whereof both the number and
matter are by us disliked. Touching the first. The number of your prayers for
Temporal benefits, exceeds them which are made for Spiritual graces:
whereas of the six Petitions in the Lords Prayer, the fourth only is for
Temporal things.


I. When we pray in the sixth Petition: Lead us not into temptation, against
what temptations do we pray?


N. Temptation is from God, either immediately without means (as that which is
termed the Divine temptation, namely, when the wrath of God does immediately
seize upon the Conscience:) Or else by means, which are three: First, the
Devil who stirs up the blasphemous temptation: Secondly, the flesh, or part
unregenerate, from which do issue both the temptations of sin, affrighting
the Conscience, and of Fancy molested with Melancholy: Thirdly, the world, by
and in which are raised outward temporal afflictions.


I. I will not now dispute about your division: Only you confess, that in this
sixth Petition you pray against temporal affliction, and so for a temporal
blessing. But now tell me I pray you, when in the seventh Petition we say
Deliver us from evil; what evil is understood?


N. These words not the seventh: but a part of the sixth Petition: For the
conjunction But, knitting them to the former words, does make them but one
sentence, and one Petition.


I. By this your reason there will be but four Petitions: Considering to these
words, Give us this day our daily bread, the rest of the Prayer is annexed by
three conjunctions: Namely, twice And, and For. Again, Beza tells (...).
you, that the word But, is often times taken for And.


N. To grant that these words may make the seventh Petition yet by the word
evil, we are to understand the evil one, that is the Devil.


I. The word may be put in the neuter gender, and so may signify Math. 5. 37.
John 5. 19.
evil, or wickedness: Again, though we should receive your interpretation
concerning the Devil, were not Job's afflictions inflicted by the Devil,
merely temporal? you perceive then, that here also we pray for temporal
security. Further I pray you consider these words, forgive us our sins: do
we in this fifth Petition desire the remission of the guilt of sin: or also
of the punishment thereof.


N. I am no Papist to separate the punishment from the guilt?


I. Are there not temporal, as well as eternal punishments of sin?


N. What will follow thereupon?


I. That, in this Petition also, we make supplication for things temporal.
And now retire (if you lift) to the second Petition: Thy kingdom come. Do you
here understand the kingdom of power, of glory, or of grace?


N. The kingdom of grace, as it is exercised in the Church Discipline: erected
by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, Widows.


I. Is not this an external and temporal government? (for I hope it shall not
last in Heaven) do you not pray for the outward peace of this your Disciplined
Church? Here also it is plain; that for things temporal, this Prayer is
tendered. There remains the first Petition (as you call it) Hallowed be thy
name: What exposition thereof do you give?


N. Namely; That Gods name may be sanctified by us; doing his will.


I. If this be true: the third Petition (Let thy will be done) is merely void.


N. It may then thus be expounded; Let thy name be hallowed in the confusion
of the enemies of thy Church.


I. Do you desire their eternal, or only their temporal confusion?


N. We desire first their conversion: then the repressing of their malice: and
for the quiet of the Church, we crave their temporal ruin. As for their
everlasting downfall, we commit that to the sole Moderator of such dreadful
executions.


I. Then some thing temporal is requested in this Petition also: So that of
the seven Petitions, all but the third do in part implore Gods aid as well for
Temporal, as for Spiritual benefits. Further (I pray you) read Salomons
Prayer: wherein of fifteen Petitions, you will hardly make One for things
merely 1. Kings 8. 23. and 54.
Spiritual.


N. First, the Jews were a People much led by sense: and therefore by sensible
Objects to be allured unto Religion: Secondly, although the things prayed for,
in show be Temporal: yet Gods blessing annexed unto them is Spiritual.


I. Our people are no less carnal, at least in part: For who has so much of
the spirit as is not in great measure allayed by the flesh? Again if your
second caution may stand (as indeed it must) remember these two things: First,
that the fourth Petition craves Contentment and Gods blessing, in the
attainment, use, and loss of the things of this life: which you cannot but
agnize to be Spiritual: Secondly, that the Prayers in our Letanie, may admit
the like construction. Further your argument may be answered, two other ways:
First, that all the suites that we present to God for temporal things, may
easily be reduced to the fourth, sixth, and seventh Petitions: Secondly, these
are but one and twenty in number, whereas our Prayers for things spiritual,
are in a manner numberless.


N. We insist not so much upon the number, as upon the matter of these
Prayers: and specially of two of them: First, you pray against Lightning and
Tempest: whereas Lightning is but rare in Winter.


I. We pray not simply against Lightning. (For we know it to be a Meteor, very
beneficial in nature) but against the damage arising thereby, which is in the
Winter more perilous; because less usual. Again, (according to the ancient
division of the year, into Summer and Winter) we pray against the dangers of
the whole year: Namely, against Lightning most frequent in Summer, and tempest
in Winter. Or thus, against Lightning most terble in Winter; and Tempest in
Summer.


N. The second error in the matter of your Prayer, is: That you pray to be
delivered from sudden Death. This to be defective, I thus prove. Against
that which ought not to be in the Elect, we ought not to pray: But Death ought
not to be sudden to the Elect: (who should rather be prepared and awaite for
it,) we ought not therefore to pray against sudden Death.


I. Although it were more fit for you to lick The Minor negative in the first
figure: and all the reason standing upon negations: nor indeed being capable
of-amendment.
your reason as a Bear does her whelps (for as yet it is all shapelesse.)
Nevertheless I deny your Mayor upon this reason. Against that which ought not
to be in the Elect, we ought not to pray: But sin ought not to be in the
Elect: Against sin therefore we may not pray.


N. To let this pass, I come to another Argument: That, against which we pray
is either a sin, or a Judgment: But sudden Death is neither (for it has
befalne the Elect.) In vain therefore do you pray against it.


I. If you imagine that no sin has befalne the Elect; you will rush upon the
Libertine error of Coppyn and Quintaine, two Belgian Cobblers; which patched up
this opinion, that sin in the Elect is but imaginary.


N. You traduce me. I brought it, to prove that it is no Judgment.


I. In the former reason you said it ought not to be in the Elect: and now you
avouch it to be no sin: How will you soder these things together?


N. Howsoever it may be a sin: yet it is no judgment to the Elect.


I. Though it be no judgment, May we not pray as well against sins, as
against judgments? But why is it no judgment?


N. Because it does befall the Elect, which no judgment does.


I. Why then does the Apostle 1. Pet. 4. 17. Read more of this in the last
Book of the Bishop of Winchester against H. I.
say, Judgment does begin at the house of God? Again is it not lawful to
pray for a comfortable Death? Is it not some comfort to die with renewed Faith,
Repentance, Reconciliation, and Setting of the house in order? Lastly, is not
Sudden Desolation, a judgment threatened to the Prou. 1. 27.
wicked?


N. But there is no Romans 8. 1.
condemnation to the Elect.


I. Yet some of them die with more scandal, and less joy of conscience, yea
and enjoy less joys in Heaven then others of their brethren: and may not we
pray for the best gift.


CHAP. IX.
Of Hymns.
N. FRom your ordinary Prayers in Prose, we come to your Hymns: which we
disallow both for form and matter. Touching the form: we like not your
Church Music, Vocal, and Isntrumental: Against which some have thus
reasoned: Music was invented by Iubal, One of the Genesis 4. 21.
wicked stock of Caine: and therefore not to be used in the Church.


I. Touching the Antecedent, I demand first, How you prove that he invented
Music?


N. He is said to be the Father of all that play upon the Harp and Organs:
under which words all kinds of Isntrumental Music are comprehended.


I. To grant that (which yet you can never euict:) yet the word Father does not
signify an Inuenter: For in the former verse Iubal is said to be the Father of
cattle, that is, of feeding cattle: Did not Abell keep sheep before him?


N. But here are meant greater cattle: or else that he perfected the art of
Shepherds, begun by Abel.


I. The force of the word, will not establish Peculium a Pecudibus dictum. Vnde
and pecuculari and peccare.
the first, considering it signifies Possession, which may agree as well to
Sheep and Goats as to Oxen and Horses. As for the latter, though it be not
credible, that Abel should want art, yet to grant it: By this you perceive that
Iubal did not invent, but adorn it. The like is to be said of Iubals Music.
For you shall never persuade that a liberal art was invented by a man.
Secondly, did Iubal invent Church Music?


N, No: But if he, being of the cursed race of Caine, did invent it, we may not
use it in the Church.


I. This is your old sandy consequence: Genes. 36. 24. Deuteronomy. 22. 10. 1. Kings
1. 33.
upon which you built your first general objection: But did not Anah find out
Mules? and yet neither David, nor Solomon refused to use them. Are therefore
tents unlawful or the feeding of cattle: or the works in Iron and Brass:
because the two first (as you expound it!) were invented by Iubal, and the two
latter by Tubal Caine?


N. Things done in the Ceremonial Law, are to be abolished: But such was
Church Music: Ergo.


I. Balance the words of your Mayor. Was not saying and reading used in the
Ceremonial Law? Will you have these also abrogated?


N. These things did concur with it, but were not parts of it* as was
Music.


I. Then is your Minor but a broken reed: As may thus be proved. All parts of
the Ceremonial Law were set down by Moses: Now Church Music was not
ordained by Moses: But by David and Solomon: And therefore not Ceremonial.


N. Your Mayor seems to want weight: For Solomon not Moses did erect the
Temple: and yet I trust you will not deny it to be a part of the Ceremonial
Law.


I. The Temple was but the Standing Tabernacle enlarged: and so in substance
all one withit.


N. Church Music does not edify: and therefore to be disallowed.


I. Touching your antecedent, I demand first. What Music you entreat of? Do
you dislike all singing in the Church: which some of the Separation have termed
the croking of Ravens?


N. No: but your artificial Music, which because it is not understood does
not edify.


I. Secondly, then I demand: Did you 1. Cor. 14. 26. Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
ever hear of Music that was not artificial? were not the Psalms and
Hymns (mentioned by Saint Paul) made by art, or that which is above art
(namely the spirit of Prophecy.) If your vulgar Psalmodie be good (as no
doubt it is) how much more excellent shall your Artificial Music be? which
also is so plain, that every man of mean diligence and capacity may conceive
it with reverend delight. And now let me advertise you of your double
contradiction to your self: First, you said that Music was not lawful in
the Church, because it was invented by Iubal: and yet after made it a part of
the Ceremonial Law, and could not deny the use thereof by David and Solomon:
Secondly, yet stumbling again, you avouch that it does not edify: As if any
part of the Law Ceremonial, or any thing instituted by David and Solomon, were
such as could not tend to edification.


N. Music did edify then, but not now.


I. You should have produced some reason of your assertion: Mean time we had
rather believe Athanasius in the East, Ambrose in the West: Augustine in the
South (which did partly erect, partly allow Church Music) then your bare
spirit of Contradiction.


N. Saint Paul shows that Music cannot edify, 1. Cor. 14. 7.
because the vulgar knows not what is piped.


I. First, the Apostle speaks of a Pipe, in whose sound there is no
distinction: Secondly, of such a Pipe, he says, how shall it be known what is
piped? His meaning is, how shall the most expert Musician know the meaning
thereof? Now can you charge our Music with indistinction of sounds.


N. Your Music is indistinct being barbarous: 1. Cor. 14. 11. Barbarus bic
ego sum quia non intelligor vlli.
And that so it is, it appears by the Apostle in the same place, because the
multitude does not understand it.


I. Does not the multitude conceive that the words of Te Deum are sung or some
such like Hymn?


N. But they cannot understand the Musical Proportions: and so the Music
does not edify.


I. If you mean an exact understanding, some will doubt whither any Musician
has it, being a matter of so deep contemplation: But if you conceive a
confused and general knowledge, this may not be denied to the multitude.


N. I mean a competent understanding of Music, without which no man can
judge thereof.


I. Though it require much skill to judge: yet a mediocritie of Science will
serve to be delighted, and thereupon to give a certain confused judgment.
For there is a natural sympathy between man's soul and melody. Now observe,
if your argument were good, then the vulgar might not hear a Sermon, because
they cannot distinctly judge of the method, and ornaments thereof; being taken
from the Armorie of Logique, and Wardrobe of Rhetorique: nor of the truth of
the Citations which are drawn from Hebrew, Chaldee, Syrian, and Greekish
fountains: And thus in stead of Church Music, you would abrogate Sermons,
especially before the multitude. In sum; As God loves a cheerful giver, so
much more a cheerful worshipper. So that Music is requisite that devotion
may be refreshed by delectation. And take this for a Maxim, An enemy to
Music, an enemy to Muses.


N. From the form we come to the matter Luke 1. 46. and 68. and 2. 29.
of Hymns: which are either taken out of Scripture, or invented by man: Of the
first kind are these; Magnificat, Benedictus, Nunc Dimittis: wherein we first
disallow; that being uttered at the beginning upon a particular occasion, they
are now converted to a common use.


I. First, If that were true: What think you of the Epistles of Saint Paul to
the Galathians, and to Philemon, being written upon most special, and urgent
necessities?


N. There are contained in them, most Ecumenical doctrines for the universal
good of the Church.


I. The same may be said of those Hymns (as you term them) for indeed it may
be doubted, whither things taken out of the Scriptures be Hymns: Forasmuch as
properly they be termed Hymns which be invented by the art of Ecclesiastical
men. Secondly, you will hardly allege any particular occasion of these Songs,
especially of the two former.


N. But of the last we may: For Simeon desired to die, because he had seen
Christ.


I. He desired to be dismissed in peace, because he had seen Gods promise
fulfilled: And so may we desire to be with Christ, upon the acknowledgement of
his revealed will in the Gospel.


N. The second thing that we dislike is; That these Psalms are more often
repeated, then the Psalms of David.


I. You know it is written: That the least in Luke 7. 8.
the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then John the Baptist: So we say, That the
Songs of the New Testament, are greater and more to our edification, then those
of the Old Covenant, because they concern the Gospel, which is both a greater
and a nearer light.


N. We will speak more of the Magnificat, when we come to treat of the
translations. The second kind of Hymns was invented by men: As Te Deum, and
Benedicite: wherein first we dislike that men's inventions should be obtruded
upon the Church.


I. Why set you before us twice sodden Coleworts? Set Prayers to be lawful
we have proved before. Now Hymns invented by men are nothing but Set Prayers:
And therefore lawful.


N. In the Te Deum we dislike those words When thou had overcome the
sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.
Whereby we suspect you mean that Christ after his death, delivered the
Fathers from Limbus, from which time all believers immediately enter into
Heaven.


I. Did not Christ first go into Heaven to John 3. 13. and 14. 2. Heb. 9. 8.
1^. and 11. 40.
prepare a place for us, as says the Scripture?


N. He went thither first not actually, but virtually: because he merited our
going thither.


I. Did he merit it by any other means, then by the virtue of his Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension?


N. He did not: But we feared some Snake, lurking under this grass.


I. I leave your jealous suspicions: Forasmuch as you know that Lymbus Patrum
is generally rejected by Our Church.


CHAP. X.
Of Collects, and Creeds.
N. I Should speak of the Benedicite, but that it is amongst the Apocryphal
Books: and therefore it shall be deferred till we speak of the Lessons: Now
from the Ordinary Prayers we proceed to the Collects: whereof the most be
extraordinary. But in the forefront of them we will place the third Collect for
Grace being also an ordinary Prayer: and taking part of both: wherein we
approve not these words (Grant that this Day we fall into no sin.) Against
which we thus reason: It is impossible, that we fall into no sins: And
therefore to pray for it utterly unlawful.


I. Your Antecedent is ambiguous, as may thus appear. Not to sin is
possible: But to fall into no sin, is all one with not to sin: and
therefore possible. The Mayor is proved by Saint John who says, he that is 1.
John 3. 9.
borne of God, sins not: neither indeed can sin.


N. That place admits sundry good expositions: As first, the regenerate
cannot finally fall into sin: Secondly, no not totally for a time: Thirdly, a
man, so far forth as he is regenerate cannot sin, but only in regard of
the flesh, which lusts against the spirit.


I. Which-soeuer of these interpretations you apply to this place; there may be
sufficient iustifications to the words of the Collect especially the two
former: For it is very lawful for us to pray, that we may neither finally nor
totally for a time, fall into sin: That is, (as the Prophet says) that we
may be kept Psalm. 19. 3.
from sins presumptuous: Again; this truth may be thus manifested: Not to
be led into temptation is possible: But not to fall into sin, is all one in
effect with not to be led into temptation: And therefore equally possible.


N. Your Minor seems to reele: For a man may be led into temptation; and yet
not fall into sin: For Christ sinned not: and yet was led into temptation.


I. The speech were blasphemous, were it not uttered of ignorance: For to be
led into temptation is to be carried into the midst thereof, and to be
overcome by it: which (as you know) cannot agree to Christ. This exposition may
thus be proved: Either we pray that we may not be led into temptation: or
that we may not yield to temptation: The latter to be lawful no man doubts:
But the former I hope you will not aver. It remains therefore: That the scope
of the Prayer is, that we may not be surprised with temptation, so that it
may occasion us to fall into any crying and habitual sin.


N. There be other Proper Collects, at whose words and doctrine we are
offended: The first Defect in the words is obscurity.


I. By this argument you might condemn many of the Psalms: which though they
be mere Prayers: yet in many places are as obscure as truth, which is hidden
in Democritus pit: But what is the obscurity which you pretend.


N. In the Collect upon Trinity Sunday (as you term it.) These words are as
dark as the leaves of Sibilla: (and in the power of the Majesty) to worship
the unity.


I. No marvel in a matter as profound as Hell, if some phrase be not so
clear: For if a man should demand of you, the difference between the
generation of the Son, and the proceeding of the Holy Ghost? Or how the Son
should be called a Distinct Person, and yet be in his Father: Or how the Father
should communicate all his being to his Son; and yet continue his own being
distinct from that of his Son. Or how the Father by the Son should actiuely
breath out the Holy Spirit? Or how the wisdom of God should differ from his
justice (considering in God there can be admited no composition) I believe
though you had the aid of all Phrasologistes, you would hardly reconcile and
explain these phrases; which notwithstanding are received in the Church, as
most necessary. But as for the difficulty, at which here you stumble, it is
of no moment: For it is plain that we worship the Unity of the Three Persons
in the power of the Divine Maieistie, acknowledging them Three to be one in
powerful Majesty, or Maiesticall power, according to a vulgar Hest. 1. 4. and
7. Acts 8. 23.
Hebraisme known to children.


N. There are some other words, in show dangerous: as first the term of
Penance in the Collect upon John Baptists day.


I. Either Penance is an old word, signifying Repentance: or else it betokens
the Ecclesiastical Absolution which is given to men that show the sign of
penitence.


N. The former signification is uncertain: Of the latter we will reason in
the Visitation of the sick. Your second perilous term is that of Chances in
the first Collect after the Offertorie: Whereas this name Chance, howsoever it
be used by the Heathen Philistim Priests: yet is it 1. Sam. 6. 9.
not found in Scriptures taken up by the Godly. And no marvel, seeing by this
word the Providence of God is denied: and our ignorances of second Causes
proclaimed.


I. This term is taken up by Christ himself, Compare (...). Luke 10. 31.
with the verse of Empedocles cited by Aristotle, Phis. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
where he says, that by chance there came a Priest. Now for the denying of
God's providence, it is untrue, Chance being either mere or mixed. Mere Chance
derogateth from the all-seeing providence of God: so does not mixed chance: For
although all things be most certainly appointed, and foreseen by God: yet he
ordains some second causes to be infallible: some to be mutable and
contingent. This is most manifest in the will of man, which though it be not
free from the necessity of infallibility, (whereby the secret operation of
God, does bow it to what side of the balance he will) yet is it most free from
the necessity of Coaction. So that our actions, howsoever conditionally they
be necessary (namely in regard of God's Decree) yet absolutely in their own
nature they proceed from a cause contingent, and changeable.


N. By this you perceive that by GODS Decree, there can be no Chance.


I. There are two degrees of Gods Decree: First, general, whereby he decrees
things in their own absolute nature to be contingent, and free. Secondly, more
special, whereby he determines the indifferency and contingencie of things,
enclining them according to his own good pleasure. In regard of the former,
Chance may, and must be allowed; not only in respect of the second causes (as
the common opinion runs) but even in regard of Gods Determination, the first
cause of the being of all things.


N. Besides words, we blame Doctrine intimated in your Collects: The first
whereof is, the Doctrine of Merit, insinuated in these words upon Ashwednesday,
or the First Day in Lent (that we worthily lamenting our sins, and
knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy,
perfect remission and forgiveness.) Here, the cause of the pardon of sins is
made to be our lamentation for them, and acknowledgement of them.


I. It is not the cause, but the concurrent, concomitant, or rather antecedent,
thereof: and that not for the purchasing of it, but of the assurance of the
same to our consciences. For although the forgiveness of our sins be in
nature before repentance (whereof the things named in the Collect are effects
and signs:) Nevertheless in regard of apprehension thereof (which some call
Certioration) it does often times follow the same. Tell me; when Christ said,
Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved Luke 7. 47.
much; Did he make her love, the cause of the remission of her sins?


N. No, but rather the contrary; For he makes her to love much, because her
manifold sins were pardoned: So that her love was an effectual sign not an
efficient cause of the condonation of her iniquities.


I. The like may be said of those things which are mentioned in the Collect.


N. Nay, but you make forgiveness of sins to be obtained by these things.


I. Did not Elias obtain the restraint of rain 1. Kings 17. 1. James 5. 17.
by Prayer?


N. Not by the merit of his own Prayer: but for that his Prayer issued from
faith, which apprehended CHRIST: upon whose merit all the efficacy of Prayer
does depend.


I. So our Lamentation, etc. proceeds from Repentance; Repentance issues
from Faith; Faith lays hold upon Christ: of whose only merit, all the force
of our lamentation, and Confession of sins depends. And what is all this to
Popish Merit? If your jealousy did not provoke you to coin unthought of
errors in our Liturgy.


N. The second is the Doctrine of Despair, which you manifest in two Collects:
First, in that upon the twelfth Sunday after Trinity, in these words giving to
us that that our prayer dare not presume to ask: Secondly, in the fifth Collect
after the Offertorie: Those things which for our unworthiness we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us: In both which we
epsy a double fault: First, a contradiction: for you pretend that you dare not
ask and yet do ask.


I. What think you of that contradiction? I believe, Lord, help my unbelief?
Mark 9. 24.



N. It is only in appearance, For he might in a confused generality believe
that the Messiah was able to perform this Miracle, and yet in distinct
specialtie did not believe that this Jesus was the Messiah: Or else, he might
doubt, because he had no particular promise: howsoever he believed Gods
Universal Power and Goodness: Or lastly, he might distrust in regard of his
own unworthiness; and yet conceive no scruple of Christ's potent mercy.


I. So may we ask that of God through Christ, which we dare not crave when
we consider our own unworthiness; looking down (like the Swan or Peacocke)
to our foul feet.


N. The second fault offensive is, that you Pro. 28. 1. Ephesians. ^. 12. Heb. 4.
16.
renounce that boldness, and confidence which Solomon; Saint Paul, and the
Author to the Hebrews do commend.


I. Why? was not Saint Paul the Author to the Hebrews?


N. We shall reason of that in Matrimony: return therefore to your argument.


I. The same Solomon then that ascribes the boldness of Lions to righteous
men, does elsewhere pronounce him blessed that fears Prou. 28. 14.
always: And the same Apostle, which exhorts us to confidence, does charge
us to finish our salvation with fear and trembling: for we Phil. 2. 12.
may be bold in regard of God's endless mercy, and yet fear in a double
respect: First, with the fear of reverence, which causes the Angels to cover
their faces with their wings: Secondly, with a fear of Gods displeasure, Jsa.
6. 2.
upon the deep consideration of our own indignity, in regard of our manifold
transgressions, partly secret, partly breaking out upon the least occasion. By
the first we do weigh our own infirmity, as we are creatures: by the
latter our vilitie, as we are Sinners, and have the flesh mingled with the
spirit. Besides this caution which is plainly expressed in the latter Collect
in these words, which we for our unworthiness dare not: whereby we intimate,
that yet we dare through the Dignity of Christ. There is yet an other clause
in the former Collect, namely, in these words, which our Prayer dare not
presume; whereby all scruple is removed. For you that talk so much of the
spirit of Prayer; will you reckon Presumption among the virtues thereof?


N. No, but we reckon it among your vices that make confidence presumption: For
to crave what God in Christ has promised is no presumption, but confidence:
and to doubt thereof is Diffidence not Humility.


I. To doubt in reguard of Christ is diffidence: but to make a demurre in
reguard of our own imbecilitie is true lowliness.


N. From the Peoples Prayers, we come to the Confessions uttered in the three
Creeds: that of the Apostles, the Nicen, and the Atbanasian. The matter whereof
howsoever we allow: yet first we dislike that you use the often rehearsal of
them: and seem to equalize them to the Canonical Scripture.


I. We hold it expedient often to rehearse the 2. Tim. 1. 13. Heb. 6. 1.
patterns of wholesome words and doctrines of the beginning of Christ: and
these Symboles we place next the Scriptures: not only because they are
extracted out of them: or by reason of their Antiquity, (the first of them
being penned either by Apostles or Apostolic men) but in part also for their
perspicuitie and perfection joined with brevity: the utility whereof is now
discovered by miserable experience. For the Grecians at this day by reason of
their bondage under the Turks, being not able to travel much in Scriptures,
or other Learning, have only these ancient Symboles left them; as arguments for
their judgment; and Monuments for their faith.


N. Secondly, we do principally dislike. That the Creed of the Apostles is
rehearsed by the Minister and People standing.


I. Concerning the Peoples answers, I In the fifth and seventh Chapters.
have spoken before, both in the Preface and Short Prayers.


N. Yea, but what reason can you render, why the People should stand?


I. The ancient cause thereof was, That 1. Pet. 3. 15. compared with Mat. 10.
18 and 1. Tim. 6. 13. Consider the difference between (...) and (...) in Luke
18. 11. and 13. illic situs, hic distantia notatur.
men might show their readiness to profess their faith, when they were to
stand before persecuting Judges. But now there is an other reason of great use,
Namely, to advertise the people, that this is A Creed and not A Prayer: for
then kneeling were more convenient then standing: whereas commonly Children
take it for a Prayer by tradition from their ignorant Elders.


CHAP. XI.
Of God's speech in the Liturgy.
N. FRom the speech of the people to God (uttered in Prayer and Confession) we
ascend up to the speech of God himself to the people: declared partly in the
Ten Commandments, partly by their sanction: and that either by threatening or
commination: or by instruction which is offered, either to the younger sort (in
Catechism) or to the Elder (in Homilies) In the rehearsal of the Ten
Commandments, these words are omitted which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of Or bondmen. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 31. Pro. 30. 6.
Apoc. 22. 18.
bondage? Against which, thus I reason? No part of Gods Law may be omitted: But
these words are a part of the Law, and therefore not to be omitted.


I. The proofs of your Mayor are impertinent: and so commonly the men of your
condition do use to lade their Margins with Texts of Scripture, as men do
Cammels till they cry. For whereas these Scriptures do forbid omission in
practice, or interpretation at the most, you apply them to reprove omission in
rehearsal: But now confirm your Minor, and all shall be granted.


N. First, the Hebrews point these words as they do the Commandments: and
number the letters of them among the six hundred fifty three letters of the
In the five Books of Moses are found written 653. Commandments, namely, 288.
affirmatiues (according to the joints of the body) and 365. negatiues
(according to the days of the year:) Read for these Phillip Ferdinando the
Jew.
Law. Secondly, they seem to be the affirmative part of the first
Commandment: whereby we are (by implication) charged to have, and acknowledge
the true God.


I. Parts of the Commandments are of two kinds. Substantial and
Circumstantiall (called Sanctions.) The Substantial part, we find omitted in
the rehearsal of the Tenth Commandment used by Saint Romans 13. 9.
Paul. For I believe that these words, thy neighbors house, thy neighbors
wife, etc. declaring the objects of concupiscence, cannot be denied to be
essential parts of the precept. As for the Sanction, we find it left out in
the repetition of the fifth Math. 19.
Commandment: for so these words are accounted that thy days may be long in
the land, etc. Now your first Argument does only enforce these words to be a
Sanction, or proeme of the Precept, considering the Sanctions of the second,
fourth, and fifth Commandments, are so pointed by the Hebrews (although with a
difference:)


N. It may seem strange that the second Commandment, and the three following
should have Sanctions annexed; and the first be destitute thereof.


I. The ratifications adjoined to them do follow them: But the confirmation
(for which you contend) does come before the first Commandment. And therefore
your argument has no firm proportion: Again this Sanction may be general to
the whole Decalogue: Neither can you necessarily prove it to be appropriate to
the first precept: And though it it were peculiar to the same, yet why may it
not be omitted in the repetition? especially so far forth as it particularly
concerns the Children of Israel, which only were freed from the iron furnace
of Egypt.


N. We are also delivered from the Spiritual Egypt of Sin and Popery. So
that for this reason Apoc. 11. 8.
likewise it should be mentioned.


I. When Moses repeateth the Law, the second time, he omitteth the sanction of
the fourth Commandment, which was added to it in the first promulgation
thereof: Namely, Gods rest after the six days of Creation: and in place Exodus
20. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
thereof does put the deliverance from Egypt: by which we observe two things:
First, that all Sanctions are not of necessity to be inculcated in the
repetition of the Law: Secondly, that this confirmation drawn from the
Deliverance out of Egypt, does pertain as well to the fourth, as to the first
Precept. Besides when Saint Paul does rehearse the fifth Commandment, Ephesians 6.
3.
instead of the Land of Canaan he names the Earth, because Canaan was
peculiar to the Hebrews. In like proportion, howsoever Egypt may spiritually
signify Sin; Popery, or rather Hell: yet because we have promises of a
better Testament, we may omit the mention of Egypt, according to the saying of
the Prophet. Your second argument is overthrown Ier. 16. 14, 15.
by the first. For if these words be therefore part of the Commandments,
because they are pointed like them (I mean as a Sanction may be termed a part
accidental) then may they not be styled the affirmative part of the first
Commandment, because they are not All the Commandments, but the fourth and
fifth have two accents in each word: they only but one.
pointed like the Fourth and Fifth, which are counted affirmative Precepts.
Besides where will you find a Commandment, wherein the affirmative and
negative part are both expressed?


N. It may be found in the fourth Precept. For as we are charged to sanctify
the Sabbath: so are we especially interdicted all work upon that Day.


I. Were that granted, which may not be, (because the affirmative speaks of
Sanctification, the negative of rest:) yet how will you make these words, I am
thy Lord thy God, etc. an affirmative Commandment? Considering that in them
there is no assertiue charge, but only a narratiue claim of Gods right,
unless by implication of Consequence you frame an affirmation: by which kind
of Art, you may find an affirmative in each precept.


N. The sceond thing we dislike, in your rehearsal of the Law, is the Prayer
inserted by the People between every Commandment: (Lord have mercy upon us,
and incline our hearts to keep this Law.)


I. Is there not a Prayer put between every Commination in Deuteronomie? Is
not (Amen,) Deuteronomy. 27 15. etc
or (So be it,) a direct Prayer joined with an assent? Is not this Prayer of
the People in our Liturgy directed by the pattern, and Exodus 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 5.
27 and 29 and 1^. 18. and 32. 29. Psalm. 81. 13.
words of Scriptures?


N. After the Commandments comes the Commination; wherein we dislike these
words (until the said discipline may be restored again: which thing is much
to be wished.)


I I have heard some of your brethren say that these words are very laudable:
because in them is partly promised, and partly wished* at least in their
opinion) that Discipline of the Church which you pretend to be most ancient:
but we avouch to be so new that hardly any of you can agree about the
fundamental points thereof


N. At first we hoped some such good motion was in the minds of them that
framed the Liturgy: But since that time we have found the true meaning of the
riddle, namely, that the intention thereof is only a Popish Lent Penance.


I. Had you ploughed with our Heyfer; and read the words immediately going
before, this should have been no riddle or Aenigma: The words are these: In
the Primitive Church; there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning of
Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open penance. But you
as cunning in compounding and dividing, as he that left out these words of the
Psalm Psalm 91. 11. Math. 4. 6.
to keep thee in all thy ways, have only remembered these words. In the
Primitive Church there was a godly Discipline: and so building Castles in the
air, benighted your selves, in wandering in the wilderness of your own
fancies. But tell me do you dislike our open Penance.


N. What we dislike you shall know, when we come to the Visitation of the
Sick. Now there remain two things: The Catechism and the Homilies. The
Latter whereof shall be deferred to some fitter opportunity. In the Catechism
these words are most dangerous: Redeemed me and all mankind; by which the
error of universal grace seems to be defended.


I. Says not the Scripture that the benefit by Christ is come to Romans 5 18.
all even to justification: and that he died for 2. Cor. 5. 14, 15
all: and what difference put you between all men, and all mankind.


N. By all there, we understand all the Elect.


I. So here we may interpret all the Elect of mankind. Again, how are
Sinners against the Holy Ghost sanctified by the blood of the Heb. 10. 29. 2.
Pet. 2. 1.
Testament? and how are Seducers bought by our Lord?


N. Some say in Appearance and Profession; others say better that Christ died
sufficiently for all men but effectually for believers alone.


I. Your latter answer clears all the doubt: For Christ his Blood was
sufficient for the Redemption of all Mankind, had they believed. Others more
subtly answer, That as the Law intended to condemn all: So Christ purposed
to save all though upon a different respect) And this they exemplify by the
diverse letters of Ahashuerosh: and by the resistance made by the Angel: but
this is as Hest. 8. 14. Dan. 10. 13.
Subtle as Safe.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Sacraments in general: and of Baptism.
N. OTher exceptions against your Catechism (because they belong to the
Sacraments) shall be handled in them. Now therefore, from Speech only, we
come to Speech and Action mingled: of which are compounded both Sacraments and
other Rites. Touching the Sacraments in general: we dislike these words in
the new addition to your Catechism (two generally necessary to Salvation:)
wherein you discover your error concerning both the number and end of the
Sacraments. The first may be thus proved: Where there be two Sacraments
generally necessary, there more then two be necessary in special: But the
latter is unsound: Therefore also the former.


I. That your Mayor is dawbed with untempered mortar may thus appear: Where
four elements be generally necessary for living creatures, there more then
four are in special necessary. But the latter is untrue; Therefore likewise
the former.


N. Your Mayor is doubtful: For this word Which last is not only in trees but
even in Mineralls.
generally, may be referred to the predicate, thus. That the four elements
are in general necessary for all things which partake of Life (whither it be
the life of Motion, of Sense, or of Vegetation) and so the Speech is true: But
if you refer it to the Subject, and make four general elements, and more
particular besides: you will run within the praemunire of an error.


I. In like manner, must our speech be interpreted: Namely, that there be two
Sacraments, generally necessary for all men. But now confirm your Minor, for I
believe you founder in this opinion.


N. Sacraments may not come by the corrupt following of the Apostles: Neither
may they be only States of life commended in Scripture: But principally they
may not want a visible sign, or Ceremony ordained of God: But the five Popish
Sacraments, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction,
are such; And therefore can be no Sacraments of the Gospel. And by consequent,
there are only two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


I. First, your Mayor is not so sure as you dream of. For (tell me I pray you)
must the sign of each Sacrament be visible? Might not Ahijah the Prophet be
partaker of the Passover after his sight failed him?


N. I did not mean that every receiver must see the sign but that the sign
must be visible, at least to some.


I. And not to the receiver? To him then, it is not a visible sign: and so no
actual Sacrament.


N. Some by Visible understand Sensible. Namely, that which may be apprehended
by any outward sense.


I. This exposition as it is large, and yet true; So will it be prejudicial to
your self. To come next to your Minor: First, tell me, Did Matrimony come from
the corrupt following of the Apostles?


N. That first clause of the Minor is only meant Mark 6. 13. James 5. 14.
of anoyling, taken from the imitation of the Apostles, howsoever the gift of
healing be now ceased.


I. Yea, but is Anoyling, a state of life commended in Scripture?


N. That part of the Minor is to be applied to Orders and Matrimony.


I. Belike then you affirmed that jointly of all the Sacraments, which should
have been divided among them.


N. We most insist upon the last clause: Namely, that they have no visible
sign.


I. Neither is that built upon a Rock: For have not Confirmation and Orders
the visible sign of imposition of hands? Can you conceive of Matrimony
without hand-fasting: Or of Extreme Unction without Visible Infusion of oils?
Nay, if Sensible be Visible: and Audible be Sensible: Is not Confession in
Penance directly Audible, and so Visible by your own interpretation?


N. What then? Do you revive the Seven Popish Sacraments?


I. Nothing less: But only I manifest unto you, with what leaden weapons you
impugn the iron enemy, namely, the Papist. Against whom while you defer to
fight, our Church becomes like the Oak cleft with wedges made out of her own
body.


N. If this Argument be weak you condemn the Book of Articles, which
propounds the Art. 25.
same reason.


I. You mistake the meaning of the Book, yea, and the words also. The words
are thus: Being such as are grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles: Partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lord's Supper: for that they
have not any visible Sign, or Ceremony ordained of God. Here first, you
perceive that the word Partly was twice left out of your argument: whereupon
came your fallacy of Compounding and Dividing: And so it may be the having of
a visible sign (taking Visible in his proper sense) does exclude Penance They
being only a state allowed in Scripture does shut out Matrimony, as the
corrupt imitation of the Apostles does Anoyling. Some such like thing may be
thought of Confirmation and Orders: But it is uncertain.


N. Yea, but they all five are denied to have a visible sign.


I. Some conjecture, that by Visible is meant that which is perceived by many
senses: and this kind of Sign may be proper to Baptism and the Lords Supper.
But the plain answer is: That no Sacraments excepting those two have a
visible sign generally necessary to salvation.


N. Without Orders there can be no Ministry: without the Ministry no Visible
Church: without which there can be no ordinary salution.


I. Orders are mediately necessary for all: but immediately for Ministers
alone.


N. From the number of the Sacraments I come to their end: Namely, their
necessity: against which I thus argue: Those things without which salvation may
be obtained, are not necessary to salvation. But such are the Sacraments. Ergo.


I. I thus encounter your Mayor. Those things without which salvation may be
obtained, are not necessary to salvation. But without Miracles, Salvation may
be had, And therefore Micracles (even those of Christ) shall be needless to
salvation.


N. Miracles are no ordinary means to salvation, but extraordinary.


I. So Sacraments are not extraordinary, Which heresy denies all outward
Sacraments.
but direct and ordinary means: for unless you be a Swingfeldian; you must
acknowledge that neglect or contempt of Sacraments is a Barto life eternal:
And so both the doubtfulnesse of your Mayor, and falsehood of your Minor, do at
once appeace in their colors.


N. My second reason is this: Things necessary to salvation do confer grace:
But Sacraments do not; and so are not necessary.


I. Your Mayor is not well poised. For, is therefore the Sabbath needless to
salvation, because it does not confer grace? Again your Minor wants the
bridle of bondage, and limiting distinction. For though Sacraments do not
actiuely, Physically, and by infusion confer grace, yet none but public
enemies to all Sacraments, will deny that they bring grace passiuely, and by
the assistance of the concurrent Spirit of God. Even as the Circles of
Magicians and Spells of Witches, are said to be operative, not of themselves
(being mere quantities) but by the concurrent assistance of Satan with whom
the bloody covenant is stricken. Now that Sacraments are necessary to
Salvation, it appears by three things: First, because they are Gods
Ordinances, and so most needful: Secondly, because they are marks of the
Church visible, out of whose bosom there is no ordinary salvation. Thirdly,
because faith is begun in Baptism: and strengthened in the Lords Supper. The
necessity whereof is greater, then of water and fire: nay, then of friendship.


N. This shall be tried in the particular Sacrament to which we now descend.
It seems then, that you make five Sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation, The
Lords Supper, Penance, and Orders: which last because it is not expressed in
the Liturgy, we will now omit.


I. You confessed before, that we made only two Sacraments generally necessary:
why do you then place Confirmation between Baptism, and the Lords Supper?
And where do you find our Sacrament of Penance?


N. The reason of these things, shall afterward be In Confirmations and the
Visitation of the sick.
declared. Now I come to Baptism. In the dignity you give to Baptism we note
two errors. First, you corruptly cite the words of Christ to Nicodemus
(Unless a man be borne of water, and of the Holy Ghost.) For by water you
understand the Baptism of the Flood (as you term it) Whereas indeed by water
you should conceive nothing but the purging efficacy of the holy Spirit.


I. We embrace the literal sense: why do you fly to a figure without
important necessity?


N. Yea, necessity does urge us so to do: For else we should grant the
necessity of external Baptism to salvation.


I. You heard before, that Sacraments were thus necessary: Why do you now
roll the same stone?


N. Prove in particular now, Baptism to be necessary to salvation.


I. First, Circumcision was thus necessary: For the soul uncircumcised was to
be Gen 17. 14.
cut off from the people of God. Yea, God would have slain Moses because he
neglected the Circumcision of his Exodus 4. 24.
Son. Nay, the neck of the Asse-coult not Exodus 13. 13.
redeemed, was to be broken, which redemption was proportionable to
Circumcision, as appears by the Exodus 22. 30.
time thereof. But Baptism is answerable to 1. Pet. 3. 21.
Circumcision: therefore equally necessary. Secondly, Baptism is termed the
lauer Titus 3. 5.
of regeneration, whereby the Church is Ephesians. 5. 26.
sanctified: It is also called the Baptism of repentance, unto remission Mark
1. 4. Acts 19 4.
of sins. Yea, Peter and Paul being demanded what men should do to be saved?
The one in direct words, both in practice, did urge Acts 2. 37, 38. and 16. 30,
33, 34
Baptism, as well as belief. Yea, Christ himself says: He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be Mark 16. 16.
saved. And Peter peremptorily auerreth that Baptism 1. Pet. 3. 21.
does save.


N. First, it seems by these places: That salvation is not ascribed to
Baptism, but rather to Faith (in the Acts) to Repentance (in Mark:) to the
putting away of the filth of the flesh (in Peter.)


I. Tell me I pray you by whom are these three things wrought?


N. By the Spirit of God.


I. And what relation has the Spirit to Baptism?


N. It is the essential inward form thereof: whereby the water is assumed, as
the manhood by Christ's Godhead.


I. If that were true, why do you separate the form from the matter; which
God has conjoined: But I must here advertise you, that you stick in a vulgar
error. For I demand: Is a Sacrament a thing simple or else compounded.


N. It is compounded of a thing earthly, and a thing heavenly.


I. What is that heavenly thing?


N. The Spirit of God which purges our sinful souls, as water does our
unclean bodies.


I. Then observe this argument: Those things of which a thing is compounded;
are the matter thereof: but of water and the holy Spirit Arist. Phys. lib. 2
cap. 3. Met. lib. 1 cap. 3. and lib. 4. cap. 2.
Baptism is compounded, these therefore are the matter thereof.


N. What then do you make the form of Baptism?


I. The union of the Water and the Spirit: as the union of Christ his Deity
and Humanity is the form of his Person: And as the union of the soul and
body, is the form of man. And this to be true, you might have learned by
Athanasius Creed: the matter whereof you Observe by this that most heresies in
divinity do proceed from errors in Logique and Philosophy.
could not before disallow; The words are these. For as the reasonable Soul,
and flesh is one man: So God and man is one Christ. By this you may observe,
That the Spirit is not disioyned from the water in Baptism: considering, they
both concur to make the matter thereof.


N. But we cannot be assured: that the Spirit does always concur with the
water, howsoever you do confidently avouch that Children, In the rubric of
Confirmation before the beginning of the Catechism.
being baptized, have all things necessary for their Salvation, and be
undoubtedly saved. Touchinh the former clause thereof, I entreat you now to be
silent, because I will object it in Confirmation.


I. The latter clause then needs little defense: For seeing Baptism is the
ordinary means of salvation: why should we causelessly doubt of their
Salvation, which have been made partakers thereof? For not only Charity, but
even Equity forbids us to doubt.


N. Yea, but some scruple remains because we want the certainty of
infallibility.


I. That certainty is needless in our ordinary censures of other men's
eternal state: For where prudence upon necessity does not weigh down the
balance, Charity must heave it up: and (according to the Law) favors must be
enlarged. And now let me admonish you of the like cavil, made against the
words in our Liturgy in the Burial; which are these: In sure and certain
hope of resurrection to eternal life: By which we do not imply a certainty
of infallibility, but of equity alone. For although persons be baptized,
yet, if they be excommunicated* or other ways heinous Malefactors, we deny
them the use of Christian Burial: Forasmuch as by the rule of prudence we
presume not to speak of them in that manner.


N. Of your Popish Superstitions in Burial, we shall treat in due place. Now
against your Scriptures brought for the necessity of Baptism: although I
might except against these words in Genesis (shall be cut off from his people:)
as being meant of Temporal Death, not of Eternal Damnation: yet because I
find some of our own men, so to expound it also, I will omit it; and come to
my second exception, which is this. You pretend that Baptism is before Faith:
whereas both in Mark and the Acts it is set in the latter Acts 8. 37.
place. Yea, and Philip requires faith of the Eunuch; before he would admit
him to Baptism.


I. We deny not but in men of years faith may come before Baptism.


N. By Faith alone we are saved, what need then of Baptism?


I. If you speak of absolute necessity, God could have saved us, not only
without Baptism, but even without faith: yea even without Christ. For if he
had given us immutable grace before our fall, Christ's death should not have
been necessary; and so faith had been void, and consequently Baptism. But,
if you intend a conditional necessity in regard of God's Decree: it will
appear that Christ's death was an efficient cause howbeit not the principal
(for that was God's love) but a working John 3. 16.
meritorious cause. As also that faith is an instrument active, and Baptism
passive: applying to us the merits of Christ's death. Again, whereas you say,
that we are saved by faith alone: Do you imagine that faith may be void of
good works?


N. I detest that Popery: But what is this to Baptism?


I. Is it not a good work and fruit of faith, to seek for external Baptism?


N. Yet by this it is manifest, that Baptism succeeds faith, which
contradicts your assertion.


I. Though Baptism do only confirm faith in men of years, is it therefore
needless to Salvation? But yet Infants faith is apparently concurrent with
Baptism, by which it is begotten. For as Infants may be elected by
Predestination; and also may be comprehended in the Covenant, and faith of
Parents: So withal, there must be required in them the Spirit of God, which
shall work analogicall faith, or the Seed-plot thereof: from which at the time
of effectual Vocation, or Conversion, shall issue the seasonable fruits of
Sanctification.


N. My third exception against your Scriptures is this: Whereas it is said, He
that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: it is immediately added, He
that shall not believe shall be condemned: So that Baptism is omitted as no
necessary means of salvation.


I. Your proofs are taken from silent witnesses (which cannot be of force.)
In this manner: Baptism is not mentioned as needful, and therefore is not
needful.


N. Yet according to the rules of discretion, Baptism should be named as well
in the negative, as in the positive.


I. By the same rule, what is largely set down in the former, is understood in
the latter: because it is presupposed that no hearty believer will neglect
Baptism.


N. Besides these exceptions against the texts by you alleged, we have other
reasons to disprove the necessity of Baptism. As first many Persons
Circumcised and Baptized, have yet failed of eternal life: And therefore it
seems, that these are not necessary means of salvation.


I. Many that have had sufficient cold and drought in their bodies, have yet
died of grievous diseases: and therefore these qualities are not means of life.


N. Heat and moisture must also concur: or else these are insufficient.


I. So the Spirit must concur with Water, or else it is not auailable: For
though the Spirit be not tied to Means: yet may we not vilify the means as
ineffectual: or move causeless doubts touching the assistant cooperation of
the Spirit.


N. I secondly thus argue: Paul came not to 1. Cor. 1. 17.
baptize: Therefore Baptism is not necessary to salvation. The Consequence is
apparent: For Paul without controversy, came to procure all things necessary
thereunto.


I. Your Consequence is ambiguous: For an ordinary Pastor's office, is
necessary to the salvation of many: And yet Saint Paul, being an Oecumenicall
Apostle, who had the care of all Churches, could not attend that function.
Again, your antecedent is impertinent: The meaning is open, That he was sent
rather to preach, then to baptize. For, that he baptized some, appears out of
that place. The like Phrase is in these words: I will have Math. 12. 7.
mercy and not Sacrifice? That is, rather mercy then sacrifice. What? will you
make Sacrifice not necessary in the time of the Law? By all this it appears:
That for fear of the necessity of Baptism, you relinquish the letter of the
text without necessity.


N. Though this were yielded: yet for two other reasons, we may not here
expound water literally. First, because where the Holy Ghost and fire are
conjoined: fire may not be taken according Luke 3. 16.
to the letter: unless we will follow the vain custom of the Aethiopians,
which set fiery prints upon their Infants through the mistaking of this text.


I. We need not go so far as Aethiopia for our interpretation. Compare the
Story of the Acts, and there will be no ambiguitie: for Acts 1. 5. and 2. 3, 4.
as John foretold, and Christ promised: So the Apostles indeed were baptized
with the Holy Ghost by the Ministry of fiery tongues: which if the
Aethiopians could procure, we would not blame their fiery Ceremony.


N. Our second reason is this: The scope of Christ's speech, is to entreat of
regeneration: which is the work of the Spirit alone: And therefore, John 3. 8.
it is not probable that there he should speak of outward Baptism.


I. Your sequel is evidently refuted by the words of Christ: If when I tell
you earthly John 3. 12.
things you believe not, etc. where by things earthly we understand things
elementary: which appellation may well agree to water, in Baptism. In sum,
remember this: That whereas many, through a seeming subtletie do embrace
tropicall expositions: they bewray themselves to be of stomachs distempered,
not enduring solid ordinary meats.


N. The second thing whereby you magnify Baptism, appear in these words: By
the Baptism of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, did sanctify the flood
Jordan, and all other waters, to the mystical washing away of sin: where
find you any warrant for this new device?


I. I wonder where the knot lies, for I conceive it not as yet: Is it in this?
That we say, that all waters are sanctified to the mystical washing away of
sin in Baptism? Think you that Abana and Pharphar are better then other
Rivers? Can you prohibit any kind of 2. Kings 5. 12.
water to be used in Baptism?


N. That is far from our meaning. But we dislike that you ascribe the
Sanctification of water to the Baptism of Christ, as to the cause.


I. Why was Christ baptized?


N. That all righteousness might be fulfilled. Math. 3. 15.



I. What? do you mean the righteousness of the Law?


N. I mean of the Gospel.


I. Did he fulfill it for himself or more principally for us?


N. I am no Papist, to dream that he merited any thing for himself.


I. Nay, was he borne: did he live or die for himself?


N. All for Us without doubt.


I. He was then baptized for us.


N. I may not deny it.


I. Wherefore as his Birth, Life, and Death did sanctify the same things in
us; So by the water of his Baptism; all waters are sanctified: even as all
beasts drink safely when the Unicorn has put his horn into the water. So
that he may be called the first-fruites of the Baptized, as well as of the
Dead.


N. Hitherto of the Dignity and holiness of Baptism. Now follow the actions
of witnesses, (or Godfathers as you call them:) which are four. First, you
admit questions to be propounded to them: Secondly, they promise sundry things
for the Children: Thirdly, the Children by their means, are said to have Faith
and Repentance: Fourthly, They impose names upon the Infants. Of which the
three first, are absurd, unreasonable, and almost ridiculous: and therefore
profane, or blasphemous: The fourth is unjust, considering it is the parents
due to give names to their Children.


I. I should marvel much (but that amongst Nouelists, nothing is to be
wondered at) that you can tolerate Godfathers: But now I remember my self, they
be suffered in Geneua. Now tell me (pray you) by what Scripture do you allow
them.


N. Some pretend an ancient custom begun by a Roman Bishop (in the days of
Antoninus Pius) who first ordained that certain choice witnesses should
present the Children to the Congregation, in case their Parents were dead, or
fled for persecution: Others allege the witnesses recorded in Isaiah the
Prophet. Isa. 8. 2.



I. But now you know are the times of peace: and so the former cause is void:
As for the latter, it was drawn from a Prophetical and singular practice, and
therefore hardly may be urged as imitable. Could we produce no firmer
Scriptures for our Ecclesiastical practice, then such as those, would you not
cry out upon us as Hercules Furens, or as Orestes.


N. What better proofs then have you for your Godfathers?


I. Children are truly said to be baptized into the faith of others: which
speech is by many mistaken. For they suppose they are baptized into the faith
of their immediate Parents only: which being granted; the Children not only of
Pagans, and Turks, which are taken in War, but even of persons
excommunicated, yea of all that are destitute of true faith shall be
interdicted the use of Baptism: Whereas the truth is: that Infants are
received into the faith and bosom of the Church, which is the Keepresse of the
Covenant. The Church therefore chooses certain witnesses as representative
persons: to whom the questions are tendered: and by whom the promises are
uttered in the behalf of the Babes. No marvel then, though by their means,
Infants be said to have Faith, and Repentance; and to receive their Christian
names from them, as being their Fathers in God: and therefore not unaptly
termed Godfathers. The general proof of which thing is drawn from all
Laws; which allow sundry actions done by Guardians in the minority of their
Wards, to be as firm as if the Pupils themselves had performed them in their
own persons being come to the years of discretion.


N. To admit this reason: yet to prejudice the Parents, who should have the
right of naming their Children, cannot but be very injurious.


I. You are worse afraid then hurt: For they are very contentions Godfathers
which ask not the Parents consent in this matter. But where be your Scriptures
to prove that this is only the privilege of Fathers.


N. We have the example of Adam, Jacob, Genesis 5. 3. and 35. 18. Luke 1. 63.
and Zachary.


I. We could oppose to these the examples of Leah: and the wife of Phinees.
Genesis 29. 32. 1. Sam. 4 21.



N. Leah did it only by the consent of her husband Jacob: as may be collected
by his practice in changing Benoni to Benjamin: As for Phinnees wife she was a
Widow.


I. Your examples also are not void of all scruple: For it is said, That Sheth
received Genesis 4 15.
his name from Euah: which (as it may seem) requested Adam that this name
might be imposed. As for Jacob; it seems that his wives did over entreat him
for the names of his Children, except only the last. Now for Zachary, Luke 1.
59.
your instance is impertinent: For it is probable by the Story that the friends
and kinsfolk did of Custom name the Child. And that Zachary did countermand
them only by virtue of the Angels Charge: But you contend Luke 1. 13.
for trifles.


N. From Public Baptism, we come to Private. The necessity whereof we
dislike, as imitating the Popish Limbus Infantum.


I. I had thought that the necessity of Sacraments in general, and of
Baptism in particular, had been confirmed sufficiently, why do you now
seethe the same Coleworts?


N. It seems you pretend necessity of Baptism to salvation: and therefore
would have it administered at home in such cases.


I. These things are ill understood, and worse conjoined: For the necessity we
intend, is not that of Salvation, but in regard of infirmities or other
inconveniences: As for example, If a Child amongst the Hebrews, had been
sick on the eighth day, Circumcision, upon necessity should have been
deferred: would you have called this the necessity of salvation? Again, if
we say that Children unbaptized, and so dying, are (in respect of ordinary
means) forlorn; and out of the course of Salvation, may not the Speech, being
well tempered, be truly justified?


N. You had need of good skill to temper the metal of this speech.


I. These Cautions will serve to allay it, namely, That if there be neither
Baptism, nor desire of the same: and that neither in the Infant nor in his
Parents, nor in the visible Church (wherein he is borne, or into which he is
casually brought;) Then, without extraordinary grace, he is excluded from the
means of salvation. And what is all this to the Limb of Infants? For although
the Child be damned, nay, though he suffer a less degree of torment, (for
degrees of Hell pains I hope you Mat. 5. 22. and 10. 15. Luke 10 48. 1. Cor.
19. 41.
will not deny) yet this will not make the Popish Limbus: which is (as the
Papists determine it) the punishment of loss, and not of sense: Or of sense
outward, but not inward: the fire, but not the worm. In sum, the Papists
make a new kind of punishment: we only another degree.


N. Be this as you say: yet you cannot prove Baptism to be so necessary, that
it should produce both Lathro-baptisme: and Anti-baptisme (which latter is a
kind of Anabaptisme:) In your Lathro-baptisme (or private Baptism) first we
disallow that it is administered privately in houses.


I. Were not Circumcision and the Passover Exodus 4. 25. and 1^. 28.
both celebrated within the walls of the house? Did not Philip baptize the
Eunuch in the next Acts 8. 36.
water he met with not expecting any Ecclesiastical Assembly to assist him?
Has not the Church been confined to a Acts 1. 13.
Chamber? and to a private Rom 16. 5. 1. Cor. 16. 19.
house? Was not the Iaylour with all his Family baptized by Saint Paul within
Acts 16. 33.
doors? Are not Private Chaplains allowed in the Houses of great Personages?
But of all men, you should be silent herein, whose Classes and Conuenticles,
have been like to the House of Lecca to Catiline.


N. The second thing we dislike is: That you allow private Persons (even women)
to administer Baptism, upon this pretended extremity.


I. First, our Laws disclaim it, as a thing not expedient: Secondly,
notwithstanding we hold it lawful: But here mistake not our meaning: For
although both before, and in the doing, we allow it not, yet, being once done,
we account the action for no nullitie.


N. We know that you defend Zipporah for circumcising her child: but we are
of another mind.


I If a man should demand of you a place of Scripture, where Priests and not
Private men; Nay, where men and not women are commanded to circumcize Infants,
I believe you would sooner find the head of Nilus, then such a place. Might
not every one offer the Passover in his own house? Nay, in case the mistress
of the house were a widow, and had none of her Family but of the female sex.
Can you prove that she was bound to send for a Priest or a Man to slay the
Paschall Lamb for her?


N. Yea, but Christ commanded his Apostles to baptize: and therefore this
cannot be tolerable Math. 28. 19.
in private men.


I. It is said, That Christ baptized more then John: yet in his own person he
baptized John 4. 1, 2.
none, but only used the ministry of his Disciples. So it may be the Apostles
baptized not by themselves but by Acts 10. 48. 1. Cor. 1. 17. Acts 6. 3.
others, which thing is also to be understood of their administering the Lords
Supper: as is collected by the speech of the Twelve to the multitude: For a
though it seem principally to be spoken of alms: yet because alms were
commonly joined with the Communion, it may be both were implied.


N. But it is against reason, that any save Ecclesiastical persons should be
trusted with Baptism.


I. The same is agnized by our Laws, not because the thing is absolutely
unlawful (much less for that being performed it is a mere nullitie) but only
because it is not convenient, as has been said.


N. From Lathro-baptisme, we come to Antibaptisme: which is a Conditional
Baptism: A strange kind of Law: Not unlike some of the Edicts of Claudius
Caesar: For in case it be doubted, whether the Infant be truly baptized at
home, the Priest is commanded, thus to rebaptize him: If thou be not baptized
already, I baptize thee, etc.


I. An abundant caution, hurts not (says the Law.) For (tell me I pray you:)
If you should find a young Infant in the streets of some City: and through the
bowels of compassion did intend the education thereof, would you baptize it, or
no?


N. It were the safer course to baptize it.


I. It may be then you rebaptize it: For peradventure it was baptized before
it was exposed.


N. The ignorance of the fact, whereof my self am not the author does excuse
me, because it is presumed to be invincible.


I. In like manner, when, by no inquiry, it can be certainly known what was
done in Private Baptism, this Cautelous Prouiso may take place. And yet some
Master Thomas Hutton.
think that this was never yet put in practice. Some rumors have been to the
contrary: but the thing is ambiguous.


CHAP. XIII.
Of the Cross in Baptism.
N. HItherto have we treated of the parts of Baptism: Now follows the
consequent or thing annexed thereto: Namely the Cross: which sins against
the Ten Commandments: and first, against the first precept, by Idolatry.


I. Is the Cross an inward Idol of the heart: or else an Idol external?


N. It is an Idol: an Idolathite: a monument of, and a motive to Idolatry.
Now although it do only tempt to the conceiving of an inward Idol: (which
temptation is forbidden in the Tenth Commandment alone) yet properly it is but
an Outward Idol, violating the First Commandment and so to be abolisht.


I. Your speech is as fruitful of errors, as Nilus of slime. At this time it
has hatched six Monsters: whereof the three first are slips in Method, where
from, commonly false opinions do proceed. The first is, That you make tempting
and motive to be two several things: whereas in this case they both agree.
The second is: that you place tempting to Idolatry in the Tenth Commandment,
whereas to be a motive to the same sin, is by you made a transgression of the
first Precept.


N. Tempting may be without Consent: whereas a motive, implyith consent, or
assent: and so the former is in the tenth, the latter in the first
Commandment.


I. Your words are confused: But I haste to your matter. Tell me (I pray you)
the order of sins against the Commandments.


N. All sins are either against God (forbidden in the first Table) or against
our neighbor (interdicted in the second:) Again, the sins against our
neighbor are either with consent (prohibited in the fifth and the four
following Precepts.) Or without the same (restrained only in the tenth
Commandment.)


I. Where then are sins against God without consent prohibited (namely, the
first motions and abstractions from Him?) Are they not in the first? So that
you erred, when you made temptation to Idolatry, a sin against the tenth.
Your third default is, that you make an outward Idol to be forbidden in the
first.


N. How may this appear to be an error?


I. You err from the opinion, both of the Learned, and of the Vulgar: First,
the Learned think, that in the first Precept, the only having, and the
acknowledging of the True God, is enjoined: and his true (both inward and
outward) worship in the Second. Secondly, the most vulgar wits are of opinion
that God's inward worship is commanded in the first, and his outward in the
second Precept. By both which sentences, you are cast in your suite: Forasmuch
as all external Idols, are to be referred to the next ensuing Commandment.
Hence you may learn, First, That your three next errors (namely, that every
Idol is to be abolished: that the Cross is an Idol: That it tempts to
Idolatry.) Secondly, that your three next arguments (namely, that it is an
Idolothite: a Monument of, and a motive to Idolatry) are to be handled in the
Second Precept.


N. I proceed then to the second Commandment.


I. I pray you let me entreat you, before you proceed, that you would repeat
in order the sins against the nine next Commandments committed by the Cross.


N. The second Precept is violated by the Superstition: The third, by the
Hypocrisy: (for it brings vain fear and trust:) The fourth, by the impiety
(for it thrusts out Ministers that would celebrate the Sabbath.) The fifth by
the Injustice: The sixth by the murder, (for it is scandalous.) The seventh, by
Adultery, (as being the punishment of Idolatry:) The eighth by the wrong: The
ninth, by the slander. The tenth, by the Concupiscence of the Cross (for it
tempts us to adore Popish Idols:)


I. Your ten imputations may be drawn to three: For first Hypocrisy, and
profane impiety, cannot agree with Superstition: Secondly, if you prove not
the Idolatry, your allegations will be cold concerning adultery and
temptation: Thirdly, if the Cross be neither Idolatrous, Superstitious nor
Scandalous: you will hardly manifest the injustice, wrong, or slander of the
Cross. It rests then, That you prove the Idolatry, Superstition, and
Scandal of the same: The rest of your Snow-balls will melt of themselves.


N. First, then I prove the Idolatry of the Cross, by those four Arguments
which I before remembered.


I. But before you repeat them: Consider these Consequences. First, the Church
of the Lutherans maintain images, which we term idols, as justly as you do
the Cross: Shall we then say, that they be idolaters: Secondly, if the Cross
be an idol: Then, either have the Brownists done well in seperating
themselves from idols: Or we (with the Reformed Churches) have done ill, in
pretending no greater cause of Separation from Rome, then her idolatry.


N. An Idol may be taken either essentially (such were the Calves of Jeroboam
from which the Levites did separate 2. Chron. 11. 14.
themselves) Or else by participation and occasion only (such was the Altar of
King 2. Kings 16. 11, 14.
Ahaz, from which no Separation was made.) Of the first kind are the Idols of
Rome, which make their Church Idolatrous, and justify our Separation from
them: Of the latter sort, are the Images of Lutherans, and our Cross: And
therefore the Barrowists have erred in their separation from us.


I. Our Cross then is only an Idol by occasion; That is, a motive to
idolatry; and so your fourth and first Arguments are confounded. Again, What
reasoning is this: There is idolatry in the Cross, only by occasion and
possibility; and yet you declaime at large against the actual Idolatry
thereof: But of this hereafter: Now repeat the first Argument.


N. Every Idol is to be abolished, as appears both by Deuteronomy. 7. 5 and 12. 3.
Joshua 23. 7.
Laws, and by Genesis 35. 4. Exodus 32. 20. 2 Samuel 5. 22. 1. Kings 15 13. 2. Kings
10. 26. and 11. 18. and 18. 4. and 23. 12.
examples. But the Cross is an Idol: and therefore to be abolished.


I. If your Mayor were true, Then the Sun and Moon so much worshipped by the
Heathens. Paul and Barnabas deified by the men of Acts 14. 12.
Listra: yea, and the bread in the Sacrament (as being adored by Papists)
should be destroyed, and abrogated.


N. My Mayor admits two exceptions: First, of Gods creatures, (such are the
Sun, and Moon: such were Paul and Barnabas.) Secondly, of Gods Ordinances
(such is the bread in the Sacrament (for these may not be destroyed though
they be idolized.


I. Your exceptions are neither true, nor sufficient: For first, God destroyed
the Gods of Egypt: Numb. 33. 4.
and yet these being (Aspes, Crocodiles, Dogs, and the like) were his
creatures: Likewise he commanded the Groves (things not to be exempted from
the number of his Creatures) to be burnt. Josias also put down the horses of
the 2. Kings 23. 11
Sun) and yet they were things created by God: Secondly, the brazen Serpent
(being Gods Ordinance) was (notwithstanding) broken in pieces by Ezekias:
Thirdly, Churches of Christians are neither Gods creatures, nor his direct
ordinances: yet may not be demolished, howsoever they have been polluted with
Idols.


N. First, your instances may be disproued: For it is not certain that God
destroyed the Gods of Egypt. It may be also that by Gods, are meant the Images
only. The Groves were to be burnt, not as created by God, but as ordered by
man's art. The Horses of the Sun were removed by the King, but not destroyed:
Secondly, Churches were ordained by God, as appears by Salomons Temple.
Thirdly, if God, neither spare his own Creatures, nor ordinances, how shall we
spare the inventions of men.


I. First, your answers to my instances, lean upon uncertain supposals, and
wrested distinctions: Secondly, what you say of Churches is untrue: For both
the house of 1. Sam. 5. 20.
Dagon was more ancient then Salomon's Temple: and (by your own In the third
Chapter of this Book.
confession) this Temple was a part of the Ceremonial Law: and so has no
agreement with the Churches of Christians: Thirdly, you confess your own
exceptions to be false: Forasmuch as God neither spares his own creatures nor
his ordinances, being defiled with Idolatry: Fourthly, you seem to answer
nothing to the Brazen Serpent.


N. I will reserve that to another place: Now what answer you to the Laws and
Examples by mealledged?


I. They prove only that the same individual idolized things are to be
destroyed, but not their whole kind. For example: We may not burn all trees,
because one tree has been transformed into an Idol. And now I pray you
confirm your Minor: Namely, that the Cross is an Idol.


N. Every humane ordinance, adored by Papists, is an Idol: But such is our
Cross: and therefore to be reckoned amongst Idols.


I. Your Mayor must be thus limited: Every humane ordinance, which was
idolatrous in the first institution, is an Idol: Else Churches shall be Idols:
and the Brownist just, that wishes their ruin: Again, your Minor is untrue:
For our particular aeriall Crosses were never worshipped by Papists. Now we may
not for the abuse of some indiuidualls, abolish the whole kind. Neither indeed
is our Cross of the same kind with the Popish, differing therefrom in
operations: For their Cross is said todriue away Devils: to Consecrate things
unto God, and the like: which things we ascribe not to our Cross. Now the
diversity of operations, does sufficiently distinguish the kinds of things
artificial: of which number is the Cross.


N. I will in an other sort enforce this Argument. The brazen Serpent ought to
have been destroyed because it was worshipped: But our Cross is as the brazen
John 3. 14. and 8. 28. and 12. 32, 33.
Serpent: And therefore (being worshipped) is to be destroyed.


I. If the premises were true, they would only enforce the destruction of the
Popish Cross, which has no affinity with ours. But indeed, first, your Mayor
is untrue.


N. Ezekias is praised for 2. Kings 18. 5
it: Therefore he ought to have done it.


I. Your Consequence is weak: First, because it may be it was a thing
indifferent, namely, whether he would destroy or remove the Serpent. For tell
me. A Prince is praised for building a Church or Hospital: shall we say he
was bound to do it? Was it not left arbitrarie to him, whether he would by
this, or some other means declare his Princely magnificence to the Church, or
to the poor? Secondly, it is probable, that the King did this by a divine
instinct.


N. When I used the like In this first book, Chap. 3.
answer, you disallowed, it as unsound.


I. But I have a firm reason for my Assertion. A divine ordinance could not
be disanulled, but by a divine ordinance and instinct. But such was the brazen
Serpent: And therefore without some such instinct could not be lawfully
defaced. But this instinct being special cannot be exemplarie. Besides, your
Minor is not well confirmed out of Saint John: First, because a figure cannot
be the sign of a figure, but of a thing figured: except you mean that it was
a parallel figure, as Baptism 1. Pet. 3. 21.
to the Flood: But so you honor the Cross more then we: Secondly, these
places especially the first (for the two latter make no mention of the Serpent)
do resemble Christ to the Serpent, and the Cross only to the Pole, or
Instrument on which the Serpent was elevated: So that if you had spoken
pertinently, you should have thus reasoned: The brazen Serpent, being
worshipped, was to be defaced: But Christ was as the brazen Serpent: And
therefore being worshipped, is to be defaced: This conclusion would serve well
under the standard of Christ's Enemies.


N. My second argument to prove the Idolatry of the Cross is this. The Cross
is an Idolothite (or thing offered to Idols: and therefore is with them to be
abolished.


I. Your reason is firm against the Popish Cross and so draws in the same
yoke of impertinencie with the former: Again, it is a phrase of hard
concoction to say that an Idol was offered to Idols: Lastly, meats
consecrated to Idols might not be refused, but in case of 1. Cor. 10 25.
scandal: and therefore you may reserve this bul-rush till you come to that
place.


N. Thirdly, I thus prove the Idolatry of the Cross: It is a Relic and
Monument of Idolatry: and therefore Idolatrous.


I. If this word Monument be deduced from Monimentum a (...) (permaneus) vel a
monendo monumentum: vt documentum, ac nocumentum, a docendo nocendoque ducta.
remaining, then how can our transient aeriall Cross be a Monument. But if it
be taken from warning, then is it only a Monument, as it is a motive to
Idolatry. And so your third and fourth Arguments iustle together, as the
Rocks called Symplegades in the Euxine Sea. And this your fourth reason you
may let pass till you speak of Scandal: For if it be not Scandalous it is no
motive to Idolatry.


N. From the Idolatry of the Cross, I fly to the Superstition thereof: which
I prove also by four Arguments: First, the Cross was invented by Valentinus
the Heretic; and confirmed by a Fabulous Vision fathered upon Constantine:
namely, that he saw, the figure of the Cross in the air: and heard these
words: Overcome in (...). Or by this, or to this (namely to Christ) of whom
this Cross is a remembrance.
this whereupon he is said to have made the sign of the Cross in his
Standard: Whereas it is more likely that he saw the Letters of Christ's name:
and therefore it cannot be but superstitious.


I. That Valentinus used it, we deny not: But you cannot prove that he was
the Inuentor thereof. This is some thing like your Story you told of Iubal the
inuentor of Music. Again, the Primitive Church was not so nice as you: to
refuse all inventions of Heretics. What? will you reject Printing and Gunnes,
because they were found out by Papists? Will the Papists neglect verses in
their Bibles, because Robert Steven.
a Protestant was the s Author of them? As for that which you relate of
Constantine, think you we will not rather believe his eyes, and the consent
not only of his Army, but even of the whole Church, then your contradictory,
and lately-borne vnlikelihoods?


N. My second reason to prove the superstition of the Cross is this. The first
use of making the Cross is abolished: (Namely, the Profession of Christ's
Cross before the Pagans which derided the same.) It is therefore
superstitious.


I. The weakness of this reason was declared, when we spoke of Gloria Patri:
for though the first use were grown old, another equally profitable may
succeed: Again, there be too many despisers of the Cross, especially the men
of your heat: in regard of whom the first use may remain in his full vigor.


N. The Cross at first was used in presence of the Pagans, not in Baptism,
whether the Paynims were not admitted.


I. The use thereof was ancient in Baptism: even during the time of Paganism:
But our contemners of the Cross, are admitted to behold (I had almost said to
celebrate) our Sacraments.


N. Thirdly, I thus reason. The Cross is added to Baptism, and that as a
Sacramental or Signifying Sign: And is therefore superstitious.


I. Your Antecedent leanes upon an error, and a slander. Your error is, that
you suppose Sacraments to be bare signs, and not to convey grace by
assistance: The Cross is a sign: yet not Sacramental, but humane and
voluntary: not of our covenant with God; but of our profession toward men: As
if a man should put a Map of Canaan in the end of the Book of Joshua: not as a
divine addition thereto; but as an humane explication thereof. In like manner
the Cross does historically, not sacramentally describe unto us Christ's
death: Wherefore it is a Slander that we add it to Baptism as Sacramental or
Essential.


N. We may not set an other Altar by that which 2. Kings 16. 14
is God's: nor a threshold by his Ezekiel. 43. 8.
threshold: and therefore we may not add the Cross to Baptism.


I. These places only prove, that Idolatry may not be mingled with Gods
worship: Now the Idolatry of the Cross you were not able to prove.


N. Fourthly, I thus argue against the Cross. It was removed out of the Lords
Supper. And therefore in like manner is to be taken out of Baptism.


I. First, being a thing indifferent (as we maintain it) it was lawful to
abolish it in the one, and to retain it in the other Sacrament. Secondly, the
retaining of the Cross in the Lord's Supper, was more dangerous, by reason of
the Artolatrie, (or worship of the bread) as also because there it was more
permanent, and durable, then in Baptism.


N. Because you make the Cross a thing indifferent, I pass to the third
thing, which is a Scandal: as being most conversant about things of that
kind. And thus I argue: A thing, though indifferent, yet being Scandalous is
to be removed. But such is the Cross: to be removed therefore.


I. If all were granted, yet are you bound to Subscription: For in things
indifferent, howsoever offensive, the Scandal does redound upon the Commander,
not upon him that obeys. For example: If a Master charge his Servant to roast
that piece of meat, which is more fit to be boiled: shall the Servant plead
indifferency out of his disobedience? Can any Family or Commonwealth long
endure with such rude discipline? But to let your Argument stand in force:
First, your Mayor must be limited to Scandal given, and not taken: and then is
your Minor untrue: For the Scandal of the Cross is not justly given, but
unjustly taken. This appears by two reasons. First, as it is commanded, for to
use it, is a thing indifferent: but to reject it is the sin of Disobedience
to lawful Authority: Secondly, though it were not enjoined: yet is it not
offensive for two causes: First, because they which are offended hereby, are
neither in number, nor dignity, comparable to them which are not scandalized:
Secondly, because a thing scandalous, is an act (that is a deed, speech, or
gesture) causing the weak to err out of the way, or to stumble in it: For as
much as they are not weak, which pretend themselves hereby to be offended, it
cannot justly be termed scandalous.


N. They be weak that are offended by the Cross, some within, and some
without our Church: within are both Ministers and People.


I. The Ministers may not justly be accounted weak: For if they confess it,
why do they resist that wherein they acknowledge their own weakness? If they
deny it, how comes it to pass, that they write so largely, and (as they
think) learnedly against it? Again, If they deny it they cannot be
scandalized: for none can be offended but weak Brethren.


N. No men in a controuesie will acknowledge their own weakness: So that, by
this reason none can be offended.


I. Ministers are presumed to be strong in common construction: especially
when they dare by writing oppose themselves to the Church: which is not unlike
the heaping of Mountains against Heaven.


N. Yea, but the People are offended two ways: First, the Sheep are scattered
when the Shepherd is smitten: especially when his necessary office is taken
from him for things indifferent, such as you pretend the Cross to be.


I. Disobedience in things indifferent, is sinful, and not indifferent: And
better it were the People to be utterly untaught, then to be carried about
with so many windy fancies as have been exhaled out of your dens.


N. Secondly, the People are scandalized at the Cross, in that they fear it
will bring back Popery, and Israel into Egypt: forasmuch as it does tempt and
move us to Idolatry.


I. It may moan by accident but not of it self: As the beholding of our naked
Churches may move an ignorant old man to consider the gorgeous Ornaments in
Popery: and peradventure to bewail the want of Images and Pictures then in
use. Such vain surmises as these had long ago been removed, if with the show
of lenity, we had not tolerated the bellows of Sedition. For as the
austeritie of women drives away Adulterers; So the Severity of Governors
silenceth the factious.


N. As within; so without the Church many are offended with the Cross, both
friends and adversaries. Our friends of the Reformed Churches have abolished
the same: and therefore cannot approve in us the toleration thereof.


I. If these Churches differing from us in matters of great moment (as appears
in the questions touching the Hierarchy, Tithes, and the like) do yet
notwithstanding account us their friend: How much more will they endure our
dissenting from them in a matter indifferent as is the Cross? Rome and
Millaine may have diverse Rites, and yet but one faith.


N. Our Adversaries both Barrowists and Papists, by our use of the Cross,
receive no small Scandal.


I. The Learned in both these factions may not be accounted weak: and so
cannot be offended. The number and worth of Brownists unlearned is no way to
be equallized in matter of offense, to Our State and Multitude. As for the
unlearned Papists, I thus retort their argument. To remove the Cross being a
thing indifferent, should have been a thing Scandalous at the entrance of the
Gospel, forasmuch as the greatest part of the Land was the^ Popishly addicted.
So, that if nothing had been yielded to their infirmity, they would have
degenerated from Popery to Atheism. Neither is the remouall thereof now less
offensive. For innovation in things indifferent, without important necessity,
is perilous both to the State and Church. Thus your arguments, which afar
off, seemed to be like a great ship, being nearly and narrowly viewed, are
found to be nothing but certain logs floating upon the water.


CHAP. XIV.
Of Confirmation.
N. THe first Sacrament of Infants (namely Baptism) being handled: The second
follows, namely, Confirmation.


I. Forasmuch as we make only Two Sacraments generally necessary to salvation:
(Baptism, and the Lord's Supper) why have you here ranked Confirmation?


N. Not only because, by your Assertion, it appertains to Children as well
as Baptism: nor yet because it is made a preparation to the Communion, and so
should come before it (for we well approve of the preparatiue examination of
Children before the receiving of the Communion) but principally, for that you
both make it a Sacrament: yea, and prefer it before Baptism. The former
whereof appears in that you do ascribe unto it (in the second Prayer) both a
visible sign, and aninuisible grace. The Sign you make the imposition of
hands. The grace you intend is the increase and strengthening of those gifts of
the Spirit, which were conferred in Baptism.


I. Concerning the name of Sacrament, we do not greatly contend. But for the
sign, we first produce that famous Catechism of the Author to the Hebrews,
whereof Six Principles Heb. 6. 1, 2.
are propounded: Two internal (Repentance, and Faith:) Two external (Baptism
and Imposition of hands:) Two Eternal (the Resurrection and the Judgment.)


N. Imposition there mentioned belongs to Orders, not to Confirmation.


I. Your Catechism differs from ours: For you, supposing Discipline to be an
essential part of the Gospel, teach it your Children even amongst the swaddling
bands of their first rudiments. But we thus reason against your exposition of
this place. Imposition of hands in Orders belongs not to the Principles of
Religion; to be delivered to them that are Neophytes and Catechumeni (that is,
Nouices in Religion:) But the imposition here meant is such: and therefore
cannot agree to Orders, but rather to Confirmation: Of which even Children may
be partakers.


N. Your Mayor is untrue: For Church Discipline (and consequently Orders)
belong partly to the fifth Commandment: partly, to the Second Petition: and
therefore may not be excluded out of the Catechism.


I. The Obedience to Magistrates does belong also to the Fifth Precept. This
Obedience cannot be exactly known without understanding the Positive Laws of
the Country: Would you have these Laws also inserted into the Catechism.


N. A general, and confused knowledge of this obedience, and of the nature of
Laws is sufficient for them that are newly Catechized.


I. So we think their heads should not be molested with intricate scruples
about Discipline: whereof one is the imposition of hands in Orders. As for your
fancy touching the second Petition, it is lighter then vanity. Secondly, we
produce the practice of Christ in imposing See before in in the Letanie.
hands upon Math. 19. 13, 15.
Infants.


N. We do not so much insist upon the sign as upon the inward grace, for
which you have no warrant.


I. We have a warrant signed from the highest authority: For first, if Christ
laid hands upon Children to pray for them: think you that his Prayer did
return empty without some spiritual grace? Is the Prayer of James 5. 14. and
16.
a righteous Elder so forcible for the Sick, and was not Christ's Prayer
effectual for the Sound? Did not the Apostle confirm men with Spiritual
gifts?


N. The Apostles had power to give the Holy Ghost: Our Bishops cannot claim
the like privilege.


I. Do you mean, they cannot give the Holy Ghost in Orders?


N. Of that we shall entreat elsewhere. My meaning is: they cannot grant the
strengthening of spiritual grace to Children.


I. Could the Priests of the Law so put Gods Name upon the Children of Israel,
that thereupon Numb. 6. 27.
he blessed them? And shall not our Evangelical Bishops, with Prayer and
Imposition of hands obtain the increase of divine grace? Think you they are
all unrighteous men, and that their Prayer is abominable?


N. What we think of their persons you must pardon if we utter not.


I. There is no need of that: the Land crawleth with Libels.


N. We are displeased if any of our brethren have been intemperate herein:
But to return to Confirmation: If in it there be both a sign, and a
spiritual grace; why is it not a Sacrament properly so called?


I. Either because Imposition of hands, which is the sign thereof, is not
proper to the same, but common to Orders with it; Or rather because
Confirmation, is not generally necessary to Salvation: I mean in that degree
of necessity which is found in Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


N. It may seem probable, that if Strength and Perseverance be given by it, it
should be even generally necessary.


I. First, it is not so directly enjoined as our two general Sacraments be:
Secondly, many Children dying before they have need of Confirmation, are yet
most justly reputed as actual partakers of eternal life.


N. That Confirmation may in a large sense be called a Sacramental mystery is
very much. But that it should be preferred before Baptism is intolerable:
Considering also that you contradict your selves herein.


I. You must first declare how it appears that we advance it above Baptism.


N. Not only above Baptism, but even above the Lord's Supper: For it is
permitted to each Deacon to administer your Baptism: But the Communion in both
kinds, may not be celebrated by any under the degree of a Priest: Confirmation
is allowed only to Bishops: whereby the Dignity and Order of these Sacraments
is manifest.


I. Why, did you then place it before the Communion?


N. It was convenient to set it immediately after Baptism, because it seems
to be a kind of Baptism it self: only of a more excellent degree, as being
administered by a Degree of a more noble account.


I. I pray you declare unto me, Why is the Head more noble then the Body?


N. The Body touches only, the Head both touches and tastes and has other
Senses.


I. The heart only touches: The tongue both touches and tastes: Is it
therefore more noble then the heart?


N. In a man it speaks also: and so is more noble.


I. But what say you to the tongue of a beast?


N. It is not more noble then the heart by it self: but as it is a part of the
head.


I. Will you conclude then that tassing is better then touching?


N. Nothing less: For touching is the root, and first borne of sense: yet
touching with tasting is more excellent then simple touching.


I. In like manner though Baptism be most necessary (because Children
baptized have all things necessary to Salvation) yet Baptism, joined with
Confirmation, is more excellent then simple Baptism. No marvel then though it
be assigned to a more excellent degree, that is, the Episcopal; Especially
seeing that Philip Acts 8. 16.
though he preached and baptized, yet might not confirm: this being reserved
for the Apostles. And now tell me, where is our Contradiction?


N. You contradict your selves both in regard of your Doctrine and Practice.
For the first; you teach that Children baptized have all things necessary for
salvation: which if it be true, then what need of Confirmation?


I. Had the Israelites in the Wilderness, all things needful to Salvation?


N. They had: else their sin should not want excuse.


I. They had only the the five Books of Moses: were these sufficient to
salvation?


N. They were for that time.


I. What then? Were Joshua, and the other Books needless?


N. They were also needful in their season.


I. In like manner Baptism of Infants is sufficient to them for eternal life,
if they die incontinently after Baptism: Nevertheless, if they come to
years, both Confirmation, and the Lords Supper may be necessary even as
repentance, and the hearing of Sermons may not by you be affirmed to be
needless to the purchase of heaven.


N. Again you contradict your selves in practice: For which of your Prelates
does urge or use Confirmation?


I. To reason from Practice to Laws, does argue but a distempered mind. Now
the reason why the Fathers of our Church do not so often Confirm Children, is
partly drawn from the shortness of time, wherein they hold their Seats:
partly from the infinite molestations, with which they are infested: but
principally from the obstinacy of the People, who disdain these things: And
no marvel, considering your Frogs are permitted to croake in each Chamber.


CHAP. XV.
Of the Lords Supper.
N. YOu may mis-tearme us at your pleasure. Nevertheless I proceed from the
Sacraments appertaining to Children, (Namely, Baptism and Confirmation) to
those which belong to men of years (Namely, the Communion, and Penance)
whereof the former belongs to men in health: and the latter to sick men only.


I. Do not we also minister the Communion to the Sick?


N. So you do indeed: as also you make it an appendix to Matrimony: But of
these we shall entreat in their due places. Now we return to your Public
Communion: wherein three things we dislike: whereof two come before; the third
is in the act of receiving. Of those that come before, this is the former.
(Least after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter as he entered
into Judas) by which words you intimate that Judas received the Lords Supper,
which is untrue.


I. What then did he receive?


N. He was only partaker of the Passover.


I. Be it so (as you affirm) yet is our argument most firm* For if Satan
entered into Judas, because he did unworthily receive the Passover (which was
immediately to be abrogated) what punishment shall abide us, if we do not
duly partake of that Sacrament which shall not be altered till the Second
Coming of Christ? But now let us hear how you prove that Judas did not
receive the Lords Supper.


N. The Sop was before the Communion (as being a part of the Passover.) For
Luke says, the Communion was celebrated after the Supper (meaning the Luke 22.
20.
Passover:) But immediately after the receiving of the Sop John 13. 30.
Judas departed, and therefore could not be made partaker of the Communion.


I. How does it appear that the Sop was a part of the Passover?


N. The Jewish Rabbis declare, that a Cake was broken at the beginning of the
Passover into two pieces, whereof the one was eaten before, the other after
the Paschall Lamb, both dipped in sauce of Exodus 12. 8.
sower herbs.


I. Of the herbs I read in Scripture, but neither of the sauce, nor of the
cake.


N. It seems that Christ received it from some Tradition of the Elders, who by
their discretion did apportionate this Cake, and Sauce, to the Herbs mentioned
in the Law.


I. Could the Elders in the Synagogue appoint external Ceremonies in God's
service besides the letter of the Law? And will you make Our Church like the
servile wife of a Russian, not attempting to order the most indifferent things
without express warrant from her husband? And now to return to Judas. How
will you satisfy this argument? After Supper was the Luke 22. 20.
Communion celebrated: after which yet followed the words of Christ, The hand
of him that Luke 22 21. and therefore (...) Mat. 26. 26. is to be translated
not comedentibus, but cum comedissent being the second Aorist.
betrayeth me, is with me at the table. It seems then that Judas was present
at the Communion.


N. There is an Hysterosis in the Story of Luke. For Matthew (recording the
same words) does repeat them before the administering of the Communion. The like
Preposteration is seen in the temptations of Christ.


I. It would trouble you to tell, which temptation was the second: which the
third: and whither the Hysterosis were in Matthew, or in Luke. The like may be
said of this Story. Thus you perceive, for ought that you have alleged, your
opinion is but probable in this matter: and yet (as I before declared) our
Liturgy does not contradict you.


N. The second thing that we dislike, is that you allow the Confession before
the Communion to be uttered by any one of the Communicants, in the name of the
rest, whereby a private man or woman is made the mouth of the Congregation.


N. The meaning of the Rubricke is this? That one (at the least) necessarily
shall join with the Priest. If all do it voluntarily, they See more Chapter 5.
shall not be prohibited, as appears by our Daily Practice.


N. In your receiving of the Communion we disallow your Idolatrous kneeling.


I. When we pray, kneeling is a gesture most convenient. But in the receiving
we do pray by the commandment of the Church. For both the Minister prays,
and we also are commanded to receive it with thanksgiving, which is a kind of
Prayer: and therefore kneeling cannot be denied to be expedient.


N. Your Mayor is not firm: For I suppose that few are accustomed to kneel
when they give thanks at meat.


I. You reason from a short Prayer to one of a more determinate nature: From a
Prayer in private business, to one that is annexed to Gods solemn service:
And (which is worst) when we argue of expediencie, you inuert the state of the
question, as though we reasoned about necessity. In sum, we say that to
kneel in Prayer is, though not always necessary, yet for the most part
expedient: as being the most significant symbol of that reverence, which the
creature should exhibit to God in supplication.


N. But your Minor also fails: For although we will not simply deny, that
the Church may ordain Prayers: yet, that Solitary Prayer may be used in the
Church (which is the place assigned for Public Prayer) it seems
unreasonable.


I. Herein you commit a double error: First, in that you imagine a man may not
use Solitary Prayer in the Church: which is refuted both by Salomons Prayer and
by Christ's 1. Kings 8. 41 and 43. Luke 18. 10. and 13.
Parable.


N. What then? Do you commend them, which in the time of Public Prayer,
betake themselves to their private devotions.


I. Nothing less: And yet, if either before or after: or in the intermission
of Solemn Service, men turn themselves to Prayer, we cannot but commend it.
Neither may we condemn those men which suddenly entering into a Church (in the
midst of Divine Service or of a Sermon, do with a short, and quick Prayer,
address and sanctify themselves to the solemn action in hand. Your second
error is, that you make some public action to be interrupted by this
Prayer: Whereas indeed, like as the Sacrament is particularly administered to
every man: so each man is bound to particularize and apply to himself the
Sacramental benefit by devout invocation of Gods name. And certainly if
Singing may concur with Receiving: why may not Prayer, whereof Singing is one
kind. Furthermore for kneeling I thus reason: An action indifferent,
determined by lawful authority, is to be performed: But such is kneeling at
the Communion; And therefore may not be refused.


N. Your Mayor holds not in case of Scandal.


I. This was before answered in the Cross, when we treated of Baptism.


N. Yea, but your Minor is to be denied for two causes: First, That which
Christ did not, we may not do: But Christ did not kneel at his Supper, And
therefore it is unlawful to be done by us.


I. Your reason stands all of Negatiues, an old error in your Logique.


N. The Minor may be negative; because the Mayor is a Relative.


I. You should do better to convert your Mayor: and then your reason will be
formal: But before you change it, mark the falsehood of it: Christ did not
baptize? Mightour Ministers John 4. 2.
refuse to baptize any, lest they should do that which Christ never did?


N. Because you so much insist upon formalitie, I will turn my Mayor.


I. You have so long resisted the formalities of Orders, that you dare not
insist upon the formalities of Art: And generally it may be observed that
through a froward kind of idleness, you have made Arts Eunuchs.


N. I return to my Argument, That which Christ did we must do. But Christ did
sit at his Supper: We therefore ought to sit: And, by consequent, not to
kneel.


I. First, your Mayor wants armor of proof: For Christ did some things
miraculous as God (As fasting forty days, walking upon the water, and the
like:) Some things as Mediator (Namely, as Dying for Mankind:) Some things
Ceremonial (as when he was Circumcised, and received the Passover) because he
was subject to the Law.


N. Why do you fetch such a compass? We speak of Christ's moral actions,
which be our imitation.


I. You have set yet to large a compass: For Christ did morally some actions
in a double manner: Namely, some as necessary: some as indifferent: Of the
first kind are those which the Law commanded to which he subjected himself
(as when he went about doing good:) Of the latter sort are those, which are
left free to man's arbitrament (as namely when he both sat, and stood at
several times of his preaching:) In sum, that which Christ commanded to be
done, is necessarily imitable.


N. Nay, that which Christ did if it be possible, and convenient to be done,
does require our imitation.


I Why then do we not receive the Communion after Supper, at Night, with
unleavened bread, our feet first washed.


N. These things are not judged convenient, and therefore not urged.


I. The like may be affirmed ot sitting, being a thing no more commanded then
the rest.


N. It is thought expedient: because it signifies our rest, and spiritual
familiarity with God.


I. This figure is of your own erection. For was not this rest as well
presented in the Passover, as in the Lord's Supper: And yet it is gathered by
the Story: that the Hebrews did stand at the eating of the Exodus 12. 11.
Lamb.


N. The first time of the Passover (being in Egypt) did require standing as
most convenient: forasmuch as then they were not in rest, but hastening their
departure: For when they came to their rest in Canaan: it appears by the
Story of Christ that they did sit at the Mat. 26. 20.
Passover.


I. It seems then that was indifferent, whether they did stand or sit: And so
your allegory is as sick as a Quail: Again, might not some Israelite have
thus reasoned in Egypt: This Passover is a figure of our heavenly rest, and
therefore we should sit, and not stand: Might not Caleb or Joshua when they
were come to the Land of Canaan, have thus argued. This Lamb is a remembrance
of our hasty coming out of the land of Egypt: Therefore we should not sit at
our ease, but stand, like men in haste: Or thus: This is a remembrance of our
Egyptiacall service: Therefore we should stand like slaves; and not sit like
freemen. Would these Arguments have been current at that time.


N. Sitting at Supper is most convenient: and therefore at the Lords Supper.


I. Is not our Communion answerable to the Passover? Was not that a Supper
appointed by God, as well as this? And yet (as your self lately confessed) they
stood in Egypt at the eating of the Paschall Lamb.


N. Yea, but the Communion is directly called a 1. Cor. 11. 20.
Supper: and therefore sitting, being a gesture used at ordinary Suppers, is
here also Convenient.


I. Is not the Passover likewise called a Luke 22. 20.
Supper, and yet they stood at the eating thereof? Besides, though Christ
received it after Supper, yet, partly for the abuse of 2. Pet. 2. 13. Jude 12
compared with 1. Cor. 11. 21.
Loue-Feasts: and partly because men were accustomed to receive it fasting: the
Communion was translated from Evening to Morning: and Loue-Feasts were
abolisht. So that if you term the Eucharist a Supper; you shall do it,
neither in regard of the time* nor of the circumstance of a meal: but only in
remembrance of the first institution. And therefore, although it were granted
that Christ did sit, because he was set before at Supper: yet this situation
cannot be enforced upon us as necessary, forasmuch as we receive it at the
time of Breakfast (when men rather use to stand then sit) not of Supper.


N. We like of standing, better then of kneeling.


I. Remember your own Argument: What Christ did not, we must not do: But
Christ did not stand (for you avouch that he sat:) standing therefore is
unlawful? Or (as your self inuerted the reason.) What Christ did, we must
do: But Christ did sit (as you auerre) we must therefore sit, and not stand
These are children of your own: and therefore you must be at the cost of their
education.


N. Some Reformed Churches use Standing, as well as Sitting.


I. I could use a reason of your own Logic, thus: a situation, which is not
sitting, is lawful at the Communion: (for you grant standing to be a thing
indifferent, and therefore lawful:) But kneeling is such a situation. And
therefore most lawful. And thus far of your Negatio infinitans negationem
simplicem non efficit.
Mayor: though this also might be added: That it is weakness to argue from
decency in ordinary Suppers, to that comeliness which is meet at the Lords
Table. For it is decent to come hungry to a bodily supper, which Saint Paul
allows not at the Lords Supper. Would 1. Cor. 11. 21.
you have men cover their heads, use trenchers, knives, and other such
appurtenances at the Communion? But now to your Minor, wherein you affrme that
Christ did sit at the Communion. First, we desire to know that place where
this is auoucht.


N. Is it not plain in the Story? Math. 26. 20.



I. It is plain that he sat at the Passover: which Saint Luke calls the
Supper: after which the same Evangelist reports, he instituted the
Sacrament: and so for ought you can bring to the contrary, he did rise from
Supper: and so might either stand or kneel: And his kneeling is more probable:
because he blessing the Bread, may be thought to have prayed kneeling.


N. Christ used at other Suppers to sit: and therefore it is likely that he did
so here likewise.


I. When he fed many thousands with a few loaves, did he sit, or stand?


N. It is not expressed, and therefore is uncertain.


I. Was this a Supper: or not?


N. It was an evening repast: and so may be termed a Supper.


I. By your own words then it is clear: how uncertain it is, whether Christ
sat at every supper. So that, if you make your reason perfect, the error will
be manifest: For example: That which Christ did at every supper: that he did
at this: But he sat at every supper: And therefore at this also. Your Minor
(as you see) is ambiguous, and cannot universally be confirmed. Your Mayor also
is incoherent, because it is not necessary he should do all things at this
extraordinary supper, which he did at the times of his common refection. But
the truth is, that he did ordain the Sacrament after Supper: And therefore it
is styled a Supper, only by a Figure.


N. It is likely that being set at the Passover, he would not rise till he
had appointed the Sacrament.


I. I showed you before the unlikelihood thereof: And from likelihood to reason
to necessity is a bondage, which the meanest wits will not endure.


N. It is generally granted that Christ sat at his own Supper.


I. It is granted by the most, that he sat, as he did at the Passover: would
you be content to sit in the like manner? Would you have three beds set about
your Communion Table? Would you that your neighbor should lean upon your
breast, as John did upon Christ's?


N. Tell me (I pray you:) what bread used John 13. 23.
Christ at his Supper?


I. Unleavened bread: for there was no other to be had at the Passover.


N. Is it not then lawful for us to use leauened bread?


I. We ought to use the ordinary bread of the country: whether leauened or
unleavened it is not material.


N. In like manner Sitting is necessary: But the order of sitting, whether
Jewish (upon beds) or Turkish (upon carpets spread on the ground) or according
to the custom of Europe: is left to us as indifferent and arbitrarie.


I. When you can prove sitting to be as necessary as the bread in the
Sacrament, then will we grant, that you may sit after the Turkish or Jewish
fashion.


N. Christ's sitting differed from that which we contend for, only by accident,
not essentially: For leaning is but an accident of sitting.


I. In what Category is sitting to be placed?


N. In the Ninth; which is called Situs, or Situation.


I. Is not leaning a kind of situation also?


N. It is a situation-partiall, not total, that is, of a part, not of the
whole body.


I. How differs Vbi from Situs?


N. Vbi is the applying of place to the whole body: Situs of the parts
thereof.


I. Of all, or of some?


N. I think of all.


I. You may not think so: unless you imagine that sitting differs not from
standing? considering that all the parts receive not a diverse situation in
these two.


N. What if I grant that leaning is a kind of situation?


I. Attend to this Argument: Two Species of the same kind differ essentially,
not by accident: But, sitting and leaning are two species of the same kind
(namely, of situation:) And therefore your sitting differs from that of
Christ's essentially.


N. Situations are but accidents: and therefore can differ but by accident.


I. Situation is an accident to the subject Scaliger exercitation. 325. Sect. 2.
(namely to the body) and yet essential to sitting and leaning (being the
kinds thereof) whereby your sitting does as essentially differ from Christ's
action, as our kneeling.


N. Were it granted that Christ did not sit, yet kneeling is unlawful because
it was appointed by a Pope for the honor of the Idolatrous Artolatry:
Honorius, Anno Dom. 1220.
And therefore, being scandalous, does cease to be indifferent.


I. Concerning Scandal, we spoke before in the Cross. Touching your
consequence. I entreated in your first general objection: But your antecedent
is also deceitful: for our kind of kneeling, was not ordained by the Pope, as
may thus appear. Popish kneeling (or kneeling ordained by the Pope, was, and
is, for the honor of the Breaden God: But, our bowing of the knee is not such;
And therefore cannot be Popish.


N. The term Popish may be taken in a double sense: Directly or Indirectly:
Directly, when Idolatry is intended by the Whole Visible Congregation:
Indirectly, when some one receiver against the common intention of the Church
does idolatrously worship the bread: Or thus: Directly, when the worship of
some Idol is plainly put in practice: Indirectly: when for the present, it is
not practiced in gross manner, but creeps on (as abuses do) by stealing,
and insensible steps: Like as the setting up of Images in the Church (although
not then adored) did in process of time, produce Open Idolatry.


I. These two shifts make you relapse into the question of Scandal, of which
we treated before in the Cross.


N. Then I say, that your kneeling, is directly Popish, and Idolatrous, as may
thus first appear: To worship God, in, at, or before a Creature, is Idolatry,
and Popery: But such is your kneeling, Ergo.


I. You join Idolatry and Popery, as if they sounded all one thing: whereas
many kinds of Idolatry be not Popish: and many Papisticall things have no
agreement with Idols. But to your Mayor: May not we worship God in the Earth,
at a Church, before Angels and Men: and are not these Creatures? Indeed to
ascribe inherent or reflexiue holiness to Creatures in God's worship, is a kind
of Idolatry: But yet to deny that they have holiness by assistance, is mere
way-wardnesse.


N. Secondly, I thus argue: To worship Christ's manhood as present, when indeed
it is absent; is Idolatry: But such is your kneeling: Ergo.


I. Were your Mayor true, then none should worship Christ's manhood, but those
that had seen him walk upon the earth: or those that triumph with him in
heaven: whereas indeed we are bound to worship the Whole Person of Christ, and
consequently his Manhood. As for your Minor, it is most weak: For men may
kneel without consideration of Christ's Manhood: John 9. 38. Ephesians. 1. 21, 22.
Heb. 1. 6.
I mean it was possible before Christ's coming though now it be unlawful:
For to worship half Christ is partly Heresy; partly, Idolatry. Besides your
argument, may be thus retorted upon you. Where, by the union of the spirit,
Christ, and God are present, with a gracious presence, there to kneel praying
is lawful. But so it is in the Sacrament (for the Spirit assisting the bread
unites us to Christ's Manhood, and so to his Godhead, and consequently the
Deity of the Father:) Our kneeling therefore cannot but be lawful.


N. By this reason, men should kneel at a Sermon: for there also is the Spirit
present.


I. If men could pray and hear at once, kneeling were not there unlawful.


N. Another thing in the receiving we dislike, that you say Christ's Body and
Blood, is verily and indeed received of the faithful.


I. These words verily and indeed, refute the common error, making Sacraments
bare signs: But these, of the faithful, refell the Lutheran and Papist, who
make the Reprobate, as well as the Elect, partakers of Christ.


CHAP. XVI.
Of the Visitation of the Sick.
N. FRom the Sacrament (belonging to the Sound) I pass to the Visitation of
the Sick, which is compounded of two corrupted Sacraments, Private Communion,
and Penance. In the former we dislike the necessity, and Priuatenesse thereof.
Touching the necessity, we marvel much: that you make it a thing so needful
to salvation.


I. Besides my former arguments used in Baptism, I add first this
distinction: That a thing needful to salvation is either a proper working
cause thereof: Or any thing that is helpful, and comfortably expedient to the
same. In this latter sense, we speak of Sacraments; as also of good works:
Secondly, I propound this reason? That thing whereby ordinarily Gods Spirit is
conuayed (namely, by the way of assistance only) to strengthen our faith
against daily sudden temptations, that thing is needful and helpful to
salvation: But such is the Eucharist: Ergo.


N. Though we should grant that in this sense the Sacrament is needful: yet
the necessity thereof is to much urged when it is given in private.


I. Do you call it private in regard of Place, or Person?


N. In both respects.


I. First, for Place: I have declared in Baptism, that Sacraments may be in
private administered: Secondly, in regard of the Person, they can by no pretense
be so termed: both because the Person administering is Public? As also,
because a private Communion is so called, when the Priest alone does receive
the Sacrament in both kinds, the people in the mean time gazing, as
fruitless spectators: Or if they communicate, being bereaved of the Cup:
whereas with us, not only the Minister, but even the sick man: and as many
assistants as can be conveniently assembled, do receive in both kinds.


N. From Private Communion then, let us come to your Popish Penance: For
although you make no mention of Contrition, or of Auricular Confession, yet
Absolution you absolutely retain.


N. Tell me I pray you, why some of your combination, desired to have the
Absolution At the Conference in Hampton Court.
termed a Remission?


N. Because Absolution implies forgiving of sins with authority: Remission
only by the way of Declaration: whereof this latter may be permitted to men:
but the former is peculiar to God: and therefore you are in this point too much
the Apes of Popery.


I. Let the Papists eat their own Crabs, which they have caught: Only it were
to be wished, that men by telling needless falsehoods; would not discredit
themselves in the most needful truths. But to let them pass? as also your
distinction of Absolution, and Remission, not worth the refuting: We avouch
that pardoning of sins with authority is double. Namely, with authority
absolute, or delegate: The former is Gods prerogative: The latter is in the
Charter of the Church. For I demand, If a Murder be committed, does the Prince
only declaratiuely pardon or condemn the offender? Does he not also the same
with authority delegate from God? May any private man well skilled in Laws,
and most able to declare the merit or demerit of the party delinquent* attempt
this thing without authority? Is not the difference between authority and
declaration manifest?


N. I will not be endangered with these matters of State.


I. No marvel: For many of your wing have succeeded but ill with them.


N. Return I pray you to the matter: How prove you that Ministers may pardon
sins with authority?


I. They to whom the Keys are delivered, and the power of binding and loosing
Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Job 20. 23.
sins, may absolve sinners; not only declaratiuely, but even with authority.
But these things are given to the Ministers of the Church. They therefore may
absolve with authority.


N. They may absolve (by the preaching of the Word) sins in general: but
they may not apply their Absolution to particular men, because they cannot know
their special repentance, whether it be sound or hollow.


I. That they may particularize their censures, appears by the words of 2. Sam
12. 13
Nathan, Job 33. 23, 24
Elihu, and Saint 1. Cor. 5. 1.
Paul. For what? May they not excommunicate particular Math. 18. 17.
men? Can they bind and not loose? Is loosing any other thing then Absolution?
As for your Confirmation it is most infirm. For were it sound: we should not
ordinarily administer the Sacraments to any; forasmuch as we are ignorant
whether men's faith be entire; or only in collusion of appearance. These fancies
do smell of Swingfeldius and H. N. and taste, not only of a desire of
novelty, but even of anarchie. So that with equal vanity you have condemned
both our general Absolution: and our term of Penance in the Collect upon
Mid-sommer Day.


CHAP. XVII.
Of Matrimony.
N. FRom your Sacraments I proceed to your Rites: which seem to be certain
customs, not Sacramental; And belong either to the living (as Marriage: and
Churching) or to the Dead (as Burial:) Marriage is a bond most honorable.
Concerning the bond you err two ways: First, you straightly charge the
parties, that if they know any impediment, they confess it.


I. Forasmuch as many thousands of your tune, have been publicly married,
never stumbling at these words: I marvel what new mystery, you have here
dug up?


N. We understand; that some of your men urge these words, for the Defense of
the Oath ex officio, which is to us a Scourge and a Scorpion.


I. Nevertheless we may justly urge it: For what is the Oath ex Officio, but
the adiuring of men to confess things tending to their own damage in
appearance: howsoever indeed they further both Truth and Charity.


N. But what Scriptures can you allege for this Antichristian oath.


I. If you mean that it was ante Christum; before Christ: You shall hear not
only that 1. Sam. 14 24.
Saul, a wicked Prince, charged his people with an oath: Nor yet only that good
Joshua did urge Joshua 7. 19.
Aehan to confess a sin against himself: no nor yet that Joseph (at least
according to your own interpretation upon the Letanie,) did adjure his
brethren to bring Benjamin (for though these were holy men, yet they might
err) but even the never failing Law of God, commanding the Priest to charge
the woman (suspected of adultery) by an Numb. 5. 19.
oath to confess her own fault, if any such had been. But if you mean that
it is Antichristian, because against Christ, it was used by the Math. 26. 63.
High Priest* Remember withal that Christ obayed it: which he would not have
done had it proceeded from Antichrist, as you pretend. Nay, if we be bound to
give a 1. Pet. 3 15.
reason of our faith to every man that demands it how shall we presume to
hide the truth from our lawful Superiors?


N. To grant (for the present) that the Bishops are our Superiors lawfully
ordained: yet they may not unlawfully proceed against us: Seeing God has
appointed, that by the Deuteronomy. 19 15.
mouth of two or three witnesses, every matter should be confirmed.


I. Indeed, when a man is accused; an others testimony is needful: But when
presumptuous circumstances concur, then either one witness is sufficient,
(as we read in the Story of Ester 2. 22.
Ester) or else, though there be no witness, yet judgment may pass (as we
find 1. Kings 3. 27
the history of the women which came before Solomon:) But why may not
confession be extorted from men, as well by the reverence of an oath, as by
torments, in case of treason? Or by a man's own folly (as in the story 2 Samuel
1. 16.
of the Amalekite:) Neither is this a servile betraying of a man's own Person,
but a necessary bewraying of the truth, which we ought to prefer before our
own lives.


N. Your second error in the bond of marriage is, that you make it
indissoluble: for you say that it shall never be lawful to put them asunder,
etc.


I. What lawful causes of separation can you forge?


N. The causes (without forgerie) are two, which concern either the efficient
cause, or the matter: Of the first kind is the consent of Parents, without
which notwithanding you ratify sundry Marriages.


I. First, although the consent of Parents, be requisite to the making of
Matrimony, yet, if it be once consummated, the want of it makes not this a
nullitie: Secondly, in some cases Marriage is not only effectual, but even
lawful without this consent; As, in case the Father will not endure his
Child, to marry any save an Heretic, or notoriously wicked person; And if
the Child, after the Et Validum: and Licitum.
years of discretion, can neither with long strife restrain burning, nor by
himself or friends ever entreat his Father; or if the Magistrate interpose
his authority herein, the Marriage (without Parents consent) in such a case
shall be ratified both in earth and heaven.


N. The cause drawn from the matter, belongs, either to the whole person, or
some part thereof. Of the former kind is that case when there is an error in
the Person: As when Leah came to Jacob in stead of Rahell.


I. If the Law do herein determine (Separation (as you term it) upon just
trial of unjust collusion: The reason is, because the parties by God were
never conjoined; As for ex-example, Jacob because he never promised Marriage
to Leah, was not in rigor bound to confirm her single fact.


N. The cause drawn from the parts of the Person, does either appertain to
the Body, or the Soul: And further, to the body, either living or dead: In
the living body may be a Defect, or a Disease: Of the first kind is that, when
a man is an Eunuch, or an Hermaphrodite: Of the latter sort is the Leprosy,
falling Sickness, or any such contagious disease.


I. The Eunuch and Androgine, are not fit subjects of Marriage: therefore we
cannot separate them, but only declare that they were never conjoined: As when
we break an oath, made of a thing impossible; or unlawful* we do not
dispense with the former bond of the oath: but only we show that the matter of
this oath is defective and so makes a nullitie: Concerning a Disease, if it
were before wedlock, and concealed by fraud, we answer as before: But, if it
follow Marriage, then absolute separation may not be granted: For God that
inflicted the tentation, will give the issue therewith, that is either healing
or patience, with the gift of chastity.


N. But death may lawfully be inflicted; and so the married couple lawfully
separated.


I. What is lawfully performed by the Magistrate is done as by God himself,
who may not be confined within Laws: Again the Magistrates intent is of
himself, only to make a divorce between body and soul and so the
separation of the married parties does only follow by accident. Lastly, the
malefactor dying, cease to be a subject capable of Marriage; and therefore of
divorce or separation. For (if we will not speak improperly) separation
cannot be between things, which, being separated, do not retain there being;
As for example, If it be true which some think that the souls of bruit
beasts, be accidents, and annihilated by death, then the term of death does
equiuocally agree to man and beasts, considering that in the one there is a
proper separation, but not in the other.


N. The Cause borrowed from the soul, is Infidelity Subiectiue in anima.
Organice and Obiectiue in Corpore.
or Adultery. Touching the first, you disanull not Marriages, made between
Papist, and Protestant.


I. But some of your friends at Amsterdam, do allow Pollygamie in their
Proselytes: which if they did return home, would be found by our Laws to be
little less then Felons.


N. Certain it is that you break Saint 1. Cor. 7. 15.
Paul's rule.


I. It is more certain that your fellows, understand not Saint 1. Cor. 7. 12.
Paul: For first it is plain by that which goes before, that the Separation
must be passive in regard of the believer, not active; that is, the believer
may marry after desertion, but may not forsake the unbeliever: Secondly,
reconciliation must be vehemently sought, before the second Marriage be
attempted: Thirdly, it must be considered, that a Papist is not an Infidel,
but a Lib. 1. c. 1. p. 5.
Christian as was declared in your first general objection:) Fourthly, this
Apostolic Canon, is not in force with us, because our Prince, being a
Christian, both can and does enforce by Law, the person departing to return;
Whereas this rule was only then effectual whilst Princes were unbelievers.


N. Yea, but adultery is an absolute cause of separation: and yet you enforce
the innocent party to remain unmarried.


I. We judge the second Marriage of the innocent party (during the life of the
party nocent) not to be absolutely unlawful; but yet very inexpedient:
First, because it is fit he should something feel the smart of his own bad
election (if any such were:) Secondly, if that were not, it is not to be
doubted but God, if he be importuned by Prayer, will give the gift of
chastity, considering the temptation is occasioned by a cause extrinsicall:
Thirdly, there be sundry cases; wherein the party nocent may be received
again after divorce: As first in case the woman were ravished: Secondly, if
she erred in the person of her husband: Thirdly, if she married upon his long
absence; and report of his death: Fourthly, if he be a Pandar to his own
wife: Fifthly, if after the first offense he have pardoned her, and she has
offended no more: Sixthly, if she may plead Compensation, namely, that he
offended, as well as her self: Seventhly if he have denied her due benevolence:
In all which cases it is necessary to receive her home. But in case she do
show the outward signs of repentance, it is expedient also to admit her
again; Apprime si primum tempus.
because we are moved thereunto not only by the example of the good Judges 9.
3.
Leuite (who peradventure did err in that matter) but even of Christ himself,
who has oftentimes been reconciled to the Church his Spouse, after her
manifold and manifest idolatrous adulteries: Fourthly, because hereby is
hindered the readiness both to accuse, and offend, whereas otherwise the flames
of malice and lust, would bring an universal combustion: Fifthly; because
hereby is avoided the confusion of Families; the neglect of the education of
Children; with many other mischiefs, which were more lamemtable to endure,
then easy to recount; or, otherwise then thus, to prevent.


N. From the bond of Marriage I proceed to the honor thereof: wherein we
dislike both your contradiction; and your errors: First, then though you grant
Marriage to be honorable; yet you seruillifie the husband; causing him to say
to his wife, with my body I thee worship.


I. The plain interpretation of these words may be fetched from Saint Paul's
Canon (The (...). 1. Cor. 7. 4.
man has not power of his own body, but the woman, etc.) The Greek word
does signify to have privilege, property, liberty, or authority (as
appears by the word, from which this is derived:) which differs little from
worship: for what greater civil (...). John 1. 12. From which worship is
derived.
worship or dignity can there be, then for a man to surrender to his wife the
property of his body? And tell me (I pray you:) were the words thus
delivered in Latin, Corporete meo dignor; seu dignum censeo; what great
Idolatry or Seruillitie should be in them?


N. To leave your Contradiction; I haste to your errors, which are two: First,
in the Author you cite: Secondly, in the degrees of honor which you ascribe
to Marriage. Touching the first when you allege a place of the Epistle to the
Heb. 13. 4.
Hebrews, you definitiuely avouch Saint Paul to be the Author thereof.


I. Are you offended that we call the Apostle Saint? Do you now doubt of his
Saintship?


N. Nothing less: But we marvel that you call not Abraham, Job, and Moses
Saints, as well as Paul and Peter.


I. We marvel that you call not Paul and Peter Masters, as well as Luther and
Bucer.


N. Not because they were less worthy of this title; but because the phrase of
these times and countries was different from ours.


I. The like may be said of the term Saint; which was not taken up, till the
Primitive Church (which began after Christ) did much use it for the dignifying
of the Apostles and Martyrs, which were Lights, not of a Church confined within
Palestina: but extended as far as the line of Heaven.


N. But we are more displeased that you thus confidently avouch, that of Saint
Paul, which scarce amounts to the credit of an Ecclesiastical Tradition.


I. Although the Tradition of Antiquity be most venerable with us, yet
besides it, we have other proof that Saint Paul was 1. Pet. 1. 1. 2. Pet. 3.
1.
Author of this Epistle: For Saint Peter, writing his Second Epistle to the
Dispersed Hebrews, thus speaks to them, as our brother 2. Pet. 3. 15.
Paul wrote unto you.


N. He wrote that in his Epistle to the Romans 2. 4.
Romans: For it appears in the same Chapter: that he directs much of his
speech to the Jews, which (as it seems) were then at Rome.


I That place is alleged, out of the Epistle to the Heb 10 23. and 32. ad
finem.
Hebrews: where that argument is copiously handled. As for the place by you
quoted it is impertinent: For, if you make a just Analysis of the second
Chapter to the Romans, you shall find that the Apostles speech (directed to
the Jews by the way of a Prosopopeia) begins not till the seventeenth
Verse; whereas the words by you cited are in the fourth: For whereas you
imagine that he writ to the Jews that were at Rome, you must remember; First,
that Saint Paul had not as yet been at Romans 1 15.
Rome: Secondly, that when he came thither, the chief of the Jews told him,
that they had heard of Acts 28. 21.
no letter concerning him, which could not be, if this Epistle had been in
part directed to them.


N. But the Apostle does not prefixe his name before the Epistle to the
Hebrews.


I. He might forbear that, because his name was scandalized among the Jews.
Will you deny that Moses was author of Genesis and Exodus? Or Ezra of the
Chronicles, and Ester, because their names are not set before those Books?


N. But this style differs from the other Epistles of Paul.


I. I might tell you, how some conjecture, that Paul wrote it in Syrian: and
that Clemens or Luke, translated it into Greek. To let this pass; If Moses
were the Author of Job. How does the style differ from that in Deuteronomy? If
this be but probable, how does the style of the Canticles differ from that of
the Proverbs? Will any man reading the two Epistles of Peter, deny a
diversity of style?


N. But the Author excludes himself from the number of them which had Heb.
2. 3.
heard Christ.


I. He had not heard him, when he was alive upon the earth: Again, he
speaks by a A figure called (...)
Figure numbering himself among the multitude, as also does Saint 1. Pet. 4. 3.
Peter.


N. Your error in the honor which you ascribe to Marriage is double: For you
make it both an holy thing, and a Sacrament. The former appears, First, by
this, that you ask the Banes in the Church: whereas Marriage belongs to the
Magistrate.


I. The Covenant of God may be published by the Priest: But such is Prou. 2.
17.
Marriage: and therefore may by the Priest be promulgated.


N. How do you explain your Minor?


I. The Covenant which makes a wife, is here called God's Covenant: But such is
Mal. 2. 14.
Marriage: Marriage therefore is Gods Covenant: Besides it is an Oath, or Vow
made in Gods presence.


N. An Oath may be tendered before a Magistrate: And therefore Marriage in this
respect may be but a civil action.


I. A Prayer may be repeated before a Magistrate; is it therefore civil?


N. He has no jurisdiction in Prayer, as be has over an Oath.


I. Is not prayer, a good thing? May not he command you to do that which is
good? Nay is not an oath, a kind of prayer? Again I thus reason: Where
public prayer is expedient, that thing may be done in the Church. But such is
in Marriage: And therefore in the Church it may be celebrated: And by
consequent the Banes asked, for the prevention of all fraud and couin. The
Minor thus appears: As the action is, so must be the prayer thereto
belonging. But the action of Marriage is public: and therefore such must be
the Prayer thereto appertaining* When I say it must be, I mean, it is most
expedient: I mean then, it must be upon conueniencie: not upon necessity.


N. But God never commanded the Hebrew Priests to marry the people at the
Tabernacle, or Temple.


I. It had been something laborious, to have brought all the people to be
married at the Temple of Jerusalem. Nevertheless the Jewish Rabbi Mose Ban
Maimone in Cu^pa.
Rabbis tell us that Marriage was celebrated in a Tent, set upon four bars,
over against the Synagogue: to which Tent, Psalm. 19. 5.
David, Joel 2 16.
Joel, and Math. ^5. 1. Luke 12. 36.
Christ himself do allude: and therefore it seems that the Priest did
something intermeddle with these matters; Whereupon both Pagans, Turks, and
Christians, all with one consent (in all Ages, Countries and Sects) have
reputed Marriage as a sacred thing: and have solemnized it with sundry
Ceremonies.


N. The second thing whereby you imitate the holiness of Marriage is, that you
cause the parties to kneel before the Communion Table: and withal insinuate
as though it were fit to have a Communion annexed to every Marriage.


I. I know not, what herein may offend you, but only that this Law is not put
in execution, as it were to be wished for these causes; First, That the parties
might be put in mind of mingling spiritual with earthly joy: Secondly, that
they might be advertised, touching the end of Matrimony, which is the
enlarging of the number of the Saints, whose Communion is most lively
represented in the Lord's Supper: Thirdly, that they might be effectually
warned to remember the union of Christ, and the Church (his Spouse,) which is
most plainly exhibited in the Sacrament.


N. By this last clause you declare that you make Matrimony a Sacrament.


I. If that were true, to what end should we join another Sacrament to it?


N. I will prove that you make Wedlock a Sacrament; both by the causes and by
the sign: The causes are the final, and formal. The final is set down in
these words of one of your Prayers: which have consecrated it to such a
mystery.


I. What will you prove hereby?


N. Two things; First, that by these words, you create a new Sacrament:
Secondly, that the words be arroneous: Touching the first, I thus reason; That
thing which is consecrated to such an excellent mystery, that in it is
signified and represented the spiritual Marriage and Unity between Christ
and his Church; That thing is a Sacrament. But such is the state of Matrimony
in your opinion: among the Sacraments therefore to be reckoned.


I. Your Mayor is mistaken, in regard of the Consequence thereof: For a thing
may be consecrated to a mystery, eitherto apply it, or to signify it. The
former way both Water in Baptism, as also Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper
are sanctified: For they do apply, and convey unto us, the Spirit of God: and
consequently both Christ and his Father; namely, by the Union of Assistance. In
the latter sense, Marriage is consecrated only to signify the spiritual
unity, or union between Christ and his Church: And this is the true cause why
Matrimony is no Sacrament, as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.


N. That the words be erroneous I thus prove; That which was before the
mystery, could not be consecrated to signify the same: But Marriage was
before the mystery of this union: And therefore could not be so consecrated.


I. The Mayor is like the verses of Dionysius, which could not be corrected,
but by blotting of them all out: Let your Mayor be thus inuerted; A thing must
be, before it signify: and then it will be true. Were there not Lambs
before the Passover? Water before Baptism? Bread and Wine before the Lord's
Supper? Again, your Minor is untrue: For the Second Person in Trinity was the
Mediator of the Church before the fall of man; and consequently by order of
nature though not of time) was before Matrimony. I mean as it was a cause,
not as it was a thing signed: For Relatiues are together in nature.


N. That which does only signify parabolically, that cannot be consecrated to
signify a mystery (unless we will imagine that every Vine with the
Branches; and Head, with the Members, are so consecrated because they are so
resembled by John 15 1.
Christ, and the 1 Cor. 12. 11.
Apostle.) But Marriage does only parabolically, signify this Ephesians. 5. 32.
mystery. Therefore we may not say that it is consecrated.


I. It seems by Saint Paul, that he makes more then a Parable thereof: As
before him both Psalm. 45 t^tum
David and In the Canticks.
Solomon; yea and Ezekiel 16. totum.
Ezekiel had done. So that it seems Matrimony was consecrated by these
Divine Pens to the opening of this mystery.


N. But do you find no other consecration of Matrimony then this?


I. We doubt not to say with Antiquity that Euah being taken out of the side
of sleeping Adam, was a figure of the Church proceeding from the virtuous side
of the Second Adam, sleeping in Death. God therefore delivering Euah to the
Man, did consecrate Marriage to represent this Mystery.


N. From the end I pass to the form, which in these words is set down: I
pronounce that they be man and wife together, In the name of the Father; of the
Son: and of the Holy Ghost, Amen:) which differs little from the form of
Baptism.


I. What call you the form of Baptism properly?


N. These words I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc.


I. What Scripture have you for this opinion?


N. Is it not written, Math. 28. 19.
Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc?


I. But does Christ command us to use these very words: In the name of the
Father, etc?


N. So all think but Papists, who say, That this form does depend upon the
virtue of Tradition.


I. The plea of Tradition is here impertinent. For tell me is not Baptism a
Sacrament? Is not a Sacrament an Action? Can the form of an action be words?
Again, is the form in those words; I Baptize? Or in these; In the name of the
Father? To avouch the former is vain: For can the form of Baptism be to
Baptize? The latter is as untrue: For by the Name of the Father, etc. is meant
the Authority of the Trinity. By which is rather intimated an efficient
cause, then a form of Baptism.


N. Do not we generally say, that the Arrians err in the form of Baptism,
because they use thus to baptize Infants: In the name of God the Father: and of
the Son a Creature: And of the holy Ghost a Creature, I baptize thee?


I. What think you of him that baptized an Infant, In nomine Patria, Filia,
and Spirita Sancta? Did he err in the form of Baptism?


N. No doubt his error was in the form of the words (his Latin being not
congruous) yet the Baptism was no nullitie: neither might be iterated, because
the substance and form were still retained.


I. You see then that this phrase is but merely popular: So that by form is
only meant form of words: that is, a form representative, not real: For it
is neither inward, nor outward; Not inward, For, that is the union of Christ's
blood with us; Not Outward; For that must be Visible, not Audible: a Deed, not
a Word: But were all this granted; will you make every thing a Sacrament
wherein these words are used, In the name of the Father, etc? If Paul instead
of these words, I Acts 16. 18.
command thee in the name of Jesus to go out of her, had said, I command thee
in the name of the Trinity, had he spoken any thing unfit or untrue?


N. Nothing less, except we think: that those which were baptized in the
Name of Jesus Acts 19. 5.
Christ, were not baptized in the Name of the Trinity, which to maintain were
little less then Heresy.


I. What then? Did Saint Paul make dispossession of Devils, a Sacrament,
because he used words equipollent to these In the name of the Father?


N. He did only declare by what authority he cast out the evil spirit.


I. So when we say in Matrimony, (In the the name of the Father) we only show
in what Name, and by what Authority we pronounce them to be man and wife,
namely in the Name of that God, which conjoined the first couple, in the
Paradise of Pleasure.


N. As the causes so the sign (namely, the ^ing) shows Marriage to be a
Sacrament: which being a mere humane invention is to be exploded out of the
Church.


I. What think you of the Eare-rings, which Genesis 24. 22. and 30.
Abraham's servant gave to Rebecca?


N. He thought she should be wife to Isaake, and therefore presented her with
these symbols of nuptial amity. But what? Can this warrant the profaning of
the Church with a Civil Ring?


I. What conceive you of the Romans 16. 16.
holy kiss, enjoined by the Apostle?


N. It was a sign of spiritual amity: and therefore used in the Church.


I. But was the sign also spiritual?


N. It was indeed drawn from a civil custom of the East, yet amplified and
converted, to be an argument of spiritual conjunction.


I. But yet it was commanded by the Apostle: why is it not still practiced in
the Church?


N. It was not judged so decent by reason of the contrary custom in some
parts of Europe.


I. By this you may understand, that the thing was but indifferent and mutable:
and yet for a time enjoined by Apostolic, and Ecclesiastical Authority: as
were also the Acts 15. 20. 28, 29.
Love Feasts; and likewise abstaining from things strangled, and from blood.
From which last instance we thus argue; Abstinencie from things strangled, and
from blood, were for a time necessary by reason of the Churches iniunction:
And yet the same things were then but indifferent, and changeable (as all men
do confess) Some things indifferent therefore may by the Church be imposed
as necessary; I mean in regard of the external order; not of eternal life.


N. Yea, but the Ring is not a thing indifferent, being laden with so many
mystical significations.


I. That is mystical which exceeds natural capacity: But the
significations of the Ring are such as all men by the light of nature, may
obuiously understand; as namely, that the gold does signify the price and
purity; the roundnesse, the perpetuity; the poesy, the perspicuitie of love:
the putting thereof upon the fourth finger of the left hand, does represent
that it is hearty; because to that finger there comes an artery from the
heart. These significations cannot properly be termed mystical, The like is
to be said of the joining of hands. Besides do you imagine, that as many
mystical senses might not be framed of the holy kiss? and yet that was no
cause why it should be banished out of the Church.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of Churching: and Burial.
N. A Consequent of Matrimony (as you pretend) is the Churching and
Purification of Women: Against the which I thus reason; Purification is a thing
Jewish: And therefore to be abrogated.


I. If your Antecedent be allayed with a limitation, it will agree with the
consequent, like clay with iron. Public Prayer as it was Jewish, and
respected the Temple of Solomon does now utterly cease: Shall we thereupon
conclude, that all Public Prayer is to be prohibited* In like manner we say,
that Jewish Purification is indeed to be abrogated, so far forth as it is
Jewish: But that is impertinent to our Churching.


N. The end of Purification is abrogated (which was the For now Infants are
prasented in Baptism? So they were in Circumcision.
Presentation of the Child to Luke 2. 22.
God:) And therefore the thing it self is also disanulled.


I. That was not the only end thereof: For in case the Child died; yet the
Mother was to be purified: And therefore that place in Luke does admit a double
reading; either the purification of her (...).
or of (...).
them (that is, of the Mother, and the Child:) There was an other end more
peculiar to the Mother.


N. That is, sacrificing, as appears Leuit. 12. 6.
by.


I. But what duty by that sacrifice was intimated?


N. Two principal duties were insinuated: First, the acknowledgement of her
sin: For which cause, besides the great Purification (which was performed in
her own separation seven days if it were a Male; and in the Circumcision of
the Child, upon the eight day: but in case it were a female in separation for
fourteen days) she had also the less purification: which endured thirty
three days if it were a son, and sixty six if a daughter: whereby was
signified, First, that the the sin of Euah was A double Sin: a double
purification and repentance.
double to that of Adam: For he sinned alone; she deceived him also: Secondly,
that she derived sin from her self to her children: For this cause also
she offered a sin offering: Secondly, as for the whole burnt Offering it was
Eucharisticall, namely, a thanksgiving for her safe deliverance.


I. It is manifest then, though sacrifice be abolisht; yet confession of
sins, and thankesgiuings for benefits do remain.


N. That these things remain we deny not: But why should they be public? By
the same reason every man that has escaped shipwreck, war, or fire should
present his public thanks in the Church.


I. If it were so, were the pot broken, or the waterspilt? Did not the Prophet
so in the Ps. 116. 13, 14
Psalm? In public benefits we solemnize public thankesgiuings: Now, the
benefit of deliverance from the pains of childbirth is, in a manner,
public: Forasmuch as these dolours were inflicted upon the whole Genesis 3. 16.
female sex?


N. The Iudaisme of your purification appears: First, in that you bring in the
veil, which is a ragge of Superstition.


I. What think you of Rebeccaes veil, which she put on in the presence of
Genesis 14. 65.
Isaac?


N. It was a model of her modesty: but what is that to the veil in the
Church?


I. Not only that modesty, but even that veil is required by Saint Paul in
the 1 Cor. 11. 10.
Congregation.


N. It is imposed upon all women; not upon them alone which come to be
Churched.


I. Can you endure Saint Paul making it a perpetual ordinance; and yet not
tolerate it in us, which do not so much command it to be used, as show what
is decent? Certainly if it be at all times comely, then especially at that
time, when women being guilty of their own infirmities, should show the
greatest symbols of shamefastness in Public Assemblies; From which for a
time (by necessity of corrupted nature) they have been separated.


N. The second argument of your Iudaisme is the offering imposed upon Women.


I. Do you dislike the thing or the name?


N. We do not so much insist upon the thing (as being pretended to be a
duty, or due to the Minister) but the term Offering, is Jewish.


I. Tithes were Offerings Numb. 18. 24.
to God: But Tithes were duties due to the Numb. 18. 31.
Priests (as being the recompense for their service:) Therefore the duties of
the Priest, are indeed, and may be called Offerings.


N. In this reason I observe two things: First, that you make things due to the
Minister to be Wages or Stipends; whereas some of your fellows think
Stipends as bad as Alms.


I. Stipends from the wavering multitude without Charter or Patent, differ not
in nature from Alms: But Honorable Stipends, set down by the Laws of God
and the Prince, we disallow not. For as the stipend of a Soldier is given by
the Prince, though it be deducted from the tribute imposed upon the People: So
the tithes of the Priests are God's Stipends, though first consecrated to God
by the people his tributaries.


N. If a man hire workmen to make a bridge for the benefit of the Country;
shall we not say that he gives a great Alms?


I. No doubt he does to the Country, but not to the laborers; unless they
take their hire, and work not: And yet (even then) are they not almesmen but
thieves; and are compellable both to make restitution, and to suffer
punishment. In like manner, he that erecteth a Church; and gives maintenance
to a Priest does indeed a singular alms to the people, but none to the Priest
unless he be unfaithful and yet (even then) he is not an almesman but a
robber; and stands answerable to his Superiors under God.


N. If all the people then give tithes, do they give alms to themselves?


I. They give their homage to God; and to the Minister they perform an action
of Justice, not of liberality: If any alms be, it is to themselves: For
example; If the maker of the Bridge (of which we spoke) do thereby reap to
his own person some maine benefit (as the preservation of his life, and the
like) may not he be said in a sort to have given himself an alms?


N. The second thing, remarkable in your reason is, that you seem to maintain
Jewish Tithes.


I. Tithes we defend, but not as Jewish. For whereas among ye Jews there were
five kinds of Tithes; First, Prediall (or great Tithes) due to the Priests and
Leuit. ^7. 30. Numb. 18. 24.
Leuits: Secondly, Personal (called the offerings of the Deuteronomy. 12 6.
hands) due to the same likewise: Thirdly, the Tithe of Tithes due to the High
Numb. 18. 26.
Priest: Fourthly, the Anniuersarie Deuteronomy. 14. 22.
Tithes, which were spent in the Voyage to and from the Tabernacle; in which
the Leuite had also a part: Fifthly, the Deuteronomy. 14. 28.
Three years Tithes, whereof part likewise came to the Leuite: we hold that
prediall and personal tithes, are due to Ministers: The tithe of tithes partly
to the Prince, partly to the Bishops: The yearly, and three year tithes,
partly to the reparations of Churches, Schools, and Colleges: (yea, and if
need were, for their erection:) partly for the maintenance of the Ministers
themselves (where their ordinary tithes are not found competent) and of the
poor.


N. To let pass your fancies; prove in general, tithes to be due to the
Ministers of the Gospel; and not to the Priests of Aaron's order only.


I. Tithes were due to Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 4.
Melchisedech, who was no Priest according to the order of Aaron: and therefore
not due to the Leuiticall Priests only.


N. Abraham indeed paid tithes; yet not of all his goods; but of all the
spoils, as the Author to the Hebrews does (...).
expound it.


I. Tithes must be paid of a man's own: But the spoils were not Abraham's (as
appears by his oath in Genesis 14. 22, 23.
the Story) Tithes therefore were not paid of the spoils. As for the Erecke
word you allege, it may be translated of the best or chief things. Again,
if we retain the word spoils; it will be proved thereby that personal
tithes of the gettings of men's hands are due, considering that spoils,
obtained in a lawful war, are of that nature. My second argument for tithes
is this: That which God gives to the Priest, being received from the people,
seems to be natural and eternal; forasmuch as no man may revoke it: But
such are Leuit. 27. 30. Numb. 18. 24.
tithes: They are therefore irreuocable.


N. They are so from the Jewish Priests: what is that to our Ministers?


I. That will appear, by this my third argument: The Laborers wages are due
to the 1. Tim. 5. 18.
Ministers of the Gospel: But such are Numb. 18. 31.
tithes: They are therefore due to our Evangelical Ministers.


N. Tithes were due for the service at the Altar, which now cease.


I. Does not the Apostle say, that the same service in substance 1. Cor. 9 13.
Heb. 13. 10.
remains? Do not our Ministers as well teach the People, and pray for them,
as the Priests of the Law? My fourth reason is thus framed: The Prophets use to
exhort men to Moral, not to Ceremonial duties: But Malachie does exhort men
to pay Mal. 3. 10.
tithes: They be therefore Moral.


N. I would have some argument drawn from the new Testament.


I. You have heard in part before: But now I directly proceed further to my
fifth argument: Tithes are counted matters of the Law (and such as may not be
left undone) by Mat. 23. 23.
Christ himself: And therefore they are to be paid.


N. They are counted as small matters.


I. Yea, but he that breaks the least Commandment, and teaches men so to do
(as many seditious men, which teach the People to give the Hundredth, for the
Tithe) shall be the least in the Kingdom of Math. 5. 19.
heaven.


N. Yea, but this place proves only that they should be paid to the Priests
of the Law.


I. The contrary appears by my sixth reason: Things consecrated and given to
the Ministers of the Gospel, may not be revoked; (as appears by the Story
of Acts 5. 3.
Ananias:) But Tithes have been given to the Church by our Ancestors even
before the times of Popery. And therefore may not be recalled.


N. Your Mayor is not firm: For Ezekias plucked off the Plates (which himself
had consecrated) from the Temple 2. Kings 18. 16
doors.


I. Ezekias did therein most grievously sin: and thereupon it may be thought
that God turned the heart of Zenacherib to break his Covenant with the King,
and to bring upon him the dreadful war, which without God's immediate aid,
had been irresistible. Now if if judgment begin at Gods house, where shall
the sinners 1. Pet. 4. 17.
appear?


N. But put the case, our Forefathers had never dedicated tithes to the Church;
how had they been then due to the same?


I. My seventh Argument will declare it: He that is catechized, Let him make
him that catechizeth him, partaker of all his Gal. 6. 6.
goods This cannot be done without Tithes, as may appear by the Stories of
Abraham and Genesis 14. 20. and 28. 22.
Jacob.


N. It may be done by Competencie, without Tithes.


I. As God set the seventh Day for the Sabbath; So he ordained the tenth for
Maintenance, We dare not judge his proportions less wise then those which are
forged by the brains of men. My eight and last reason is drawn from analogy
and proportion: That which was given to the Seruitours of the Law, ought much
more to be granted to the Ministers of the Luke 7. 28. 1. Cor. 9 13. 2. Cor. 3
9.
Gospel: But the Legal Priests had more then Tithes: (For we know they had
the first fruits; the redemption of the first borne; 48. Cities with land about
them; sundry parts of the Sacrifices, etc. The Ministers of the Gospel
therefore ought to have tithes at the least.


N. Tithes were Ceremonial; and therefore to be abolished.


I. In regard of the particular assignation to the Tabernacle they were indeed
rituall: but as they were stipends of Gods public service; so they both were,
and are naturally Moral.


N. The Tithes might be Leuit. 27. 31.
redeemed; and therefore not necessary.


I. They could not be redeemed, unless the fifth part were added: whereby their
necessity does much more appear: as also for that they could not be Leuit.
27. 33.
changed without a Curse.


N. They that were in Cities paid no tithes: And therefore they are not
necessary.


I. First, this argument might prove Tithes under the Law of Moses, to have
been needless, which had been an empty proof: Secondly, Personal tithes
were there also due.
Prediall Tithes were due even in As is plain in the Cities of Niniue,
Babylon, Jerusalem, and others.
Cities; considering that in Cities also Cattle may be found: Thirdly, instead
of those tithes, they had sundry other recompenses: which were before named in
my eight Argument: Fourthly, the fruit of the ground may be expounded of the
rates of houses: which being tithed will exempt all scruple: Fifthly, some
imagine that Country tithes were divided among the Levites dwelling
wheresoever: but this is uncertain.


N. The Apostles were maintained by 1. Phil 4. 15.
alms, and not by tithes: And therefore tithes are not needful.


I. That these contributions of the People were alms you cannot prove:
forasmuch as they were due, as Saint 1. Cor. 9. 6, 7. etc. Gal. 6. 6. and 10.
Paul declares at large. By which places also we have showed tithes even then
also to have been due. Again, tell me: If a man had reasoned thus in the time
of Malachie: Tithes were not paid when the Israelites wandered in the
Wilderness: Now therefore they are not due to the Priests in Canaan: what
would you have answered?


N. We would have said to reason from the fact to the right, is not
reasonable: Again it was not seasonable to argue from the seed time to the
harvest: from the night of want, to the Day of Plenty: from the Barren Desert
to the fruitful Palestina.


I. So we answer: that whilst the winter of persecution was upon the Church,
Tithes could not be exacted: but now it is preposterous to urge the same order
in the summer of our abundance. Tithes therefore (as you perceive) are
needful: and yet the same are offerings to God: So that the term, Offering,
need not displease you in our Churching of women.


N. From the Rites belonging to the living, we come to the Burial of the Dead:
wherein we dislike the Person, Manner, and Place. Touching the first, we
marvel that you make Burial a Ministerial Duty, seeing the Law prohibiteth
the Priests to defile themselves by the Leuit. 21. 1.
Dead.


I. You were lately displeased, because we used Purification, being Jewish: And
now you would have us use the Jewish manner of Burial: We like not this: that
with the same breath you blow both hot and Reclusis illud; hoc clausis Lahijs.
cold: Again, tell (I pray you) what mean you by that defiled with the Dead.


N. It seems that Leuit. 21. 3, 4.
lamentation is thereby meant.


I. Where is then your Argument? The Priest may not lament for the Dead: He may
not therefore be present at Burials, to comfort them that lament, with his
devout exhortations and prayers.


N. We read not that the Priests did bury any man: and therefore to make this
their office, is against Scripture.


I. It is not against, but besides Scripture were it as you pretend. But the
truth is: we do not appoint the Priest to bury (that act being in a manner
merely civil) but only to assist the Funeral, for the comfort and
instruction of the living.


N. The manner of your Burials does also displease us: Forasmuch as you use
sundry Prayers therein, which seem to favor the Popish Purgatory.


I. The Dumb Shows of Other Churches, though we condemn not: yet we cannot
suppose that they contain so much reverence and devotion as our custom does.
As for the Purgatory you mention, it is a forgerie of your own Jealousy,
considering we pray for nothing in the behalf of the Dead, save only that we
seem to be in good hope of their joyful resurrection, of which matter we
treated in Baptism.


N. Yea, but Prayers, being rehearsed at the Grave, have some smell of
Superstition.


I. Were you as quicke-sented as the Vultures of Romulus, yet could no such
savor be here felt, forasmuch as our Prayers being in the mother tongue, are
discerned by the meanest auditor to contain nothing but matter of consolation
and hope to the living.


N. Funeral Sermons are of the same branne: and therefore justly abrogated in
the Reformed Churches.


N. If those Sermons contain flattery, or error, we may not defend them:
But if they be replenished with hopeful and consolatorie doctrines, we doubt
not to think them to be of that nature of which was the famous lamentation of
David made for his King 2. Sam. 1. 17.
and his Friend; Or of which were those worthy Orations The Funeral Orations
of Basil and Gregory.
Funeral, which deserve to be written in Plates of gold, celebrated in all
antiquity. And certainly if a Word in Place Prou. 25 11.
and Prou 15. 23.
Time be so precious; If we be commanded to preach in 2. Tim 4. 2.
Season: Can any Sermon be more seasonable, then when God's judgments concur
with his word; when the sense of mortality does kindle devotion; and grief
quickneth Charity. Think you that when the men of Iabesh fasted 1. Sam. 31. 13
seven days at the burial of Saul and his sons: and when Mary wept at the
Tomb of her John 11. 31.
brother, a Sermon would have been unseasonable? Suppose you that in all those
seven days (before mentioned) prayers were not mingled with their fasting? As
for the Reformed Churches, we censure them not; neither may they condemn us;
Forasmuch as the Strangers amongst us, being men of their own Country and
Discipline, do still retain Funeral Sermons.


N. We are most offended with your Place of Burial, which is the Church or
Churchyard: wherein you seem to place great holiness.


I. We do in some Cities allow men to be buried in a field set apart for that
purpose.


N. But even that field is reputed holy ground.


I. And that most justly: For did not Abraham refuse to be buried among the
Genesis 23. 6. and 9.
Hittites? Did he not there buy a field for burial, whereupon the Place was
called Hebron? Did not Jacob desire to be buried with Genesis 49. 30.
Abraham? Ruth with Ruth 1. 17.
Naomi? The old man with the 1. King. 13. 31
man of Judah? Did not the Pharisees purchase a field for Math. 27. 7.
strangers, called Acheldama, a field of Acts 1. 19.
Blood? Is it not probable, that the brethren of Joseph desired to be buried
with him in Acts 7. 16.
Shichem? Did not the men in the Primitive Church, desire to be buried near
the Martyrs? by whose Tombs afterward in the Halcionian days of Peace,
Oratories and Churches were built for the honor of Martyrdom, not for the
worship of Martyrs? Are not the bodies of Saints departed still members of
Christ? being united to their souls, not only by the relative hope of the
resurrection; but even by the union of Christ's Spirit? And, by what more
lively sign can we testify, or signify this our belief, then by interring
them in or near some Church, where they may be reserved better then in the
Where the Kings of Egypt were buried.
Pyramides of Egypt, till the second coming of CHRIST.


Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Of the New Liturgy.
CHAP. I.
Of the Book of TOBIT.
FRom the Old we pass to your New Liturgy: wherein you have both added the
Apocryphal Books to the the Canon: And have in sundry sorts depraved the
Canonical Text it self.

I. The Apocryphal The Book of the Articles of Religion. Article 6.
Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of life and
instruction of manners: But yet does it not apply them to establish any
Doctrine.


N. Against the reading of these Books I thus argue. Whatsoever is read in the
Church ought to be Canonical Scripture: But these Books are Apocryphal, not
of the Canon: We may not therefore be urged to read them in the Church.


I. First, your conclusion strayeth from your reason like a bird from her nest.
It should have been thus framed: They may not therefore be read in the Church.
You pretend as if you were urged and enforced to read them: the ^ut^ is if you
did not delight in contention, as the Viper that was pleased with the blood of
her own tongue, which she grated against the file) you might easily perceive
that the Book leaves it to your discretion, whether you will read a
Canonical, or an Apocryphal Chapter.


N. If we may not read them; then much less be urged to the reading of them.
So that my Conclusion was a Secondarie, or Corollarie, naturally following out
of the proper conclusion of mine argument.


I. In the mean time you see, that your often complaints (of urging and hard
usage, being both causeless and respectlesse) do deserve to exasperate the
State against you: For many things, ^o doubt, had been either altered or
mitigated, had you not against the rule of Pythagoras) dug in the fire with
a sword: But now to reuisite your argument: First, I might deny your Mayor,
and render four reasons for it: First, the Epistle written from Coll. 4 16.
Laodicea, was read in the Church; and yet it was out of the Canon (unless you
think it was some Epistle of Saint Paul, which is lost) some thing therefore
not Canonical may be read in the Church.


N. I think no Canonical Epistle could be lost: For it were to derogate too
much from Gods providence, and the faithfulness of the Church, which should
be the Keepresse of the Volumes of the Covenant; I rather suppose that it was
some Epistle written from the Laodiceans to Paul; to the demands whereof this
Epistle to the Colossians did answer: And therefore that it might more plainly
be understood, it was meet that the other of the Laodiceans should be read in
the Church also: For such a like thing is probably collected to have been done
by the 1. Cor. 7 1.
Corinthians.


I. To sift the ground of your assertion were now unseasonable: But you have
given in a fair evidence against your own Mayor, as shall hereafter appear.
My second reason is this. Nine Chapters of the Book of Job: (whereof four were
uttered by Job 4. and 5. and 15. and 22.
Eliphaz: three by Chap. 8. and 18. and 25.
Bildad: two by Chap. 11. and 20.
Zophar) are read in the Church: But these Chapters are not of the Canon
(seeing no doctrine can be established by them forasmuch as Go himself
disallowed the Job 42* 7.
saying of Jobs three friends:) we may therefore in the Church read some
thing which is not of the Canon.


N. The general positions of Jobs friends are true: howsoever they erred in
the application of them to Job himself, as if he had been an hypocrite.


I. That is but a shift: for the maine maxim of all the Dispute, is taken from
Job's wives Job 2. 9.
speech: The sum whereof may thus be demonstrated: He that falls into great
miseries is an hypocrite: But Job is so fallen: He is therefore an hypocrite. So
then let him not continue in defending his uprightness but bless Ios. 7. 19.
God in the acknowledgement of his hypocrisy and so let him die with
repentance and patience. By this it is plain: that the Mayor Proposition was
false, and not the Assumption only as you pretend.


N. I hope you will not exclude these nine Chapters out of the Canon,
considering they contain an historical, though not a positive truth: For it
is true, that these men so spoke, though they erred in their speech.


I. You have made a fair distinction, whereby you will cut off your own
arguments made against the Apocryphal Books, as shall be showed in due
place. My third argument is this: Sundry Books of Traditions were read in the
Church of the Jews; and yet were never of the Canon; Or else, how could the
names of 2. Tim. 3. 8.
I^^nes and Iambres the Heb. 12. 21.
four of Moses: the time of the famine in the days of James 5. 17.
Elias the combat of Michael with the Jude 9.
Devil and the prophecy of Jude 14, 15.
Enoch have bin rehearsed, as things vulgarly known: My fourth and last reason
is this: Set Prayer may be read in the Church (and yet is no part of the
Canon) as was proved in the first Lib. 1. Chap. 2.
conference. Besides this, your Mayor admits of a distinction, which is this:
Whatsoever is read in the Church, must either be the Canon of faith, or
manners. To this latter kind we may refer the Apocryphal Books.


N. This is a rotten device: They cannot be the Canon of manners: seeing that
in the Doctrine of manners they may err.


I. This answer shall be sifted in your Minor. But now we tell you further,
that things may be read in the Church for the explanation of the Canonical
Scriptures. For (as you remember you said the Epistle of the Lacdiceans was
read for the explanation of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Colossians.


N. But the Books Apocryphal do rather obscure, then explain the Canon.


I. The Book of Wisdom does open the Story of Exodus concerning the ten See
Wisdom 16. and 17.
plagues of Egypt: Ecclesiasticus is a Commentary to the Proverbs: The Sixth of
Baruch is a most famous epitome of sundry things in Moses, the Psalms, and
the Prophets, against Idolatry: The first Book of Maccabees is a key to the
mysteries Especially to the 8. and 11. Chapters thereof.
of Daniel.


N. Because you cavil so much at my Mayor, I will change both it, and my whole
reason: Whatsoever is read in the Church, ought either to be Canonical
Scripture; or agreeable thereunto: But the Books between Malachie and Matthew
are neither: And therefore may not be read.


I. As the change of your Mayor is to the better: so is that of your Minor to
the worse; whereof we desire the first part to be explained; the latter to be
confirmed.


N. That these Books are not Canonical, it is plain, because they are
Apocryphal.


I. Some Serpent lurketh under this grass: why call you them Apocryphal?


N. First, because they contain sundry errors.


I. How many errors think you there be in the Book of the Petition to the
Parliament, defended by T. C?


N. We suppose no error can be found therein.


I. A Book Apocryphal has errors: But this Book has none, and therefore
is not Apocryphal: and is by consequent, Canonical.


N. It may be Ecclesiastical; and so neither Canonical, nor Apocryphal.


I. You see then that your reason is infirm. These Books are not Canonical
because Apocryphal: and therefore Apocryphal Non causa pro causa.
because they contain errors.


N. Secondly, then, they are termed Apocryphal, because they are capable of
errors, as being the writings of men.


I. This is to make them Apocryphal in possibility, not in act. Now every
possibility is reducible to some act. Tell then, what is the actual cause,
why they are Apocryphal.


N. Can a privation have an actual cause?


I. The cause may be actual; though rather deficient then efficient.


N. Thirdly, then; They are deemed Apocryphal, because their Author is not
known.


I. No more is the Author of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, no nor of
the Epistle to the Hebrews (in your opinion.)


N. Their Author is known to be Gods Spirit, though we doubt of the Penman.


I. But how is that known?


N. The Prophetical Church received the Books as from God: and has delivered
them to us by Succession: Fourthly, then, these Books are Apocryphal, because
the Jewish Church never received them: For neither were they written in any
tongue which the Jews understood; neither do the Jews at this day admit of
them, but as of Interludes.


I. You have at the last stumbled upon the true cause; but withal have
overwhelmed it with sundry errors: The first is this: You pretend them to be
refused by the Jews: because they were written in a language not understood by
them: What? Did not Hierome out of Chaldie translate Tobit? Did not the Jews
in their Dispersion understand the Greek tongue, (namely in the Greekish
Septuagint?) Why was the Epistle to the Hebrews written in Greek, if they
were ignorant of the language? The like is to be said of the Epistles of Saint
James and Saint Peter. Now tell me; Do not you acknowledge our Apocryphal
Books to have been written in Greek? and yet was not Sirach's Son a Jew?
Did not Philo, and Josephus (being Jews) write in Greek? The second is rather
a scoff then an error: Not unlike that of some men, partly Arrians, and
partly Barrowists, which call the Athanasian Creed, the Creed of Sathanasius.
This is like that which is more then yea and nay; for it comes of evil. Your
third error is, that you acknowledge the traditionarie testimony of the
Church for the Books of Scripture: and yet explode all tradition, not only as
needless, but even as damnable. Your fourth error is that you ascribe more to
the Jewish Synagogue, then to the Christian Church; For you heard before out of
Hierome that the Christians received these Books.


N. They received them but as Apocryphal.


I. And yet they read them in the Church.


N. They were men and might err: For we are assured that these Books are not
agreeable to the Canon, as containing and maintaining manifold errors: and
therefore may be the Canon, neither of Faith, nor of Manners.


I. We deny that you can find any error in these Books concerning Manners:
Now touching Faith, fundamental errors we acknowledge none in them. If any
petty fault or slip be found our subscription is safe. But now bring forth the
errors in their numbers and armies.


N. The Apocryphal Books, are either such as are reputed so by the Papists
themselves: (namely, the third and fourth of Esdras: and the prayer of
Manasses: besides some other Books, not expressed in our Common Bibles;) or
such as are so accounted of by the Protestants only, whereof some be not read,
some be: Of the first kind are certain portions of Hester: also Susanna,
Bell, and the Dragon: and the two Books of the Maccabees. And here I marvel
much, that the first Book of Maccabees is not read in your Church: considering
you say, it is a key to the Mysteries of Daniel.


I. Even for the same cause, that we read not other Books of the Chronicles
and Other Volumes of holy Scripture.


N. This cause shall hereafter be tried. Now the Books that you read are
Historical, or Dogmaticall: The Historical be either whole Books, or a
fragment: Of the first sort are Tobit and Judith: The Book of Tobit contains
errors of things to be believed, or to be done: The first sort concerns
either Angels, or the Means of our preservation: Angels, be good or evil: In
the good we may consider the name, and nature: concerning the first: The Book
sets down the name of an Angel, calling him Tobit. 3. 17.
Raphael: whereas Angels names ought not to be enquired Genesis 32 29.
after, as being Judge. 3. 18.
secret.


I. The Books of Dan. 19* 21. and ^0. 21.
Daniel, of Luke 1. 19.
Luke, of Iud. 9.
Jude, and of Saint Apoc. 12. 7.
John, do set down the names of Angels, after which we should not enquire,
because they be secret; are they therefore Apocryphal?


N. These names are not secret to God's Spirit, which has revealed them to us
in these Books.


I. And why may not God's Spirit reveal the name of Raphael in this Book?


N. This name Raphael is not extant in any other Book of Scripture: and
therefore it seems to be a term Apocryphal.


I. If a Jew should thus reason: I find the names Gabriel and Michael,
specified no where but in Daniel: it seems therefore the Book should be
Apocryphal* what answer would you returue, if you were a Jew, and believed
neither S. Luke, S. Jude nor Saint John?


N. I would answer, It is sufficient that these names are recorded in one Book
of Scripture


I. So it is sufficient, though Raphael be named no where but in Tobit;
unless you beg the question: Besides the names of Angels are of two sorts:
Some expressing their nature, some their office: Of this latter kind is the
name of Isa 6. 2.
Seraphim, which signifies burning; because one of them touched the Prophets
lips with a burning coal. To this head we may refer Raphael, which
signifies one that heals from God, because he healed Sara, and Tobit:
Lastly, the place in Judges, by you alleged, is impertinent: The Angel which
appeared might be Christ, who said his name was Secret, or Wonderful. The
like Isaiah says of Isa. 9. 6.
Christ: (he shall call his name the Wonderful, and so forth.) So that the
Angel may seem rather to have revealed his name to Manoah, then to have God
showed the burning of Sodom to Abraham, and yet not to Lot: The time of death
to Ezekiah: not to us.
concealed it from him.


N. From the name of Angels, we come to their nature: wherein we will try
their number, and their office: Touching the first; this Book determines that
their are seven Tobit 12. 15.
Angels, etc. which is partly Magical, partly Popish: For first the Magitians
(especially the Jews) numbered seven Angels according to the seven days of the
week: For Sunday Raphael, then Gabriel, Sammael, Michael, Izidkiel, Hanael,
See Iunius upon this place.
Rephariel.


I. The Book of Tobit does not design these Angels by days; much less
reckons their names: though two of them (namely Gabriel, and Michael) are
found elsewhere in Scripture: By what tradition the Jews understood the rest,
we know not: But, first we are sure the Angel tells Daniel that he was one of
the chief Dan 10. 13.
Angels: Secondly, this number of seven may probably be thus collected. The
seven eyes in Zach. 3. 9.
Zachary, are by Saint. John expounded to be the seven spirits which are sent
into all the Apoc. 5 6.
world: And what should be meant by these Spirits but Angels? Again, Saint
John twice mentions seven Apoc. 8. 6. and 16. 1.
Angels, it is not sufficient for you to exclaim that this is Magical: We
rather credit the Scriptures affirming, then your negative supposals.


N. The seven spirits are expounded the Holy Ghost.


I. The exposition is but your own.


N. What? Do you suppose that John prays for grace, and peace from Angels?


I. Not as from causes, but as from instruments: Again, though they be
interpreted of the Holy Ghost in the first Chapter: yet in the Vision of the
fifth Chapter, that exposition will be violent: For there it is said that the
Lamb had seven horns, and seven eyes; which are the seven Spirits, sent out
into all the World. Now it will be hard to make the Holy Ghost to be the
horns, and eyes of Christ the Lamb: Again, how will you make the Holy Ghost
to be sent out into all the World? What? are the wicked also partakers of him?
But if you apply these phrases unto Angels, they would most expedite.


N. It may be John by seven Angels understands an uncertain number for a
certain: as the seven spirits in the first Chapter are taken for the Holy
Ghost, pouring out seven (that is infinite) spiritual gifts upon the Church.


I. When the seven plagues are denounced by the seven trumpets, and poured out
by the seven Vials of the seven Angels, will you make these plagues, trumpets,
and vials to be of this uncertain and indefinite number? will you not hereby
inwrap all the Apocalypse in uncertainty? And were all this granted, might not
we say that the Angel in Tobit also, does by seven understand an uncertain
number?


N. But the number of seven is Magical: as apeares by the Story of Numb. 23.
1.
Balaam.


I. You may as well say that the seven horns of the Lamb were Magical by this
reason: Indeed to put confidence in the number of seven (as Balaam did) is
Magical: But to use that number for the signification of perfection, is not
only Prophetical, but even Psalm. 119. 164 Prou 9. 1. and 24. 16. and 26. 1^
usual.


N. Howsoever it be not Magical, yet is this number Popish: For do not we
blame the Papists for framing nine Orders of Angels, out of Dionysius?


I. Indeed it was too much curiosity to forge nine orders of nine such words,
as either concur in signification (namely, Thrones, Principalities,
Dominations, Powers, Virtues) Or be taken from a particular message (as the
name of Seraphim) or from some special representation (as the term Cherubim)
because they were pourtrayed like Children.) Or be not found in Scriptures (as
the word Archangels) or agree to them all (as the title of Angels: For even
they that stand before God are sent out as Math. 18. 10. Luke 1. 19. Heb. 1. 14.
messengers.) But what is this to the number of seven Angels, which is found in
Scripture?


N. From the number of Angels, I proceed to their office, or action: which is
ordinary, or extraordinary. Of the first kind is the bringing of the Prayers
of the Saints to memory; or the presentation of them to God; which the Tobit.
12. 12. and 15.
Angel in Tobit does arrogate unto himself; being the peculiar office of
Christ, as appears in the Apoc. 8. 3.
vision of John.


I. How did Elias call the widows sins to remembrance before 1. Kings 17. 18
God.


N. The widow thought he did it by his prayers.


I. And how does the Devil accuse the Brethren, day, and Apoc. 12. 10.
night?


N. He does urge God with the memory of our sins.


I. Why is Satan said to stand at the right hand of the wicked when they Psalm.
109. 6.
pray; yea and sometimes of the Zach. 3. 1.
godly?


N. He does it to accuse the one: and to resist the other in his prayers.


I. Why did the Angel stand at the right hand of Zachary, when he told him
that his prayer was Luke 1. 11, 12
remembered? The like phrase to which is found in the Angels speech to 1. Acts
10. 4.
Cornelius?


N. I know not, except it were to declare that he helped the one, or the other
in his prayer.


I. Why make you scruple of that? Think you the Angel was not as ready to
help Zachary, as Satan was to hinder Joshua?


N. It may be the Angel did help: But the manner of the help is unknown.


I. If the Angel received his prayer; why might he not present it to God?


N. It is Popish to say the Angel received his supplication.


I. Did not the Angel receive Lots Genesis 19. 21.
Prayer?


N. That Angel was Christ; For it is said in the Story, that Jehovah from
Jehovah rained down Genesis 19. 24.
fire, etc.


I. Jehovah did it, but by his Angels, whom he sent to destroy the Gen 19. 13.
place.


N. But will you have God put in mind by Angels, as Princes are by their
Remembrancers?


I. God has no such need as Princes have; and yet he accepts of the prayers
of Men and Angels, who do in a sort call things to his memory, as you head
before of Eliah.


N. Do you think then (with Papists) that Angels pray for Men?


I. That the Saints in Heaven do in general pray for us, is denied of none:
But why the Angels (who know our wants in many particulars; and abound with
Charity, as much as the Saints) should not in special pray for us, either
render you a reason, or call it not Popish.


N. This yet will help the Popish opinion touching the invocation of Angels.


I. A Christian that is in Tartaria prays for his friend at Mosco: May the
Muscouite therefore desire his absent friend to pray for him?


N. He may by a messenger, or letter; but not else.


I. So the Angels pray for us; yet may not we request them so to do, unless
they appear to us (which is rare) or we could dispatch some messenger to them,
which is impossible.


I. But Christ only presents the prayers of Saints; as you heard by John's
Vision.


I. Such a mystical place will hardly be argumentatiue: But were it granted
that this Angel was Christ; we may thus answer: that Christ alone does
present the prayers of all the Saints in his own real intercession: Does this
hinder: that an Angel may not present some men's particular Prayers; and in his
own Prayer recommend them to God, through Christ's merits? It is true, Angels
pray for us, and assist us: But because we are ignorant when they do it, it
were too much familiarity to entreat their prayer; of whose presence we are
uncertain.


N. Then you make Angels, Mediators of intercession; which is only Christ's
royalty.


I. No more then we make Abraham because he prayed for Genesis 19. 29.
Lot. Yea Beza will tell you, that the Mediator mentioned by Saint Gal 3. 19.
Paul was Moses.


N. Though Master Calvin be of an other opinion: (namely that it was Christ:
yet with reverence I rather assent to Master Beza) namely, that Moses was in a
sort a Mediator of intercession; yet subordinate under Christ.


I. The same we affirm of Angels: yet with this caution; that they must be
present to us, as Moses was to the Israelites, before we may entreat their
Prayers.


N. From the ordinary action of Angels, we descend to the extraordinary;
namely, eating and speaking; the first, exceeding the order of Nature: the
second of Morality. Touching the former; the Angel in Tobit 12. 19.
Tobit, says, I did neither eat nor drink, but you saw it in a Vision;
whereas the Angels which were guests to Abraham and Lot, did eat Genesis 18. 8.
and 19. 3.
really.


I. That word really, is by you added to the text: But tell me did not you
term him an Angel that appeared to Manoah? Did not he refuse to eat? Is not
this reason thereof rendered there, because he was an Angel? as if it had
been said, Manoah knew not that he was an Angel; for then he would not have
invited him to meat: So that, if we take things in the most vulgar meaning,
Angels may sometimes eat; sometimes refuse to eat* sometimes eat in a
vision: But to speak properly, Angels cannot eat?


N. Why? Do they not assume true bodies of men? Is it not thought the Devils
property to assume aerie bodies?


I. Although they that so say, cannot prove what they say yet to grant your
saying, what will you gain? That body that eats, must be united, and not
only assumed; But the bodies of Angels are assumed, not united (for they have
no vegatiue nor sensitive soul:) They therefore cannot eat.


N. Do the Good Angels then deceive men?


I. They cause men to believe, that they are men, when indeed they are Heb. 13.
2.
not: this is not deceit, but concealing of the truth for a season.


N. From Angels eating, I come to their speaking: concerning which we are much
displeased that the Angel in Tobit 5. 12.
Tobit calls himself Azaria, the son of Hanania So Iunius trrnslateth it.
the Great: and makes himself to be of the Tribe of Tobit 7 3.
Nepthali.


I. Concerning the first: some men well expert in Hebrew, do thus answer:
that Azariah signifies a helper from God; and Hananiah, the merciful of God:
The former name may agree to an Angel; the latter to Christ: For Angels are
called the Job 1. 6.
sons of God: and we the brethren Heb. 2. 17.
of Christ: But we do rather embrace an other less subtle, but more safe
answer, namely, that the Angel spoke according to his appearance only.


N. This is equivocal forgerie.


I. What if the Author of the Story, had called the Angel Azariah?


N. He had belied the Angel; for himself avouched his name to be Raphael.


I. The Author of the first Book of Samuel, says: that Samuel spoke to 1.
Sam. 28. 15.
Saul, seeking his counsel by the Witch of Endor; Think you that he was
indeed Samuel, or rather Satan?


N. He is termed Samuel, because he appeared in his habit; as also because
the Witch (or at least King Saul) did repute him so to be.


I. So this Angel was taken for Azariah: and therefore for a time bare his
name. Concerning the latter place; First, we say that the Angel did not
affirm himself to be of that Tribe, but only Tobias: who spoke according to
that which he saw: Secondly, the Angel himself does secretly insinuate that
men ought not to inquire after his tribe and kindred: wherefore these speeches
were not lying (as you suppose) but either true (according to the present
appearance) or Mystical.


N. Next to Good Angels, we are to entreat of the Evil: And first of their
name then of their nature. Touching the former: the Tobit 3. 8.
Book of Tobit says: that the name of the evil spirit was Asmodeus: which
seems a name very uncouth.


I. What think you of the name of Beelzebub so often 2. Kings 1. 2. Math 10.
26. Mark 3. 22. Luke 11. 15.
used?


N. That the Deull may have a name we grant: But where also do you read of
this name Asmodeus?


I. It is an Hebrew name: signifying a Destroyer; as also does Abaddon; or
Apoc. 9. 11.
Apollyon.


N. That is the King of the Turks, or Papists (as some think) not the Devil.


I. The Pope (in your opinion) is Antichrist; and the Turk (as some judge:)
Now; who can be the King and God of Antichrist but Satan?


N. After the name we proceed to the nature: wherein we may consider either his
affection, or his limitation. For the first: this Tob 6. 14.
Author says, that the evil spirit loved Sara: which seems to favor their
error, which mistook the place in Genesis 6. 2.
Genesis; saying that Angels (which be the sons of God) fell in love with
the daughters of men (that is, women) according to the fable of Incubus and
Succubus; and that this was the proper cause of the deluge.


I. Herod said to his servants concerning Christ, that he was John the
Baptist, raised from the Math. 14. 2.
Dead: Did Saint Matthew favor the error of the Herodians or Pythagorians,
which fained souls to pass from body to body?


N. He brought in Herod speaking according to his own erroneous opinion: and
yet, being an Historian, not a Censor, did neither approve nor reprove him.


I So might this Author introduce Tobias speaking according to the popular
sentence: and yet himself be tainted in no sort with this error, Again, when
Tobias says, an evil spirit loves her: the word love, may signify to haunt;
to keep company with; to be accustomed unto: for so the nature of the Greek
word does bear: Or else, the spirit might love her, not in regard of
affection, but in respect of his charge: that is, he might love, and desire to
preserve and keep her, till Tobias came, that should be her true husband:
because he was nearest of her kindred: Or he might love, that is, less hate
Compare Genesis 29. 31.
Sara then the seven men: whose lives he took away; as we say the Lions
love only their Keepers, because they seem to spare them alone. Lastly, if
Tobias at that time were in an error, he afterward did retract it, telling
his Father that the Angel had healed his Tobit. 12. 3.
wife, that is, had freed her from the ungrateful society of Satan.


N. Hitherto of the Devils affection: now follows his limitation: wherein you
err, both in regard of the means, and manner. Touching the former; you make
the perfume of a fishes liver to drive away Satan, if you believe the fabulous
and Magical Tob. 6. 7. and 16.
Tobit: The like is to be said of the healing of Tobit's eyes with the gall of
a Tobit. 6. 8.
fish.


I. If the fight of the brazen Serpent might cure the Numb. 21. 9.
Israelttes: If the shout of the Hebrews and the noise of the trumpets cast
down Iericho's Joshua 6. 20.
walls: If Elisha could heal the bitter waters with 2. Kings 2. 21.
salt, and the deadly pot with 2. King 4. 41
meal: If Isaiah could remove the byle of Ezekiah with a lump of dry Isa.
38. 21.
figs: If our Savior Christ could heal the woman that had the bloody issue
with a touch of his Luke 8. 44.
garment and the blind man with spittle, John 9. 6, 7.
and water: If Peter's shadow could cure the Acts 5 15.
sick: If Paul's napkin could drive out Acts 19. 12. Compare 2. Kings 5. 10.
Devils: why might not this perfume at God's appointment expel Asmodeus?
Again, the Angel in Tobit 6. 18.
Tobit says, that Prayer was to be adjoined thereunto: not unlike the speech
of Christ: this kind goes not out but by fasting and Math. 17. 21.
Prayer: Both which were used by Tobias. Thirdly, Upon Tobit 6. 17.
Iunius himself says, that the Perfume of Sacrifice was adjoined to the
perfume of the fishes liver. The like answer will serve for the fishes gall,
whereby the blindness of Tobit was healed.


N. The second limitation of the Devil was his confining into the uttermost
parts of Tobit 8. 3.
Egypt, which seems to be merely fabulous.


I. The Devils desired that they might not be commanded to go out into the
deep, that is, into the Luke 8. 31.
Sea.


N. By the Deep is meant Hell: as in the Apoc. 20. 2, 3.
vision of John.


I. Think you the Devil was in Hell, a thousand years together; and never
came into the earth? Will you produce a Story, that the Devil was quiet for a
thousand years from all invasion, and operative temptation? Again, although
the word deep be so taken in the Apocalypse; yet can it admit no other
signification in the Gospel? When it is said in Genes. 1. 2.
Genesis that darkness was upon the deep, will you by deep, understand
Hell? or rather the Sea, or waters in general?


N. Yea, but in the New Testament, this word does only betoken Hell: and
indeed whereas, properly it signifies a bottomless place, it cannot be
attributed to the Sea, but by a figure; forasmuch as the Sea has every where a
bottom.


I. When Romans 10. 7
Saint Paul says, who shall descend into the deep, etc. will you interpret
this of Christ's going into Hell? If so you do, the men of your own H. ^.
Classis will condemn you Again, whereas you affirm Hell and not the Sea to
be bottomless in proper speech; do not you suppose Hell to be a Place? Make
you Place to be Superficies or Space?


N. I am of the refined opinion, that it is a Space.


I. Is not every space finite? If hell be properly bottomless; shall it not
be properly infinite; and consequently no place?


N. I grant that the Deep may be taken elsewhere for the Sea: but here it
cannot be so meant: for the Devils voluntarily did carry the heard of Swine,
and (by consequent themselves) into Mark. 5. 13.
the Sea.


I. The Devils might strike the Swine with dizzinesse or madness, and so force
them to rush into the Sea, and yet themselves not enter into the same.
Secondly, although this place be called a Sea by Saint Mark; yet Saint Luke 8.
33.
Luke terms it a Lake. Now the Devils requested that they might not be sent
into the Deep, that is, into the maine Sea: For they were loath to depart out
of the Country, as appears by Saint Mark. 5. 10.
Mark. Thirdly, they were not so much afraid to enter into the Sea, as to be
confined thither, because their ordinary occasions of temptation were found in
the Land. Tell me (I pray you) have not some Scaliger exercitation. 359.
Section. 13.
Peripatetians confined Angels to the Orbs of Heaven: and some of another
Patri^ius in noua Philosophia.
faction to all the Elements? May not we as justly suppose, that evil spirits
are for a season confined into some Places?


N. That passes my skill.


I. But it passed not your will to contradict.


N. I pass from Angels to the means of our preservation: which either
concern the body or the Soul: Of the first kind was the curing of Tobits
eyes with the gall of the fish.


I. This was answered before, when we spoke of the expelling of Asmodeus.


N. To the second sort appertain those immoderato praises which your Author
gives to Alms: saying, that it delivers from death, and purges from Tob.
4. 10. and 12. 9. and 14. 11.
all sin: whereby the doctrine of popish merit is established.


I. Is not alms by Tobit called righteousness? Does not Solomon say, that
Pro. 10. 2.
righteousness delivers from death?


N. That is not to be understood of the merit of alms delivering from eternal
death (this being the peculiar operation of Christ's passion) but it is a way,
wherein if we walk by faith in Christ, we shall be safe from death of Soul
and Body.


I. The same interpretation might you make of Tobits words, if malice did not
hinder your voice, as the silver squinancie did Demosthenes.


N. But how can alms purge sin?


I. How can alms redeem Dan. 4. 14.
sin?


N. Indeed the Chaldie Paraphrast has it redeem: But the Hebrew verity says
break of, not redeem.


I. But Calvin tells you, though we translate it redeem (according to the
Chaldie) yet Popish merit hereby cannot be confirmed.


N. It may be in some proper sense said, that alms redeem, that is,
recompense our iniquities against our neighbor: But our redemption from the
divine wrath, is only by the death of Christ.


I. In like manner may we say, that alms purges away sin. Furthermore
concerning this controversy of merit: I take you to be an incompetent
adversary, for so much as you understand not the state of the question, as shall
be demonstrated in another disputation.


N. Because you seem to put off this Combat: I will pass from the errors of
this Book, touching things to be believed, to those which concern things to
be done.


I. You might have spared all this labor: For we read neither this, nor any
like book for the establishing of the Doctrine of faith, but only for moral
instruction.


N. But this book is contrary to the Doctrine of faith, as has been showed
by proof.


I. Your shows have been golden, your proofs leaden, as has been showed by
their reproof.


N. The errors concerning duties, are two: For either they pertain to
Marriage, or to Burial. Concerning Marriage, this Tob. 7. 1^.
Author seems to make a Contract, the same in essence therewith: Whereupon it
may seem you have mis-translated the place in Math. 1. 18.
Mathewes Gospel after this manner: when his mother Mary was married to Joseph
before they came to dwell together: whereas it should be thus rendered, when she
was espoused, etc. Before they came together. Thus your interpretation seems
to make Marriage and Contract all one in substance; as also to infer that our
Savior was conceived in or after Marriage.


I. Concerning the first point, it may thus appear out of the Deuteronomy. 22. 24.
Law, where the espoused woman is called a Wife; and if she be convicted of
wilful unchastity, is reputed as an Adulteress worthy of death: By which it
is manifest that a De praesenti non de futuro.
Contract for the present time, differs not in substance from Marriage
(although we deem not but that the public and sollemne ceremonies of
Matrimony, are decent, expedient, ye and requisite in regard of our positive
Laws.) The same is confirmed by the words of the Angel in Saint c Matthew: For
there Mary being espoused to Joseph is called his Wife.


N. The words are thus; Fear not to take Mary to thy wife.


I. They are neither so in the Greek, nor so translated; But are thus read;
Fear not to take Mary thy Math 1. 10.
Wife; whereby it was declared, that she was then actually his Wife. (...) Non
(...).



N. Now prove you the second point, namely, that Christ was conceived in
Marriage.


I. It appears partly by that which has been said, partly by two other
reasons. First it was most safe for Christ then to by conceived, that all show
of scandal might then be avoided: For the Jews being scrupulous Calculators
of time (if this occasion of slander had been presented) would readily have
accused him as base borne: whereas we never find that they so did.


N. They could not so accuse him considering he was borne in wedlock.


I. Howsoever the conueniencie of our Positiues Laws herein may be justified;
yet the Jews both did and do hold that Children begotten out of Marriage are
base: Neither do you advisedly avoid the scandal: For if she were with
child after the espousall, before Marriage (as you pretend) the Jews would
have alleged against her the capital Law in Deuteronomy before named. My
second reason is taken from the agreement of time: For S. Luke 1. 26. 36
Luke reports Christ to have been conceived when as John the Baptist, had
been six months in his mothers womb: After which time the Virgin remained
with Elizabeth Luke 1. 5, 6.
three months. And six months after (according to the computation of our
Church) was delivered of Our Savior.


N. It may seem by the Story of the Math. 1. 18.
Gospel, that Mary was found by the swelling of her body to be big with
child.


I. Could that swelling show that she was with child by the holy Ghost? And yet
is it not there avouched that she was found so to have been?


N. How then was she so found?


I. By her own narration to Joseph, according to the relation made to her by
the Luke 1. 33.
Angel.


N. Why then did Joseph purpose to send her away, lest he should make her a
public example? Did not he fear that she had committed fornication before
contract, or adultery since that time?


I. Nothing less: But he feared to retain her with him, because he knew not
what vocation he had to be Father to such a Child as was conceived and borne
out of the limits of nature.


N. But how could he be unwilling to make her a public example, seeing she
had conceived in marriage?


I. The Greek (...).
word signifies to make a common talk of: So might he have done if he had
put her away publicly: For then would every man have accused her of
fornication or adultery.


N. But had she been his wife, he could not so have put her away: especially
being a just man, as it is there said: For he must have accused her according
to the Law of Deuit. 22. 13. etc.
Moses?


I. He could not so accuse her, being a just man; because he believed her
naration concerning her conception, by the Holy Ghost.


N. But had she been his wife, why did he not keep company with her?


I. The Greek word signifies to dwell together, as well as to keep company.
Besides, if this latter should be meant, it may be conceived that the Marriage
Feast lasted seven days as did that of Judge. 14 12.
Sampson: So that he might not go into her till the seventh day of the Feast.


N. The latter duty concerns Burial: Of which your Author speaks on this
Tobit 4 17.
manner: Pour thy bread upon the burial of the just; But give nothing to the
wicked* which words are contrary to those of Gal. 6. 10.
Paul, where he wills us to do good to all, especially to the household of
faith.


I. Although we acknowledge the doctrine to be true, That upon certain
cautions, we ought to be liberal as well to the evil as to the good: yet we
avouch, that you are deceived both in the place of Saint Paul, as also of
Tobit. Touching the former the coherence does show: that by the household of
faith we are to understand the Ministers of the Church. For the Gal. 6. 6.
Apostle says, Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that teaches him
partaker of all his goods: Whereof making this reason (Because we shall reap
as we Gal. 6. 7. ad 10.
sow) he thus concludes, whilst we have therefore time, let us do good
unto all men; especially unto them which are of the household of faith.


N. But what then is the meaning of Tobit in his charge to his son?


I. In sum it is this: give Feasts for the comfort of the children of the
just in their mourning Ier. 16. 7.
for their parents deceased, who thereby are also honored: But give no such
honor to wicked men. Thus you see your twelve cauils against the Book of
Tobit to vanish into smoke.


CHAP. II.
Of Iudeth: and the Song of the three children.
N. FRom the Legend of Tobit, I pass to the Fable of Iudeth: wherein we
dislike both word and matter. Touching the first; we think that the term
Iud. 16. 7.
Titans does not savor of the simplicity of Gods Spirit but of some Pagan
Poet.


I. You are like Domitian: you will kill flies for want of men, and pursue
words for lack of matter. But what? did not Saint Paul and Saint James borrow
words from Poets? Is Poetry now become so base in your eyes, that you cast it
down from the mountain of dignity into the valley of scorn?


N. Divine Poesy I acknowledge to be a part of Theology: as being used by
Moses, Miriam: the Author of Job, Debora; Hanna, David Isaiah; Habacuck; and
others: but the profane words of heathenish and fabulous Poets we cannot
endure.


I. What think you of the word (...) Hell used 1. Mat. 11. 23. and 16. 18.
Luke 10. 15. and 16. 23. Act. 2. 27. and 31. 1. Cor 15. 55. Apoc. 1. 18. and 6.
8. and 20. 13. 14.
eleven times in the New Testament? was it drawn from the Heathen Pluto? Do
not you endeavor to prove that (...) may signify Heaven as well as Hell; to
the intent that your interpretation of that clause in the Creed, he descended
into hell, that is, his soul ascended into Heaven might seem to have the
better coherence? Whence do you fish these your proofs but out of the ponds of
Poets?


N. The Poets do sufficiently show that (...) does betoken a place of Joy,
as well as of Pain.


I. Indeed they place Elisium in Hell: but, that they mingled Heaven (whither
they sent their Heroes,) with Hell cannot be confirmed out of their Poems. But
now (I pray you) tell me: had you been at the framing of that Book of Iudeth,
what word would you have used instead of Titans, which should have bin
equipollent to the name of Giants, unless you condemn that name also?


N. I will not busy my self about amending that which is all faulty: and yet
I must ingenuously confess that I cannot dislike the name giant, forasmuch as
it is found in Genesis 6. 4.
Genesis and Io^. 15. 8.
Joshua.


I. Do you remember whence the name giant is derived?


N. It may be from Gyges or Gog the King of the Lydians: But the received
opinion is, that it is deduced from being borne of the (...).
earth.


I. Indeed we read that the earth (in the Poets) did bring forth giants: but
will you believe that men came of the ground like mushromes? By this you may
perceive, that the word giant is as poetical as that of Titan; as also that
the Story of Iudeth is not (as you pretend) like the verses of Dionysius,
amended only by blotting out. But now (I pray you) cease to be like Antoninus)
a cutter of (...)
Cummin; and so come on to the matter.


N. In the matter then, we disallow both the circumstances and actions: Of the
first rank are time and place: Concerning the time of this Story it cannot be
declared with any certainty: and therefore it must needs be a Fable, or, at
least a Parable.


I. The Stories of Job and Ruth; and (it may be) of Hester, will hardly admit
any determination of time: will you bury these also in the grave of Fables? I
believe it would molest you to make a true Chronology of the Book of Judges:
or of Daniels seventy weeks. Yea, if you were strictly examined in what year
or age, the eleven Tribes fought with Benjamin: Or in what year of Herod, Our
Savior was borne: or how many years he preached upon the earth: or how long
time is calculated in the Story of the Acts; you would be as dumb as a man at
the first fight of a Wolf. Shall all these things be fabulous therefore,
because we (living in the prison of ignorance) cannot clearly discern the
light of truth? Again it is more then probable that the Story of Iudeth fell
out under the reign of King Manasses.


N. The untruth of this assertion may be showed three ways: First thus; In the
time of Manasses the Temple was not destroyed, as appears by his 2. King. 21.
4.
Story: But it was leuelled with the ground in the days of Iudeth. 5. 18
Iudeth: she was not therefore in the time of Manasses.


I. To your Minor: First, I oppose other places in Iudeth. 4. 2. and 8. 24.
Iudeth: yea, indeed the whole tenor of the Book every where affirming the
Temple then to have stood.


N. This is but to show what contradictions are in the Story.


I. Nothing less: For tell me whose words did you allege?


N. They were the words of Achior before Holophernes.


I. Do you believe the speech of Rabshakeh when he said that Hezekiah had
taken away the Altar of the 2. King. 18. 22.
Lord?


N. It was an ignorant speech of a Pagan: For the Altars demolisht by Hezekiah
were not the Lords, but heathenish and deuillish.


I. So it may be Achior, being an ignorant Amonite, might untruly report the
destruction of the Temple.


N. It is not likely he should err in a matter of fact, especially being so
famous.


I. His words may be otherwise; interpreted after this manner: the Temple was
made as the ground that is, was reputed profane, and common ground, namely,
during the captivity of See Iunius upon this Place.
Manasses.


N. My second argument is this: It is said that Iudeth was a fair Iudeth 8. 7.
woman: also that she lived an hundred and five Iudeth 16. 23.
years: Lastly, that there was no trouble in Israel for many years after her
Iudeth. 16. 25.
death. Now we know that from the death of Mansses to the destruction of the
Temple, were but fifty five years; and to the captivity of Ieconias out
forty four. So that if she were sixty years old at the death of Manasses
she must live a whole year, after the deportation of Ieconias.


I. Your computation holds together like ropes of sand. And first (I pray you)
how old was Sarah, when she was said to be fair by Genes. 12. 11.
Abraham?


N. She was about the sixty fifth year of her age.


I. The Jews also doubt not to say that she was beautiful at the hundredth
year.


N. What is that to Iudeth?


I. It may be she was sixty years old when she came before Holophernes. It
may be this was done twenty years before the death of Manasses: and so she
might die twenty years before the Captivity of Ieconias. Can you produce any
thing against this but your own confident conjectures? Should you upon so
light grounds disgrace the Stories of Thucidides, Diodorus, or Suetonius, would
not men think of you, as of the Estridge in Job. 39 20.
Job, that you were deprived of understanding?


N. I can swallow your bitter, or rather poisoned pills: But I come to my third
reason on this manner. This act was done by Iudeth, either before or in the
time of the Captivity of Manasses; or after his return from Babel.


I. The first is affirmed by none, as far as I remember.


N. The second is refuted by the words of Achior: who says, that they were
then returned from Iudeth 5. 19.
captivity.


I. They that defend this opinion, may answer, that as some returned from
Babylon in the days of Cyrus: and some not till the time of Darius Nothus,
about an hundred years after: So some of these captives might have returned,
and yet the King remain in Bondage.


N. This is but the opinion of Bellarmine, one of the Knights of the Poast for
Romish Religion.


I. We rather think it was done after the return of Manasses.


N. First then; Why is Iudeth 4. 6.
Ioacim the Priest only named in this action of war: no mention at all being
made of the King, who was most interessed therein?


I. Why is not the Devil named in the temptation of Euah; and in the Vision
presented to King Saul: forasmuch as he was principal Agent in both
enterprises?


N. These Stories are declared not according to things done, but after their
appearance.


I. It may be King Manasses did not appear in this matter: For it is probable
that he was lately delivered from the King of Assiria. He was not willing
openly to be seen in an action which seemed to savor of rebellion.
Furthermore think you that Daniel did worship the Image of Nabuchadnezzar
because it is not written, that he refused so to do?


N. His constancy even to and in the Lions den does sufficiently disclaim
this imputation: so that we had rather take shelter of any conjecture, then
accuse so holy a Prophet, and constant a confessor: It may be Daniel was then
employed in some foreign Province: It may be, though he were present, yet the
Chaldeans would not for reverence, or durst not for fear, accuse him: or if
they did, yet were not heard in their suite. If all these probabilities fail,
we must err on the safer side: and not accuse upon groundless and negative
presumptions.


I. Neither may you accuse King Manasses upon the like uncertainties: For it
may be no memorable thing was done by him in this business: It may be as the
greatness of his sin caused his repentance not to be written in the Book
of the Kings; so the same cause of the like silence is to be ascribed to this
Author.


N. Secondly, I thus prove; that this could not be done after the return of
Manasses: For, had it been so, why did Holophernes so curiously demand of all
his Captains (and by name of Achior the Ammonite) what was the particular
estate of that Country? If it had been so lately subdued, and the King
carried away in bonds, this inquiry might seem to have been superfluous.


I. It is written in the 2. Chro. 33. 11
Chronicles, that the Lord sent the Captains of the King of Ashur, who took
Manasseh, etc. It is more then proble that Holophernes was not of this number
of Captains. It may be he was then too young to be a Captain: It may be, he
was then busied in some other expedition: and what though he had been in that
Country before? might he not be ignorant of the Chorographie thereof: and
especially of their Genealogy? You cannot be ignorant how wildly Historiae
lib. 5.
Tacitus writes concerning the Jews, affirming that they came from Ida, a
mountain of Creete; and yet he had conferred both with Vespasian and Titus
which overthrew Jerusalem.


N. From the Time, we pass to the Place or Scene of this Comedy: which is
said to be Iudeth 4. 6.
Bethulia, whereas no such City can be found in the Land of Canaan.


I. Do you believe that there was such a City in Judea as Jerusalem?


N. Not only Scriptures, but even all Authors give report of such a City.


I. And yet none can tell now, where this City was situated, howsoever we
hear fables of Bethara.


N. Howsoever this great desolation be, at this present, yet we may not so
disgrace the undoubted stories, as to make any scruple of the being of such a
City.


I. In like manner neither may you doubt of the being of Bethulia, howsoever
you find now no such place in the Mapp. I believe it would trouble you to show
me all the Cities of Greece (named by Thucidides) in any mapp. Again the names
of sundry Cities, have been altered in process of time: (as John 4. 5.
Sychar for Genesis 33. 18.
Shechem) some also have been built since the the time of Joshua, when the
survey of Canaan was made; (as by name 1. King. 16. 24
Samaria.)


N. What is this to Bethulia?


I. It might, as well as Samaria, have been built since the time of Joshua. But
the truth is, Bethulia is a name changed from Joshua 18. 19 and 21. See Iunius
upon Iudeth 4. 6
Bethhoglah.


N. Thus far of the circumstances: now follow the actions of Iudeth,
concerning her behavior either with God or Men. Of the first kind we have
Fasting and Prayer. Her fasting was Superstitious. Forasmuch as she fasted
every day but the Eve of the Sabboth-day, and of the sollemne Judeth ^. 6.
Feast.


I. Were it Superstition (as you intimate) what is that to the Historian, who
no where does applaud it? Again this action of hers, may not only be
defended, but even exceedingly praised. First, by this means she did most
exactly and sincerely observe the Sabbath; preparing her body by praecedent
rest: For they that approach to the Sabbath with tired bodies like the Romans to
their first battle with Hanniball, shall never bear away the victory. Most
laudable therefore, and religious is the ancient custom of our Country,
whereby Saturday was made Halfe-holiday.


N. But this is reckoned amongst the Jewish Superstitions.


I. If the Jews make it part of Gods worship, as they did the washing of their
hands before Mark 7. 4.
meat, How can it be prejudicial to us who make no such will worship of it;
neither live near the Jews to scandalize them herein? Secondly, she did
herein observe the nature of fasting and feasting. For as nature passes not
suddenly from one extreme to an other, but lays hold of the mean or middle
term: So is it prepostrous abruptly so go from fasting to feasting, from
mourning to rejoicing. For this cause she fasted not upon Friday, being the
day before the Jewish Sabbath. I will make it plain by this Diagramme: On
Thurs-day she did fast: that is, she did neither eat nor rejoice till
evening: On Friday she did eat but not rejoice: On Saturday (which was the
Sabbath then) she did feast, that is, eat with rejoicing.


N. Why do you then fast upon Saturdayes, and the Eues of Holidayes?


I. Upon the first we fast only from certain kinds, namely from flesh: upon
the second we do fast at euenings alone: Neither of which can properly be
termed religious fasts: because the former does not afflict the Leuit 16. 19.
body, the latter does afflict it in very gentle manner.


N. To her fasting a cousin German was her prayer: the impuritie whereof
appears by two things. First, she commends the fact of her father Iudeth 9.
2.
Simeon which Jacob notwithstanding did Genesis 49. 7. Compared with Chap. 34. 25.
accurse.


I. But does the Author of the Book commend her for so doing?


N. It is the office of a good Historian to declare his judgment concerning
those things whereof he makes Cicero (...). 2. De Oratore.
relation.


I. He that told you that, never read Genesis: For if he had, he would have
marvelled why Noah's drunkenness, Lot's incest, Jacobs simonie are neither
condemned nor defended. And were this Canon of yours stristly observed, we
should banish Historians out of the World, as the Turk does Rhetoricians.


N. Yea, but your Author commended Iudeth as a virtuous woman.


I. So were they virtuous men, whom I now named. Nay, were not Sara and Rahel,
virtuous women, whose vices though they be related, ye are not particularly
reproved by Moses.


N. But yet her prayer is most ungodly, blessing that which God has cursed.


I. What think you of Balaam's going to King Balak?


N. It was an accursed act of avarice: therefore the Lords wrath was kindled
Numb. 22. 22
against him.


I Notwithstanding the same Lord commanded him to Numb. 22. 20.
go.


N. He was not angry for his going; but for that he went with an evil mind,
namely, to accurse the people of God (if it were possible) and especially to
lade himself with the thick clay of Egypt.


I. And what opinion have you of Iehu, for destroying Ahab's house?

Did not God commend and reward him for that Heroical 2. Kings 10. 3.
action?


I. And yet the Hosea 1. 4.
Prophet condemns it for a bloody fact.


N. It may be his mind was bloody, howsoever he obeyed God in the external
act.


I. In like manner, though the outward act of Simeon were evil; yet might his
intent be good: namely, the punishment Gen 34. 31.
of lust.


N. A good intent alone, makes not the action good.


I. But a good intent may not be termed evil and therefore Iudeth for this
intent might praise Simeon. For (if you observe it) Jacob does not simply
accurse the fact, but the rage, wherewith it was performed. Yea, he ascribes
the deed to himself in part, as appears by his speech to Genesis 48. 12.
Joseph* the reason whereof may be this, because the people of Shechem were
accursed in their Gen 9. 25.
Grandfather Canaan. Besides did not Herod and Pilate, that Acts 4 28.
which God had determined?


N. God's determination could neither excuse them, nor Simeon.


I. Yea but that which God determines cannot be unjust, howsoever he use
unjust instruments. Iudeth then praises God for revenging lust, even by the
Sword of cruel Simeon.


N. This is like Sixtus Quintus his Panegyricall Oration upon the death of the
French King, Henry the third, slain by that unmerciful Clement: wherein the
providence of God was magnified.


I. This is an odious, and yet not four footed comparison: For Shechem
deserved death, though Simeon was but an hasty and uncalled agent therein. But
no such thing can be avouched of that Prince, who was as unjustly murdered by
that Monk: as Henry the Fourth was of late by Francis Raualliac of Angolesme.


N. The second fault of that Prayer is, that she prays for God's assistance in
her q craft. p Iudeth 9. 13.



I. Did you never hear of Dolus malus, evil craft?


N. What is that to Iudeth?


I. If there be evil, why may there not be good craft also, as is to be
seen in the stratagems of war mentioned in the Bible? r Joshua 8 19. Judge.
7. 20. and 20. 4 ^. ^am. 5. 2^.



N. But the craft of Iudeth was wicked as appears by her behavior toward
men.


I. Although she might fail in the circumstances of ^h^^ craft, wherein she
desired to prosper, yet might her intent and prayer be godly.


N. In her behavior I note two couples of lies: The former she told to the
Soldiers, the latter to Holophernes: The two first are set down in her speech
to the Judeth 10. 12, 13.
watch: For first, she said, that the Bethulians (from whom she fled) should
be delivered into the hands of the Assirians, which was more then her
knowledge, and contrary to ^^r hope.


I. What think you of the speeches of Genesis 27 ^^. ^ 33. 1^
Jacob, ^^sh^^ (...).
Rahab, of 1. (...)
David, and of the woman at 1. (...).
Enrogel?


N. They were lewd and loud lies.


I. Your Censers are perfumed with Wormwood, not with Frankincense: But why
do you not condemn the Books of Genesis, Joshua, and Samuel for these lies?


N. They do indeed relate them; yet do they not commend them.


I. Neither yet do they condemn them: And may you not with the same pensill
whiten the walls of this our Author likewise? Besides Iudeth spoke true
according to their opinion as David did to King Achish, when he told him that
he had roned against the South of* 1. Sam. 27. 10.
Judah; for the King thought he had spoiled the Tribe of Judah; whereas David
understood the Amalekites, dwelling in the same Southern Coasts.


N. This is like the Anabaptists: who being demanded whether they believe the
resurrection of the body? Will answer that they do: meaning they believe such
to be your belief: Or like the Papists who being asked whether King James be
a lawful King? affirm that he is; meaning in the received opinion of the
multitude of this Realm: Howbeit if strength were not wanting the Bull of Pius
the fifth, and the Breues of Clement the Eighth, and Paul the fifth, should be
in force against him.


I. You show of what spirit you be, in accusing David of Anabaptisticall and
Popish equivocation. Either relinquish this censorious ignorance, or else men
will rather judge you to be led by the Moon, then by reason.


N. What? Do you defend equivocation, which was not invented by George
Southwell, but by him that used those four Equivocations to our Grandmother
Euah: First, you shall not die, that is presently: Secondly, your eyes shall
be opened, that is; the eyes of your consciences: Thirdly, you shall be like
Gods or Angels, that is, evil Angels: Fourthly, you shall know good and a
evil, z 1. Sam. 27. 10.
that is, not by theorie, but by lamentable and late experience.


I. To equivocate before a Magistrate, an oath being tendered (as Anabaptists
and Papists do) we hold it a thing dissonant to Religion and policy
Nevertheless to speak doubtfully to a professed enemy. no kind of oath being
administered; and to conceal from him that part of truth which we may not
vttter, howsoever we be tormented, we maintain it not only to be lawful, but
also safe and necessary: All which was performed by Iudeth to the soldiers in
this first lie (as you term it.)


N. But the second lie yet lies heavy upon her, when she said she would tell
Holophernes nothing but truth: whereas indeed she patched two famous lies
before him. First, she told him that no punishment could come upon the
Israelites except they sinned against God.


I. It is probably collected out of S. 1 Apoc. 2. 14.
John; that this was taken from the Counsel of Balaam, who thought that Israel
could not be troubled, unless it were ensnared with Idolatry or Adultery.
And surely the ground of this advise was most profound: forasmuch as no divine
judgment can overtake a nation until it be guilty of the impunitie of some
known transgression; which maxim if you deny, you will hardly avoid an
axiom of Atheism.


N. The next lie before Holophernes is yet more apparent: For she tells him that
the men of Bethulia were ready to eat up things consecrate to God, which (as
she pretended) should have been a great sin: whereas she knew that these
things might be used by them in case of extreme necessiity.


I. To grant that she knew this; How was she bound to reveal this to the
Tyrant, and enemy of the Church? Did not Iael the like to Sisera, when she
said Judge. 4. 18.
fear not?


N. One mule may claw another: For it seems this fable of Iudeth was taken
from the Story of Iael.


I. I wonder you called not that fable also, considering that Debora (being a
Prophetess) did term Iael blessed among women Judge. 5. 24.
for the very like fact. Neither indeed is the phrase of Vzziah unlike to this
in the commendation of Iudeth 13. 18
Iudeth.


N. But Iael first of all did break the peace made between Iabin, the King of
Canaan, and the house of her husband Judge 4. 17.
Heber.


I. I pray you, were you present at the contract of that peace? was it made
with a League or without it? If the latter, then no promise was violated: If
with a League; was it a League of amity (so that each was bound to help other
in all warfare?) Or was that a League of equality? (so that both were
indifferently restrained from molesting and inuading the friends of the
Confederate party:) The former you can never euince: If it were the latter,
the King of Canaan had first broken the league by inuading the Israelites, and
so Iael was free. Besides, howsoever there were a league: yet if God by
immediate instinct did ordain the contrary, Iael was absolved from all humane
bonds: the like instinct may be supposed to have been in Iudeth.


N. But Iael said fear not: when there was indeed true cause of fear.


I. Although she interdicted him to fear, yet she promised no security.


N. It was an implicit promise.


I. But this is of small force, with a sworn enemy to Gods Church, such as
was Sisera.


N. This will make good that which was confirmed in the Council of Constance:
Namely, that faith is not to be kept with Heretics.


I. I will not now scan the meaning of that Decree: only I answer: That she
made no faith with Sisera, when she said, fear not: For it may be she meant,
fear not in regard of Barak and the Israelites that pursue thee.


N. This is but an equivocal shift, which you can never confirm.


I. As your self said of Daniel: so we say of Iael: we will eather fly to any
conjecture, then acruse a woman commended by so great a Prophetess as was
Debora: Now the fact of Iudeth was not unlike that of Iael.


N. It is not likely that the Bethuliam were about to eat the things that were
consecrated: no such matter being elsewhere specified in the Story.


I. We will rather believe her affirmation, which had better means to know
it, then you, that be ignorant thereof. And thus your ten imputations and
aspersions cast upon this Book, are now become like painted dreams of the
shadow of smoke, being dreamed by a doting, sickly, waking man.


N. I weigh your words as wind: and come from Whole Stories to a Fragment,
called the Song of the three Children, out of which your Benedicite is taken:
rehearsed by you after the first Lesson instead of Te Deum.


I. If this offend you, it lies in the discretion of the Minister whether he
will repeat it or not: For in the place thereof, he may say Te Deum: unless
it also be tedious to your quicksiluer minted ears. But what is that in the
Benedicite which moves your choler.


N. First, it is said, That the fire went out forty nine The Song of the three
Children, Verse 47.
Cubits.


I. Where begins the Benedicite?


N. At these words. O all ye works, etc.


I. That is ten Verses after the place by you The Song of the three Chrildren,
Verse 57.
alleged: So that it may be that they, which disliked the Story, could not
disallow this Song read in our Church.


N. This Song is a Part of the Story: and therefore is to be rejected, if the
Story be found reprobate silver.


I. The Song may be rehearsed for moral instruction; howsoever the History
which is not rehearsed, should err from some part of truth. But now what is
the hole in this relation?


N. It is utterly impossible the Chaldeans should cast in Naphtha, pitch, towe,
and faggots into the furnace, if the flame did issue there from so many Cubits.


I. Some Mechanical Artizan could teach you a device, how to cast fuel into a
furnace without peril, being distant above forty nine Cubits, though tripled:
Again, it will be hard for you to prove, that the fire went forward, and did
not ascend upwards: Lastly, though this were granted: yet no impossibility
would follow: For this may be the meaning of the place, That the flame brake
out of the furnace, and went forty nine Cubits, and so burnt the Chaldeans.
This is confirmed by the words of Dan. 3. 22.
Daniel, where it is said because the King's commandment was straight, the
fire slew the Chaldeans; that is, because they fearing the rigorous
commandment of the King did ouer-heate the furnace, the fire suddenly came out
and slew them: whereof the reasons may be rendered: First, their preposterous
haste: Secondly, their casting in of Naphtha, pitch and towe, which might
wonderfully inflame the other fuel: Thirdly, because the Angel did shake the
fire out of the furnace, with a hissing Song of the three Children, verse 49
wind.


N. You heal one error with an other: For Dan 3. 25.
Nabuchadnezzar says, that the men walked in the midst of the fire.


I. This is the Kings meaning, that they walked in the midst of the furnace,
being the place of the fire: neither is it improbable that some wind or dew
was brought by the Angel to abate the violence of the fire.


N. It were more miraculous to say: that the fire was restrained from burning.


I. Miracles and Monsters are not to be multiplied without necessity. It had
been more miraculous that the Hebrews had been fed with Manna in Canaan, and
yet the Manna there Joshua 5. 12.
ceased. In like manner, it had been more strange if the grave garments had
fallen from Lazarus of their own accord; yet Christ commanded him to be John
11. 44.
loosed by men. For where the natural strength of Angels or Men will serve:
why should we exact a miracle, as it were to tempt, and Psalm. 78. 41.
limit the Almighty.


N. Two fragments there be separated from the beginning of Daniel, commonly
termed the thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters of that book (namely the Story
of Susanna, and of Bell and the Dragon:) In the History of Susanna we dislike
The Story of Susanna, and of Bell and the Dragon.
the matter, and the phrase. As for the matter, it is neither sound for
substance, nor circumstance. For the first, it is manifest that Daniel was not
advanced upon that occasion that this Story Susanna v. 65
pretends, namely, for delivering Susanna from death by his Prophetical
sentence: but rather for the interpretation of Nabuchadnezzar's Dream, as is
to be seen in the true Dan. 2. 48.
Daniel.


I. We may easily conceive a double advancement of Daniel: First, whereby he
came into credit with the People by the occasion of the matter of Susanna:
Secondly, whereby he came into reputation before the King, for expounding of
his dream. Again, although the King took notice of Daniel's judgment
concerning Susanna: Yet was it possible that he should not advance him: either
because he was very young or because he thought this judgment proceeded
from dexterity of wit: not from divine inspiration: Or lastly, because he
might be as forgetfully ungrateful toward Daniel, as afterward was
Balthazar, till he was advertised thereof by the Queen Dan. 5. 10.
Mother.


N. The circumstance of time does more convince this Book: and that for two
reasons: First, it appears by this narration, that the Jews had yearly
Judges in Babylon; and power to execute the Susanna, v. 5. and 41. and 62.
Laws of Moses; which is no way probable.


I. First, Nabuchadnezzar and Darius advanced some of the Jews in Dan. 2. 48.
49.
Babylon: Secondly, Hamman tells Ahashuerosh that the Jews observed their own
Hest. 3. 8.
Laws: Thirdly, the Romans which kept down the Jews as much as the
Babylonians, yet gave them leave in some cases to keep the capital Laws of
Moses, as appears by Saint John 18. 31.
John, and by Saint Acts 7. 58.
Luke. Wherefore this is not so improbable as you would have it.


N. Secondly, against the time I thus reason: Daniel is said to be a Susanna v.
45
young child: and yet this Story is reported to be done in the time of Cyrus:
Susanna v. 65
but this is impossible: For Daniel was carried away in the beginning of the
Dan. 1. 1.
Captivity, which lasted seventy Ierem. 29. 10.
years, even to the first year of the reign of Ezra 1. 1.
Cyrus: So that Daniel could not be less then eighty years old in the first
year of Cyrus.


I. First, Some doubt not to avouch this to be another Daniel.


N. To what end then is this Story annexed to his Book?


I. That might be done, because they were men of the same name, nation, spirit
and happiness. But I relinquish this opinion as uncertain and improbable. The
plain answer is this, that those words concerning Astyages and Cyrus in the
end of Susanna, are taken out of the beginning of Bell and the Dragon, as is
plain by the Greek Text: Your calculation therefore is needless.


N. From the matter I come to the phrase: For it semes by the Greek, that
there should be an allusion in Daniels speech to the words Susanna v. 54* and
58. (...).
of the Elders, which allusion is not found in the Hebrew, or Chaldie tongues.


I. First, no marvel, if it cannot be found: For the names of Eastern trees
are little known to the Grecians, and the rest in Europe, as all Herbals do
witness: Secondly, though the Greek Interpreter did allude, it follows not
hereupon that there was an allusion in the Hebrew or Chaldie: Thirdly, if all
be granted, as also that the Story is Apocryphal; will you hereupon conclude
that it is false and not to be read in the Church for moral use. namely to
show how God defends innocence, and conuinceth lust, and malice?


N. I pass from Susanna to Bell and the Dragon: wherein we disclaim two
things: First, it is said, that Daniel was six days in the Lions m den; f Bell
and the Dragon, v. 31.
whereas it is said in the true Dan. 6. 19.
Daniel, that he remained there but one night.


I. The Stories speak of two several facts and times: The first under Darius;
The second under Cyrus.


N. Darius was Cyaxares the Uncle of Cyrus: and reigned with him in Babylon.


I. This Story is uncertain: For Scaliger proves that Darius reigned ten
years before Cyrus came: which if it be true, your argument is at an end:
Again, Master William Perkins in Digesto.
others think that Xenophon, who tells your Story, is merely fabulous, and
that Herodotus tells the truth, saying that Astvages had never a child but
Mandana the Mother of Cyrus.


N. Secondly, we wonder that Habacuk should Bell and the Dragon, v. 33.
here be mentioned: who was before the Captivity, as appears by his Heb. 1. 5.
prophecy.


I. If he were the same man* yet might he live as long as Daniel. Also you
know how long Isaiah, and Hosea prophesied; namely, at the least sixty three
years.


CHAP. III.
Of Wisdom: Ecclesiasticus, and Baruch.
N. FRom the Historical Books I pass to those Apocryphal Volumes, which are
termed Sapientall; whereof the Book of Wisdom (commonly ascribed to Philo
the Jew;) and Ecclesiasticus (compiled by Jesus the Son of Syrach) may be
called Dogmaticall; and the last namely, the Book of Baruch) Prophetical.


I. Whither Philo penned the Book of Wisdom we dispute not: But at this we
marvel, that Doctor Iunius (being a man of rare diligence) could epsy no
error in the Books of Wisdom or Baruch; and yet your Eagle eyes have found
some of this kind.


N. First, we blame the title, then the matter of the Book of Wisdom. The
title seems to make Solomon, the Author thereof, which is false, without all
controversy.


I. It is not intended by this title, that this Book should be ascribed to
Solomon; but it is only propounded, as a Meditation or Soliloquie made in
imitation of that divine Wisdom of Solomon, published in his Books of the
Proverbs, the Preacher, and the Canticles: Of which kind were the Meditations
of Saint Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, and (...).
others.


N. In the matter of the Book we dislike two places: First, those Wisdom 8.
20*
words: But rather being good, I came into an undefiled body: wherein two
errors are contained: First, that the soul is created before the body:
Secondly, that according to the merit, or demerit thereof, it obtains a good
or bad body: which be the errors of Plato, the Chiliasts, and Origin: Other
plain meaning of this place cannot be framed.


I. If you reject the Book, because some place therein is not plain; what
shall be done to the Epistles of Saint Paul; wherein some things are 2. Pet. 3.
16.
hard to be understood? Nay, what shall become of the Books of Job, Canticles,
Ezekiel; Daniel, and the Apocalips? (not to speak of Tertullian, Possidonius,
Thucidides, Sueronius, Aristotle; Archimidedes, Lycophron, and Persius; which
Books all will acknowledge to be as hard as profitable.) Furthermore two
gentler interpretations may be brought of this place: The first is Lyranus
upon this place.
vulgar; namely thus: But I, becoming better, (that is, making progress in
(...).
virtue) I came into a body undefiled, that is, obtained a body, neither
polluted with fornication, when I was young, nor with adultery when I was
married: howsoever according to the custom of the time I used Polygamie:) The
second exposition is this, But rather being good (that is, in regard of my
soul, which though it were not free from Original sin, yet was endued with
as much strength of nature as may be: namely, in respect of understanding,
memory, or fancy) came into a body undefiled (either with a too fiery, or
to foggie a complexion whereby the operations of my soul might have been made
over dull or precipitate.) If either of these two meanings be admitted your
two imputations will vanish: Lastly, your latter error, which you pretend,
has no ground; For he says not because I was good; but, being good, I came
into a body undefiled; showing, not the cause, but the concurrent condition of
the soul, when it obtained a good body. Neither indeed is your former
aspersion very probable: For though he say I came into the Body, it follows
not hereupon that the Soul was made before This rather may be the meaning: My
soul, being created and infused, came in an instant into the body.


N. In the second place we mislike these words: Wisdom 14. 14. and 15.
When a father mourns grievously for his son, etc. By which place is
intimated, that the first beginning of Idols was the custom of the mourning
for the dead: whereas we read of Idols long before, namely, in the days of
Rahel; yea of Abraham and Genesis 31. 19. and 53. Ios 24 2. See Calvin Instit.
Lib. 1. Chap. 11. Sect. 8.
Terah.


I. First, the Author makes this only the occasion of the public adoration
of Idols; by the commandment of Tyrants: What is this to Rahel or Abraham;
which (for ought you can produce) had only their private wil-worships? But tell
me (I pray you) what was Tammuz for whom the women mourned in the Ezekiel. 8. 14.
Prophet?


N. Some think he was Adonis: Others say better, that he was Osiris, King of
Egypt, and husband to Isis; who being slain of his Brother Typhon was by her
lamented, and deified.


I. At what time reigned Osiris in Egypt?


N. Surely he was a most ancient King. For he, with his wife instructed the
Egyptians in the use of Wheat and Barley: So that it may seem he was before
the time of Abraham, who went into Egypt, when there was a famine in Canaan,
which he had not done if the use of grain had not been there known.


I. You see then by all probability, that the Idol Tammuz, was before
Abraham: and (it may be also) before Terah. For was not Prometheus the son
of Iapetus or Iapheth (the elder brother of Shem) which first framed Idols,
much more ancient then Terah?


N. We insist not so much upon the Antiquity of Idols: Only we say that man's
mind, desirous of a visible God, was rather the original cause of them; then
the fashion of the lamenting for the dead.


I. The Author speaks not of the inward cause, but of the outward and
public occasion. Now you cannot prove that the Idolatry of Rahel or Terah
was not thus occasioned.


N. From the Book of Wisdom, I come to the Book of Ecclesiasticus: wherein
we first mislike the Argument, and Prologue: then the Treatise it self.


I. The Argument is extant only in some Greek Copies: Neither seems it to be
compiled by the Author of the Book. Have you not observed that the
subscriptions of Saint Raul's Epistles, have been blamed by Ancient Divines,
as things added by some unskillful Clerks? And what if the same should fall
out, even in this Argument? But now declare the fault thereof.


N. These words seem to be very The argument of Ecclesiasticus, verse 8.
according to Iunius.
arrogant. This Jesus did imitate Solomon: and was no less famous in wisdom
and doctrine, etc.


I. Why do not you translate them as Iunius did, namely, thus: He was a
follower of Solomon, no less endeavoring to prove wisdom and Learning? what
is the scruple?


N. He seems to equallize Jesus to Solomon.


I. When we say, Let thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive: Also when Math. 5. 48.
Christ says, You shall be perfect as your father which is in heaven is
perfect; is it intended that we should do Gods will equally to the Angels? Or
that we should pardon sin or be perfect in equality God?


N. These phrases do not import a just equality, but a likeness of
proportion according to the degree, and measure of our weakness.


I. The same may be here affirmed: For as Solomon by his infused gifts did
search out wisdom; so Jesus (no doubt) by his purchased habits, might tread
the same steps, though in an unlike degree; and be as famous in his time and
kind, as Solomon was in his.


N. In the Prologue, these words declare the spirit of the Author to be
nothing In the Prologue of Ecclesiasticus, verses 6 and 7. according to Iunius.
prophetical: And to this, take it in good worth, though we seem to some in
some things not able to attain to the interpretation of such words as are hard
to be expressed: For the things that are spoken in the Hebrew tongue, have an
other force in themselves, then when they are translated into an other tongue,
etc. Furthermore, the first words, take in good worth, are in the (...).
Greek: to have, or give pardon: A phrase nothing befitting the majesty of
God's Spirit.


I. First, the Greek word may signify some thing else then pardon or
remission: Saint Paul uses it for 1. Cor. 7. 6.
Permission: Besides, it is a strange phrase in Greek, to have pardon for to
give pardon The simple meaning of the place is, to permit willingly, or
beneuolently: or take in good worth, as we translate it: Secondly, he says,
not if we be unable: but if we seem to be unable: Thirdly, he makes a
translation to be inferior to the original; and the Greek to the Hebrew. The
former is plain by daily experience: The latter may be thus explained: First,
the Greek tongue came by the confusion at Babel: whereas the Hebrew was more
ancient and divine: Secondly, the Hebrew roots are verbs, and those few, and
are easily found by certain Letters; whereas the Greek Theames are variable,
infinite, intricate: Thirdly, whatsoever the Greek does add to, or take from
the Hebrew, proceeds from imperfection: as namely, the adding of the neuter
gender, and of cases; as also of indefinite tenses, is a thing most needless.
So the taking away of genders out of verbes, and the future tense out of the
Imperative Mood (which only should have been therein:) as also of the five
last forms of Coniugations (wherein the Arabians were imitated) does argue
great confusion: Fourthly, if this Prologue were penned by the Author, and
your argument were in full force, the Book were only excluded the Canon, but
not out of the Church, wherein we defend that Apocryphal Books may be read
for moral use: Fifthly, to what end is this allegation, seeing we read neither
the argument nor the Prologue in the Church?


N. In the Treatise we disallow four things; whereof the first concerns
Christ: the other three, his servants the Prophets. Christ (the wisdom of the
Father) is said to be Eccles. 1. 4. and 9. and 24. 12.
created; which is little less then Arrianisme.


I. First, some doubt not to affirm these places to be meant of God's wisdom
showed in his creatures, and not of Christ: Secondly, this (...).
word may signify not only to be created, but to be possessed: for so the
Septuagint do render it in the Prou. 8. 22.
Proverbs.


N. The place was corrupted by the Arrians, who read (...) for (...): for so
it should have been read according to the Hebrew.


I. There is no such Greek word as (...): but (...): for it is a Verb mean,
and not active. Again, the word (...) signifies to inhabit, or possess,
whereupon (...) does signify not only the builder of a City: but also the
inhabitant therein, and Possessor thereof: Thirdly, to create, may signify to
ordain, as when we say a King is created, that is ordained. Now what hinders
us to say that Christ from the beginning was possessed; and in a sort Romans 1. 3.
ordained by his Father?


N. From Christ I descend to the Prophets: whereof the first, namely, Enoch,
was before the Flood: the other two, that is Samuel and Elias did succeed it.
Eccles. 44. 16.
Enoch is said to be taken away for an example of repentance to the
generations: whereupon the Papists have fained Enoch to be one of the two
witnesses in the Apocalypse, which should Apoc 11. 3.
fight against Antichrist.


I. The Papists can euince no such thing out of this place: For it is only
said, that he was removed from the power of wicked men; that they knowing what
he had Jude 14, 15.
prophesied concerning the Flood to be brought upon the World for sin, and
considering his triumphant passage into heaven, might repent. So Christ John
16. 8. and 11.
says: That the Spirit should convince the World of sin, because they
believed not in him: and of the righteousness of his cause for that he whom
they had crucified, was taken up to his Father in Heaven. As for the witnesses
of Saint John, (if any place be for conjecture) it is more probable by the
consideration of the miracles there mentioned, that the first of them was
Moses, and not Enoch.


N. Next to Enoch is Samuel, who is said to have Eccles 46. 20.
foreshewed the Kings death: whereas indeed that foreteller, was not Samuel but
Satan.


I. But the Scripture calls him 1. Sam. 28. 15, 16. 20.
Samuel.


N. Not because he was so indeed, but in appearance.


I. Why then may not the Son of Sirach use the same Phrase?


N. Yea, but he reckons this amongst Samuels praises, which was one of the
prizes of the Devil.


I. It was a praise to Samuel that Saul who would not believe Samuel during his
life, was forsaken by God, and so delivered up to a reprobate sense; that he
sought help from Satan appearing in his likeness, whose prophecies he had
abused and contemned.


N. From Samuel the Judge we pass to Elias, under the Kings; who (as the
Eccles. 41. 10.
Author says) is appointed in due season to turn the hearts of the fathers
to their children: Wherein I note first a contradiction: then a false
interpretation. The former thus appears? These words (as you know) are
alleged out of Mal. 4. 5, 6.
Malachie who was the last of all the Prophets. Now it is said in the The
argument of Ecclesiasticus, verse 2 according to Iunius.
argument, that Jesus was after all the Prophets almost.


I. Jesus the father of Sirach might be before Malachie, and yet Jesus the
Son of Sirach might succeed him in time. This latter Jesus finished the
Volume: Again Malachie, was the last Prophet whose writings are extant: and
yet some Prophet might come after him: For Elias and Elisha wrote nothing: and
yet were Prophets of the best rank: So that Malachie might be alleged by
the Son of Sirach and yet he lived to see some other Prophet, later then
Malachie: Lastly, he is said to have lived after all the the Prophets almost:
whereby it may be thought: that he might see Malachie, and yet not survive
him.


N. The false interpretation is this: That the Author does suppose the bodily
return of the Old Elias into the world, before the Day of Judgment: whereas
both Math. 11. 14.
Christ, and the Luke ^. 17.
Angel, expound it of John the Baptist: So that it may seem the Jewish and
Popish, fabulous Elias had hence their beginning.


I. The Jews reject this Book as much as you do. The Papists for their
dream do as well allege Malachie as this Author: Yea, they doubt not to
pervert the words of Christ, thus reading them: This is Elias that is to come;
whereas they should be read thus that was to come: as is plain by the
thirteenth verse: and by the words of the Angel in S. Luke: As for the meaning
of this Author it may be thus: Elias the This bite was a man of that excellent
spirit, that John the forerunner of Christ; and greater then all the Prophets,
should be called by his name, and be said to come in his spirit and power: As
the two witnesses in Saint Apoc 11. 11. Compare Ecclesiasticus 48. 11. with the
Kings Majesty's divine speech and answer in the conference at Hampton Court.
John are said to be revived in their Successors; and inspired with their
spirit: It may be also thus meant, that Elias in his own time, and person
performed these things.


N. It rests now: That we come to Baruch, which has two parts: First, a
Prophecy in five Chapters: Secondly, the Epistle of Jeremy in the sixth. In
the Prophecy we mislike two places: First* these Baruch 1. 2.
words: In the fifth year, the seventh day of the month: whereby is intimated
that Jerusalem was taken and burnt in the fifth year of Zedechias; whereas it
is plain by the Story 2. Kings 25. 2.
of the Kings, and by Ier. 52 6.
Jeremy, that this fell not out till the eleventh year of the same King.


I. We read not Baruch for Chronology, but for Morality: If you were bound
to reconcile all the calculations of times in Scriptures, you should have need
of the help of the tenth This name was given to Joseph Scaliger for his skill
in this, and other arts and tongues.
Muse. Yea (I believe) if ten Scaligers should concur, they could not cut all
the Gordian knots made by Chronologers. For this particular time, Iunius
guesseth that the City might be set on fire, in the fifth year, and yet the
flame being extinguished, the last burning of Jerusalem might be deferred till
the eleventh. Another conjecture may be this: that the fifth year is put for
the fifth month, that is, of the eleventh year. For in the fourth month of
the eleventh year was the City Jer. 52. 6.
taken: and in the fifth month of the same year came Nabuzaradan who burnt the
2 Kings 25. 8.
City: For it may seem strange that Baruch should set down the year and day,
but not the month.


N. As strange as you make it, it is used in the Story of the 2. Kings 15 3
Kings: where it is said, and the ninth day of the month the famine was sore,
no number of the month being expressed.


I. But Jeremy resolves, that this was the fourth month; which if he had not
done, we should never have understood that place in the Kings: And some would
have coniectured by month, to be meant the first month; which, as you see, is
refuted by Jeremy.


N. To leave your intricate Chronology: the second place we disallow is in
these Baruch 3. 4.
words: Hear the dead Israelites: where it seems the Prayers of the Saints
in Heaven are allowed after the Popish manner.


I. Where do you read that by dead Israelites are meant the Saints in Heaven.


N. Were not Abraham, Isaacke and Jacob, now dead?


I. But Christ tells us, that they are Math. 22. 32.
living: For he is their God: But he is not the God of the dead but of the
living.


N. Saint Paul says, that he is the God of the Romans 4. 9.
dead also.


I. Christ speaks of God in mercy, in regard of redemption: the Apostle
treats of God in power, in respect of creation, and moderation of things. But
(tell me) is it not an irreverent and improper phrase to say that God hears
the prayers of the dead Saints? (for it is confessed that the Saints in
general pray for us.) The first is plain; for it can be little then profane
to call them dead which live with God: The latter is evident: For seeing they
pray as they are alive, not as they are dead, it is but a rough-hewne speech to
term them the prayers of dead men: Besides, two other interpretations, may be
brought: First, by dead Men may be meant, men dead in Math. 8. 22. Ephesians. 2. 1.
sins: This is confirmed by the words following in the same verse, which
have sinned: Secondly, they may be said to be dead, in regard of their infinite
troubles: and so they are said to be defiled Baruch 3. 11.
with the dead. To the same purpose is the vision of the bones showed to the
Ezekiel. 37. 1.
Prophet.


N. But how does it appear, that here are not meant dead men, whose souls are
out of their bodies.


I. Baruch directly Baruch 2. 17.
denies, that such men pray: for so Iunius expounds it.


N. In the Epistle of Jeremy, we allow neither the title nor the treatise. The
title seems to make Jeremy the Author of this Epistle: which we find not
in his prophecy.


I. Your negative argument is an old Pigmies bul-rush against the Craines (as
it is in the Fable.) But we pray you conjecture with Iunius that Jeremy sent
this Epistle by Ier. 51. 59.
Serara^


N. In the Treatise first we dislike these words Baruch 6. 2.
seven generations, where a generation is taken for ten years against the use
of Scripture phrase.


I. It will be hard for you to bind Baruch to the calculations of Iubilies. If
you do; the answer will be, that the Greek Interpreter used the Greekish
account: For example; He that translated Xiphilin into Latin, for the Greek
Dram does use the Latin Denarius and aureus for twenty five Dram or
Denarius is 7. d. ^oo. aureus 15 s. ^d ob.
Drachmaes. So the Greek Expositor finding seventy years in in the Hebrew
expressed it by seven generations which the Greeks call (...); the Romans
Pergama quum caderent bello superata bilustri.
tempora bilust^^a, that is, times of ten years. We in England would have
termed them ten lives: that is, seven years to a life.


N. Secondly we cannot in dure your immoderate praises of this Chapter. For you
have publicly taught, That it is more able to convince the Papists of
Idolatry, then the Canonical text.


I. This was said, not because it was equal with the Canon; but, first,
because they have added it to the Canon, and yet it crosses their Idolatry:
For whatsoever arguments are here brought against the Idols of Pagans, the same
may be alleged against Popish Images: Secondly, because this Chapter is a
compendious collection of those things which are largely propounded in
Scriptures. And thus your arguments against the reading of the Apocryphal
Books in the Church are become like a white cloud without rain: or like an
Eunuch embracing Ecclesiasticus 20. 3. and 30. ^0.
a Virgin.


CHAP. IV.
Of the Translation of the Psalms.
N. FRom the Books Apocryphal I ascend to the undoubted Canon: consisting of
Psalms, and Chapters. First, of the Psalms, as being wholly set down in your
Liturgy. We say that you have deformed them both in quantity and quality:
Concerning quantity, you have detracted, and added: You have detracted
sentences and words: Of the first kind are the titles of the Psalms, which you
have omitted.


I Declare I pray you the number and kinds of those titles.


N. Twenty and five Psalms have no title at all: Now of those, which have
titles annexed, about forty two have distinct titles, showing their cause
outward or inward: The outward, is the end, or efficient. Titles declaring the
end are such as these: A Prayer of David; A Psalm of praise; for remembrance;
or of Instruction. Whereby it appears that some Psalms are Petitions, some
Thankesgiuings (which are two kinds of Prayer:) Others be Instructions: The
titles showing the Efficient, are these: A Psalm of David; To Ieduthun; To
Asaph, etc. whereby the Penman or Singer is described: The inward cause is the
matter or form. The matter is expressed in the titles, setting down the
occasion of the Psalm (as in Psalms 3. 7. 18. etc.) The outward form is
seen in those titles, which describe the Musical keys to be used in song
(as in Psalm, fourth, ninth, and others.)


I. To speak in order of these tittles: I say three things. First, I probably
think that they were not compiled by the Authors of the Psalms: Secondly,
that they be not needful: Thirdly, that they are imperfect. The first I thus
explain: First, it is not likely that David would have set down the
foureteenth, and fifty third Psalms; forasmuch as they differ scarcely in
three words, excepting the titles which are so different, that they seem not
to come from the same Author The like is to be thought of the forty third
Psalm, which has no title, and yet is an epitomie of the forty second
Psalm, whose title is most large: Secondly, we find the hundred and eight
Psalm compiled of two other Psalms, (namely, the fifty seventh Verse seventh
to the end. And the sixtieth, Verse six, to the end) which argues, that David
never compiled these Psalms in one Book: And therefore the Hebrews make
four Books of Psalms: Thirdly, it is written in the end of the seventy
second Psalm, Here end the Prayers of David the son of Ishai: which will
hardly admit a good construction, if we think that David ordered the Psalms,
as now we find them. For there are many Psalms after that ascribed to David
(as most of the Songs of Degrees, and the like:) Secondly, that these titles
are not needful, may thus appear: First, if David were the Author of the
first seventy two Psalms, what need is there in every Psalm to iterate these
words a Psalm of David? Secondly, why should not the title of the fifty third
Psalm be needful for the fourteenth, containing the same matter? Thirdly,
these titles can be no more needful then the Hebrew Letters set upon the
hundred and nineteenth Psalm. Now these are useful to none but them which
understand the Hebrew Tongue; whose memories may be aided by them: Fourthly,
the Musical titles cannot be needful, and that for a double respect: First,
because they are not understood as the Jews themselves confess.


N. Learned men have expounded them.


I. They have made some flying conjectures concerning them: So that it is not
meet with them to oppress the capacities of the multitude; which receive such
subtleties as these as the bottomless barrel of the Belides did water.
Secondly, these harmonious titles (at the least in your opinion) are needless
for us: For you account Church-musique ceremonial; and almost, as unprofitable
as Pictures or Images.


N. The titles which declare the occasions of the Psalms cannot but be very
profitable.


I. Some of them are very obscure, and of little use to the people without an
Interpreter (as Psalm. 7.) the rest are exceeding short; so that they may seem
to be certain brief notes collected for the direction of the Priests only:
Thirdly, that these titles are imperfect, may be gathered thus; First, to what
end is the title of the ninety eight Psalm, which is thus nakedly set down A
Psalm?


N. It may be to distinguish it from a Song.


I. It will be Plato's year, before you find out this distinction: Secondly,
there be many Psalms of Prayer; Praise; Instruction; and Remembrance: whereof
some have no titles: others no such thing expressed in their titles: and
therefore your title to titles, is but a title of contention.


N. From Sentences I descend to words, by you detracted. Now these are words of
attention, or intention: You have taken away sundry words of attention: Namely
first in the midst Selah The first place is in Psalm. 3. 2.
very often; Higgaion Psalm 9. 16.
once: Secondly, in the end Haleluiah, seventeen times.


I. Tell me (I pray you) what mean you by Selah?


N. Some think, it means no more then very much: Others suppose it to be a
Musical note, whereby the Quire* was admonished to lift up their voice.


I. Your former interpretation is hungry, cold, naked; the latter (at least
according to your fancy) is Ceremonial, and so a stranger from our Church:
The truth is, this term Selah is most obscure: The like may be said of
Higgaion (howsoever some expound it, a thing to be meditated of with
industry:) As for Haleluiah I answered when I spoke of Gloria Patri.


N. Besides words of attention; you have also taken away effectual words of
intention: So that you have corrupted the sense, as the dead Frogs did the Land
of Egypt. Of the first kind is that place in the Psalm 68. 27.
Psalm; There is little Benjamin their ruler: whereas it should be read with
their ruler.


I. In the Hebrew text this word with is not to be found: In the seventy
Interpreters it is not extant: For they read it thus. There is young Benjamin
in excellency; the Princes of Judah, etc.


N. The Greek word is there (...): which Mentis excessu.
is to be translated phrenzie.


I. You will sooner fall into a phrenzie, then make this a good construction of
that place.


N. If these words be not corrupted: by phrenzie may be meant a Prophetical
ecstasy whereby Benjamin was moved to praise God in hymns.


I. The Greek word may come of (...), to be eminent, or stand above others:
And so we may accord it with the Hebrew verity: and so not stand in need of
your wresting. Besides Iunius translates it as we do: Lastly, the sense
agrees with us little Benjamin their ruler, in regard of Saul of that Tribe,
the first King: Or in respect of the Temple, standing in that part of Jerusalem
which pertained to the Tribe of Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
Benjamin.


N. The second place is in these words: they were not Psalm. 105. 28.
obedient: whereas it should be read they were not disobedient.


I. What if it were the slip of the Printer to omit the syllable dis, or to
insert the syllable not; could you not have lent him a Spiders web; or an
Egyptian Canopie to catch Syllables instead of flies?


N. You know that Sibboleth being pronounced for Judges 12. 6.
Shibboleth, was an instrument of a great slaughter: And that Arrius differed
from the Church but in a letter; saying, that Christ was (...), that is, like
to God in substance: whereas the Church said he was (...); that is,
coessentiall, or consubstantiall with God. Again, we are not bound to
subscribe to the errors of the Printers.


I. Belike then you will not subscribe to any Hebrew Bible in the world
forasmuch as none will be found, wherein there is no addition, detraction or
alteration of a Syllable. Now whereas you pretend that the change of a letter
or syllable may do much hurt: that imputation cannot agree to this place,
whether we consider the reading or sense. For the first you know that the word
(...) which here both you and we translate not; may be rendered him: as if it
were written (...) For the like change we find in the 2. King. 8. 10.
Kings; according to the general exposition. Again, these words may be read
with an interrogation, thus; were they not disobedient? And so it will be alone
with this they were not obedient: The like is in Job 13. 15.
Job: Lastly, the Seventy read it thus; because they sharpened his words (or
decres) namely by their disobedience. Now we know that the Apostles did many
times follow rather the Seventy then the Hebrew.


N. That was done, because the Greek Translation was better understood, then
the Hebrew: Besides the True Translation of the Seventy is lost.


I. Not lost; but in part altered: For we find the Apostles citing sundry
places, according to the Translation now extant.


N. You strive about the reading, like a bear in a net: but you cannot make
the sense accord: The plain meaning is, that Moses and Aaron, the
wonder-workers; or rather the wondrous plagues themselves, were not disobedient
to his words and decrees.


I. If our reading may be admitted, the meaning may be thus as plain: that
the Egyptians obeyed not God's Word, for all the plagues: And this will agree
well with the Exodus 9. 3. See it in the Hebrew.
Story.


N. As you have detracted, so you have added sentences and words: For the
former: First, you have added three whole verses to one Psalm. 14. after verse 4.
Psalm.


I. We did it, according to the citation of this place, used by Saint Paul to
the Romans 3. 13 to the 19.
Romans.


N. You thought that he had cited all these words out of this Psalm; whereas
indeed they are taken out of sundry places of the Psalms, Proverbs, and
Isaiah: Or else how durst you to have added them to the Psalms in your
Liturgy?


I. Saint Paul had joined them together in citation: and therefore we thought
it no heinous error to conioyne them in reading the Psalms: Considering
hereby, that both the fourteenth Psalm, and the third to the Romans, do
receive a mutual light of explanation: Neither can any error hereby arise: If
the references be well set in the Book: For it is well observed, that the
English references, are better for use, then most of your Geneuian notes
whereof some have been taxed of As that upon Exodus 1. 19. and upon the 2.
Chron. 15. 16. See the Conference at Hampton Court.
partiality.


N. In the second place you have added a verse, to the 136. Psalm: which is
not in the Hebrew nor in the Greek: but seems rather to be taken out of the
Vulgar Latin.


I. Have you not heard men in the end of a Psalm sing the last verse of the
twenty eight Psalm?


N. I have heard Some of your own brethren do it: neither may I disallow it:
Considering it may be used as a good Epiphonematicall conclusion to a Psalm.


I. The like may be said of this verse: Praise ye the Lord of Lords, etc.
which is repeated out of the third verse of the same Psalm: and therefore
cannot be erroneous; but may be a good Epiphonema or conclusion to the Psalm.
Now if you fear it will spoil the Rabbinicall conceit of the number of six
and twenty; containing the two and twenty Hebrew Letters: and the four
letters of rest, which are said to be found in the name Jehovah; we pass not
for such bubbles in the water.


N. From Sentences I pass to a Word by you added in these words of the Psalm:
For so you read it, that seek thy Psalm. 24. 6.
face, O Jacob.


I. How are the words read in the Hebrew?


N. Thus (as I take it:) that seek thy face Jacob.


I. How do the Seventy read it?


N. Thus: that seek the face of the God of Jacob.


I. And how would you read or translate them?


N. This is the generation of them that seek thy face (this is) Jacob: that
is; Jacob is the generation which seek Gods face: whereas you make the Just to
seek the face of Jacob; a sense either idle, or idolatrous.


I. To seek the face of Jacob (that is, the Visible Church) is no idolatry:
For God's face, or Presence, is best seen in his Church. Thus our Translation
agrees in sense with the Greek; in sense and words with the Hebrew: whereas
yours iarreth in both, with both.


N. As you deformed the quantity: so have you altered the quality of the
Psalms by obscurity, and falsehood: The obscurity appears both in the
connection of whole sentences: and in perverting of some words: Of the first
kind is that in the Psalm. 58 8. or 9. according to some.
Psalm: where thus you read: Or ever your pots be made hot with thernes, so
let indignation vex him, even as a thing that is raw. Here I would ask upon
what ground or color you have translated Pots?


I. Do not you know that the Hebrew word signifies both Pots, and Thorns? Now
tell me, how you would have this place translated.


N. Our brethren of Geneua, have thus rendered them; As raw flesh before the
pots feel the fire of thorns; so let him carry him away as with a
whirlwind, in his wrath.


I. This is as obscure as the former: Besides you see that your brethren
translate pots as well as we. And here I might ask you how they came to render
it thus, as it were in his wrath.


N. The Seventy so translate it; and the Hebrew word is so taken in another
Psalm. 78. 49.
Psalm.


I. True, if you read it without points: And it may be that you suppose that
points were invented by the Masorites, which were much later then the Seventy.


N. I will not enter into that question: But I reverence the points of the
Masorites, above the Seventy now extant.


I. That this plea may be brought to an issue; Produce I pray you some plain
interpretation of this place.


N. The place may be rendered to this effect: Before they understand (that is
before men perceive by miserable experience and feeling) your prickles (which
are as the prickles) of rhamnus (that is a poisoned bramble) he (that is God)
shall with a whirle-winde destroy it: (namely, the bramble, or every one of
the prickles) as well as the living (that is the green and flourishing
prickle) as the dried (for the bramble has some prickles green, some dry, and
withered at the same time) This is the plainest exposition that I can invent.


I. Then were you mistaken in accusing our Liturgy of obscurity: For your
interpretation will hardly ever be understood of the vulgar. And indeed it were
an unreasonable task, to force them to conceive the connection of every
intricate place in Job, Psalms, Ecclesiastes, and the Prophets: Considering
that the best learned, do many tines here stand amazed like the ten Spies,
when they saw the walls, and stature of the Anakims.


N. From the connection of sentences, I turn my self to your perverting of
words: wherein your ignorance discouers it self: sometimes putting in a word
that is opposite: sometimes that is diverse. An example of the first kind is
this: Psalm. 17. 4.
Because of men's works that are done against the words of my lips, I have
kept, etc. Whereas the words should thus be turned, concerning the works of
men, by the words of thy lips, I kept me, etc. Here first you see that the
words are by you mispointed: For this clause: (By the words of thy lips) should
be joined to this (I have kept me.) Secondly, you have translated against for
by; and my for thy, which are terms plainly opposite.


I. The original is pointed like our Book, as is to be seen: As for the word
which we translate against; and you by, it has both significations.


N. But in this place, it should be translated by; and not against: For the
Prophet means, that by the words of Gods lips; he had preserved himself from
the ways of the cruel.


I. The Hebrew pointing, refutes your meaning. The words may be thus expounded,
Because men have done things against the words of my lips; I have therefore
avoided their paths.


N. But the Hebrew has thy, not my lips.


I. The sense is all one: For things done against God's word* were also wrought
against the words of David, his true Prophet. So Mich. 5. 2.
Micha says, Thou Bethlehem art little; meaning in regard of place; and yet
Saint Matthew, citing the same Math. 2. 6.
sentence, thus translates it; Thou Bethlehem art not little: Namely, because
Christ should come out of that City. Thus the words differ; but the sense
agrees.


N. From words opposite I come to those which be diverse: and breed obscurity.
The first example of this kind is in the Psalm. 68. 30.
Psalm; where you read humbly bringing pieces of silver: for treading down
pieces of silver.


I. Your translation is more obscure then ours: and less agreeable to the
Hebrew.


N. You know, that this word is so taken elsewhere: Prou, 25. 26. Ezekiel. 32. 2.
Dan. 7. 7.
howsoever in the two former places the word may seem to vary in writing; and
the last be written in Chaldie, not in Hebrew.


I. These places are impertinent: for though they come of the same root: yet
are they in a different form and They are in Call, and Niphal This in Hit^pael.
Conjugation. For the word here betokens the action of a man treading down
himself; or craftily suffering himself to be trodden down; that is, humbling
himself: And so our interpretation is more consonant to the text, then yours.
The Greek is also for us: for so it is there found: that they which are tried
may be bowed down with silver, that is, may humble themselves, bringing pieces
of silver: For (as I take it) the words are amiss altered in the (...) for
(...)
Greek.


N. The second instance of your mistaking is, when you read in the Psalm. 141.
5.
Psalm: It shall not break my head; as if it were meant of the flatteries of
wicked men: Whereas it should be thus rendered: Let it not be wanting to my
head: being to be expounded, of the reproof of the godly.


I. Your Geneuians translate it as we do: and surely this translation came
from the Greek: which is thus, Let not the oil of the sinner anoint my head:
And (if you observe it well) the sense will accord with the Hebrew. For when
David prays, that the oil (namely of the godly) may not be wanting to his
head; Does he not by consequence request that the oil of the wicked may not
anoint it?


N. But how does breaking the head, agree with anointing?


I. Either this may be the meaning; Let not the oil of the wicked (under
pretense of anointing) break my head: Or else, it may be taken from the
custom of breaking the box of ointment over the head of the party Mark 14. 3.
anointed.


N. From your obscurity, I proceed to your falsehood: wherein you violate
either the analogy of faith; or of the place; and present text.


I. When we urge you to subscribe to the translation, our meaning is: that
that there is no error therein against the analogy of faith: and you
impertinently allege certain errors against the analogy of the Place: But
now to your proofs.


N. The first instance of the former kind is: when you read in the Psalm. 18.
26.
Psalm: Thou shall learn frowardness: Whereas it should be read; Thou shall
show thy self froward: else the speech were blasphemous.


I. The Hebrew word signifies a reflexiue imitation, or learning of an action
(as the Conjugation shows;) For in an other form it signifies to wrestle,
or Namely in Niphal. Gen 30. 8.
strive: And it is a vulgar (...).
figure, whereby we ascribe to God, the passions of men: (As when he is said to
repent, to be grieved, or angry:) For indeed what can we conceive, or utter of
God, without a figure? Again, the (...).
Greek reads as we do: So that your censure of blasphemy, is somewhat too
viperous.


N. A second instance of the same fashion, is, when you read in the Psalm. 125.
3.
Psalm; Shall not fall; whereas it should be translated shall not rest: Else
we should pray with some ignorant people to be delivered from all evil.


I. The Seventy render it as we (...), Non dimittet.
do: And this is but a critical cavil, about the emphasis of a word: For
whatsoever does rest upon a thing, must first fall thereupon. So that by
falling, we mean an heavy, and a continued fall.


N. Against the analogy of the place, you have corrupted sentences and words:
An example of the first is, when you read in the Psalm. 107. 40.
Psalm; Though he suffer them to be evil entreated through tyrants; whereas
according to the Hebrew and Greek, it is! He powered out contempt; Or contempt
is powered out upon Princes.


I. The meaning is all one: For God by sending foreign Tyrants to vilify
their Princes, does suffer even the People also to be roughly handled by them.
So Nabuchadnezar by God's permission plucked out the eyes of Zedechias, and
withal did lead the People into captivity.


N. You have also corrupted and falsied words; two Nounes, and two Verbes.


I. O unhappy Mother Church: which have brought forth such children, as for a
pair of Nounes and Verbes, make such long furrows upon thy back.


N. To leave your Rhetorique: The first place is in the Psalm. 68. 6.
Psalm: where you read men of one mind, for solitary men,


I. We read it according to the (...).
Greek. The Hebrew word comes of a root, signifying to Unite. And surely it
is a great blessing of God to have an agreement in a Family.


N. The next Psalm. 75. 3. or 2. according to others.
place is where you translate a Congregation, for a fit time.


I. The Hebrew word signifies a Congregation Numb. 16. 2.
elsewhere. David also means that great Congregation mentioned in 2. Sam. 3.
19. and 5. 1.
Samuel: Lastly this was a fit time (namely in this assembly) to do this
action: and therefore the Greeks translate it a (...).
season.


N. The first falsified Psalm. 106. 30.
Verb is, where you render it Phinees prayed, for executed judgment.


I. The Hebrew in other places: does signify to 1. Sam. 2. 1. and 25. Jonah 2.
1.
pray. The Greek* also translate it as we (...). ^
do, intimating a prayer conjoined to his valiant act: by both which, he
wrought the atonement.


N. But where do you read in the Story of Phinees that he prayed?


I. Where find you in Exodus that Moses said, I fear and quake?


N. Though it be not extant in Moses: yet we find it in the Epistle to the
Heb. 12. 21.
Hebrews, which is to us most authentical.


I. In like manner, Though Phinee's prayer be not found in Moses: yet dare we
not deny credit to David, reporting the same.


N. Your last Psalm. 119. 122
corruption is, where you interpret thus: make me delight in good; whereas it
should be, answer for me in that is good: Or be my surety in the thing which
is good.


I. This Cobweb is not worth the sweeping down: For who conceiueth not that
God causes us to delight in goodness, when he becomes our sure surety for
our good? And thus your twenty objections against the Psalms, are become like
the apples of Sodom, turned into smoke, ashes, and brimstone.


CHAP. V.
Of the Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels.
N. FRom the Psalms, I proceed to the Chapters; wherein we blame your reading
and Translation: In your reading, we disallow your omission of so many Chapters
(Namely about two hundred and ten) So that of 1039. Chapters, you read but 829.


I. The cause of our action is double: First, sundry Chapters be exceeding
hard, and therefore not fit to be read without 1. Cor. 14. 28.
interpretation.


N. This place has been fitly applied by some of our brethren, against
reading in the Church, where there is no preaching.


I. Digress not now: You know the place is meant of the interpretation of
tongues, and not of preaching. But to let your opinion go current now if no
Chapters may be read without an Interpreter; How much more should those be
unread which be intricate? and such only: are by us omitted. These are of four
kinds: First, some contain Genealogies, as Genesis 10. 11, 36 Exodus 6. Likewise
the first of Matthew, and the third of Luke, in Math. 1. 1. to the 18. Luke 3.
23. to the end.
part.


N. By this reason, you should omit the fist of Genesis, which is nothing but a
Genealogy.


I. That is untrue: For besides the Doctrine of Original sin; and the taking
away of Gen 5. 3.
Enoch: the long lives and deaths of the eight Patriarchs are declared: also
the time of the Flood, and the Preservation of the Church is made known:
Secondly, some be Ceremonial, (as Exodus 25. to the 32. and 35. to the end of
the Book: Leuit. 1. to the 18. Likewise 21. to the 26 also the last Chapter of
the same Book: The like is to be said of sundry Chapters in Numbers: and those
two in Deuteronomie: the 14. and 23.) Thirdly, some contain the description of
places: (as Joshua 15. to the 23.) Fourthly, some are Prophetically mystical:
(as all the Song of Solomon; and many Chapters in Ezekiel, especially the nine
last: And Apocal. 2. to the 22.) The second cause of our action is; For that
some Chapters do only repeat things elsewhere delivered. Of this kind, are
the Books of the Chronicles, and the seventh of Nehemiah.


N. But why do you omit the eighteenth of Job?


I. I have showed you elsewhere: That those Chapters uttered by the three
friends of Job contain an Chap. 1. of the first book.
error: and therefore if none of them were read without an Interpreter, it
were more safe for the people. Of this number is this Chapter uttered by
Bildad: What other particular reason, may be rendered thereof, I am ignorant.


N. But why do you not read the thirtieth of the Proverbs?


I. The Chapter is very lofty, and obscure: and therefore an easier Lesson
were fitter for the people.


N. This term of Lesson is Childish.


I. It is but the English of Lection, and Lecture: a word used by Acts 13. 15.
and 15. 21.
Saint Luke.


N. To leave your reading: I proceed to your translation: wherein twenty other
faults are observed, as well as in your Psalms: These also are in quantity,
and quality: In the quantity (as before) Substraction and Addition.


I. The adversaries of Paul, gave him one stripe less then forty: You give
your Mother the Church, full forty stripes Besides you are bad Arithmeticians,
setting Substraction before Addition: But if, instead of Substraction, you had
put Detraction, the thing, and the name had kept time together. Now declare
what material thing have we taken away?


N. You have cut of words twice in Saint Luke, and once in the Epistle to the
Colossians: The first place in Luke is, where you read, this Luke 1. 36. In
the Gospel of the Anunciation.
is the sixth month, which is called barren: whereas it should be, this is her
sixth month; or the sixth month to her.


I. Few hearers are of so leaden understanding, which hearing this Story read,
will not conceive, that Elizabeth, and not the month is here termed barren.
Wherefore you do but trifle about words: especially considering that your
first correction; this is her sixth month (which is also extant in our Church
Bibles,) makes the sentence never the less subject to caption, if a man list
to strain at a gnat: And your latter emendation (This is the sixth month to
her) though smelling of the Greek phrase, yet will never agree to our English
Idiome.


N. Secondly, in Luke, you omit these words. Luke 10. 1. In the Gospel on
Saint Lukes day.
After these things, whereby the coherence of the text, and Chronology is
declared.


I. When we read the Chapter we omit not these words. But when we read the
Gospel; the coherence you pretend is not so needful, but that it may be
omitted: As for any particular Chronology out of these words, it is hard to
be gathered.


N. You have not a little erred in cutting the Bible into these Epistles and
Gospels which are more like to shreds and fragments then to true Chapters.


I. Forasmuch as the whole Books could not be read at once, it was thought
fit, (besides the Division into Chapters) to extract certain smaller Models,
(yet containing whole matters) that the people might be instructed more
plentifully by the reading of the text. And herein you nod your head at the
Primitive Antiquity.


N. In the Epistle to the Col. 3. 12. In the fifth Sunday after the Epiphanie.
Colossians you geld these words, Holy and beloved.


I. You are not unlike Cham, who (according to the fable of the Hebrews) made
his Father unapt for generation. So would you make your Mother the Church unfit
for the regeneration of men: for that watching much, she winked once, and let
slip a brace of words: the Emphasis whereof she retains notwithstanding in the
Sentence. For they which put on the bowels of pity, as the elect of God* are
they not Holy and Beloved?


N. You have added also sentences and words: The first sentence is in Math 9
25. In the Gospel on the 24. Sunday after Trinity.
Matthew: where you add these words, And said, Damsel arise.


I. Beza tells you that some copies did insert these words out of Saint Luke 8.
54.
Luke: it may be also out of Mark 5. 41.
Saint Mark.


N. Two other sentences are added by you in Luke. The first in the Story of
the Luke 16. 21. In the Gospel on the first Sunday after Trinity.
richman: (And no man gave unto him.)


I. It may be those words, were taken out of the Parable of the Prodigal Luke
15. 16.
child: Or else in some Copies they were put in by Consequence of the Story:
For it is more then probable: that no man gave any thing to that poor Eleazar
(or Lazarus) whom God, and not So answers Junius in his Paralells upon Heb.
1^. 21.
man helped.


N. The next sentence added in Luke 19. 42. In the Gospel on the tenth Sunday
after Trinity.
Luke is this: Thou would take heed.


I. Beza does out of Budaeus tell you: That this patheticall exclamation, has
in it a defective brevity, which may fitly be supplied or explained by this,
or the like sentence: which liberty of supplying, who so grants not to all
translaters shall show himself more stiff in opinion, then studious for
edification.


N. The words by you inserted, are partly in the Old, partly in the New
Testament. And here we cannot but marvel: that you call As Isaiah 40 and 55.
and 63. Ier. 23. Joel 2. Apoc. 14. and the like.
Prophecies Epistles.


I. This we do for two causes. First, in regard of the matter of these
Chapters: which is Evangelical, and Hortatorie, not unlike that which is found
in the Epistles: Secondly, in regard of the form: For these being among the
Epistles, receive their common name. So we say: the Psalms of David, though
David made not all of them: so we reckon the words of Prou. 30. 1.
Agur, and of Prou. 31. 1.
Bathsheba; among the Proverbs of Solomon: So Saint Luke styles his second
Book, The Acts of the Apostles; though other men's actions besides the
Apostles, be there historified.


N. The first word added by you in the Old Testament, is found in Isaiah 63.
11. In the Epistle, on the Monday before Easter.
Isaiah: where you have patched the text with this word Israel; whereas the
place is meant of God, as is plain by the context.


I. Not so plain (as you pretend.) The words are intricate in the As may
appear by Iunius his confused translation of this place.
Hebrew, neither will there be any incongruitie in the sense, if we say that
Israel remembered the days of old: and so God in mercy remembered his penitent
people Israel: Surely though I were of Domitians mind. I should be weary of
killing these little flies.


N. Secondly, you add in Ier. 23. 5. in the Epistle on the 25. Sunday after
Trinity.
Jeremy these words, (with wisdom.)


I. The Hebrew word signifies elsewhere to prosper with 1. Sam. 18. 14. and 30.
wisdom.


N. The place in the New Testament is in the Epistle of Paul to the Gal. 4. 5.
In the Epistle on Sunday after Christmas day.
Galatians: where you add his word natural.


I. Why are not we the natural sons of God, by faith?


N. Christ only is Gods Son by nature, we by adoption.


I. Saint Paul calls Timothy, his natural son in the 1. Tim. 1. 2.
faith.


N. He means that he loved him in manner as a natural son.


I. So God (though in an other degree) loves us, as he does his Son Christ:
Can you tell what Corn is shaken by this wind?


N. In the quality, there is obscurity and falsehood: Obscurity comes by
transposing, or misinterpretation of words. Of the former, the first instance
is in Math. 27. 9. In the Gospel on Sunday before Easter.
Matthew, where you read whom they bought of the Children of Israel: whereas
it should be rendered: whom they of the Children of Israel bought or (rather)
valued.


I. If they valued, they bought by consequence. As for the obscurity it is in
the Greek as well as in our English. The like Phrase is found in the Acts 21.
16.
Acts: for there is a (...), or the like.
word in both places understood.


N. A second instance is in the Gospel of John 1. 1. In the Gospel on
Christmas day as you call it.
John: where you read: and God was the word whereas the words should thus be
placed. And the word was God: as both the Greek ((...))
Article shows, which declares the subject (as you term it) not the Ramus
does term these antecedens and consequens.
predicate: As also the sense and scope of the place does convince: For it is
as improper and indirect a speech to say, God is the word or Christ, as if one
should say a living creature is a man; or a Tree is an Oak.


I. Ramus did indeed exclude indirect predication out of his new invented
Logique, as he did also many other most wholesome things: (Namely, the doctrine
of Obiectum, Modalis propositio, Limitatio, Distinctio: Reductio Syllogismi,
Figurarum modi.) Besides he most negligently handled Relation, Definition,
Demonstration, See more in Kekermans Book, called Praecognita.
Method. Every Logician can tell you, that indirect predication is usual: For
here it is used by Saint John in the (...).
original. What do you make words of Scripture like Complementall Pharisees
striving for places? Besides if a man should examine you, Cuius est haec
praedicatio (This word was God.) Could you answer? It is not Generis de
Specie? Speciei de Indiuiduo? Nor Differentiae de Specie? Much less Proprij or
Accidentis de Specie, seu Subiecto.


N. We have hissed the Predicables out of Logique.


I. You may depart out of the Schools with them for company: For without the
Predicables, Division, Definition, and Demonstration cannot be understood.


N. Obscurity by misinterpretation of words is found in that place of the
Epistle to the Gal. 4. 25. In the Epistle on the fourth Sunday in Lent.
Galatians: where you translate bordereth for answers.


I. Do you mean that it answers in neerenesse of situation?


N. Nothing less: For there is a great distance between Mount Sinai, and
Jerusalem. We mean it answers in allegorical proportion.


I. The same do we mean by bordering, Namely, not Local, but Relative, or
contrary.


N. Other obscure places are in the Epistle to the Ephesians. The Ephesians 3. 5.
In the Epistle on the 16. Sunday after Trinity.
first is, where you read, which is father of all that is called father;
whereas the words should thus be turned, Of whom is named every family.


I. You are not unlike one who would have had Stripling put in for Youth in the
Psalm. 119. 9.
Psalm. For tell me: Is there not in every family a father? Is not he our
father of whom we receive our name? Besides the (...).
Greek word there used, signifies a company of men, who have their pedigree
from one Father (as the Israelites from Israel; the Rechabites from Rechab, and
the like.) Is not this all one with a family?


N. The second place in the Ephesians. 5, 13. In the Epistle on the third Sunday in
Lent.
Ephesians is: where you read, every thing that is manifest, the same is
light. Whereas it should be; every thing that makes manifest is light.


I. Beza declares out of the Greek Scholiast, that the Greek word may be
rendered as we do it: for it is passiuely taken in the words going (...).
before: So that by light we understand full of light. In which sense the word
is used in the same Ephesians 5. 8.
Chapter.


N. After the obscurity there remains falsehood: violating the analogy either
of faith, or of the place: Of the first kind some transgress the Law, some
the Gospel. For the Law first you mistake the ceremonial; when in the Epistle
to the Heb. 9. 25. In the Epistle on Wednesday before Easter.
Hebrews you read with strange blood, for with other blood, namely with the
blood of beasts, not his own.


I. When you say in the first Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but
me. Do you not mean Strange Gods? When Solomon bids you beware of a strange
woman, does he not understand another woman besides your own wife?


N. Secondly, you corrupt the Moral Law, when you read in the Epistle to the
Rom 12. 11. In the the Epistle on the second Sunday after the Epiphanie.
Romans: Apply your selves to the time, for serving the Lord. For if it should
be translated time; it should be thus rendered, serving the time, as if Paul
should say be time seruers, which is a thing against the Moral Law.


I. Some Greek Copies read as we (...) not (...).
do. The meaning of the Apostle may be: that we should apply our selves to the
season, namely, to take all occasions of doing good. So the Prophet speaks of
himself, according to your Psalm. 75. 2.
translation. So the Apostle enioyneth Gal. 6. 10.
us: your objection of serving the time, is light: for we may serve the time,
as we may serve men: that is, in Gal. 5. 13.
love, not upon 1. Cor. 7. 23.
constraint.


N. From the Law to the Gospel; which you first break, reading in Luke 1. 48.
In the Magnificat.
Luke, Lowliness for Low Degree.


I. Some would contest with you in this point, saying, that Lowliness
signifies meanness, and baseness, as well as humility. But put the case we
had translated it humility.


N. You had confirmed the Popish error of Merit.


I. Why had not God respect to the sacrifice and faith of Genesis 4. 4 and Heb.
11. 4.
Abel? Will not God reward us according to the things we have 2. Cor. 5. 10.
done? and that with a reward of 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Justice? to the recompense of which reward Moses had Heb. 11. 16.
respect.


N. Secondly, you do injury to the Gospel, when you make Paul doubt of his
own salvation, translating 1. Cor 9. 27. In the Epistle on Septuagesima Sunday.
a Castaway, for reproueable.


I. First, it was possible that Saint Paul, being made of flesh as well as of
spirit; might doubt of his own salvation: Secondly, it is lawful for us to
fear damnation, in regard of the cause thereof, namely, sin: For it is no
servile fear, to fear to sin, least we be damned upon God's pleasures
against us for sin. As for your in erpretation of reproueable, it is not
worth the reproving, it is so weak.


N. There remain two places against the analogy of the text or present place:
The first is in the Epistle to the Philip. 2. 7. In the Epistle on the Sunday
next before Easter.
Philipians, where you translate apparel for habit.


I. Is not habit an apparel in the tenth Categorie?


N. We have banished all Categories out of Logique, and Metaphysiques.


I. You are not unlike the snake, which being brought up by an husbandman, killed
one of his children. For you being nourished in the University, would wound or
slay two of her best children, Logique and Metaphysique. But to defer this to a
time more convenient: what mean you by habit?


N. What, but the flesh of Christ?


I. Does not Antiquity resemble Christ's flesh to Elias 2. Kings 2. 13
cloak? Besides, may not this be the meaning, that Christ put on the apparel
of man, which was not given to Adam till after his fall?


N. The second place is in Peter, 1. Pet. 3. 20. In the Epistle on Easter Even
where you read was once looked for, instead of did wait.


I. The Greek word is of the mean voice; and so may signify either.


N. But in this place, it must be rendered did wait: for the wicked did rather
abuse then wait for God's mercy. Noah did expect the flood.


I. Withal he did expect the deliverance of his family; and so did prepare
the Arc. Thus your words have been weighed, as the words of Euripides, in the
scales of the Aristophanes in the Frogs.
Poet; or rather in the Scales of Balthazar, and have been found too light.


FINIS.
Let these faults be thus corrected, and the rest (as mispointing, etc.)
favorably pardoned.
Errata.
IN Epist. p. 2. l. 22. r. readers for reader, in Epist. p. 4. l. 23. for Rits,
r. Rites. In the second Epitaph, l. 18. some Copies have been printed Patrum
for Patrem p. 2. l. 20 r. (...). And, ibid. l. 23. r. Caere. And, ibid. in
Marg. r. Ioh Epist. 2. v. 10. page 7. l. 26. r. Cathedral, page 10. In the
second Marg. quotat. for John 18. 12. r. Matthew 13. 2. page 12. l. 31. r.
Nouelist, page 15. l 25. all for ill, page 17. l. 16. r. These for thus, page
33. l. the last before though add and, p. 36. l. 21. and 31. r. superstition,
p. 41. l. 14. r. refuteth, p. 99. l. 23. for of r. on, p. 157. after, enter,
add, into you, p. 228. l. 13. r. vegetative, p 237. l. 12. r. yea and ihid l.
27. for by, r. be p. 251. l. 30. r. yet p. 257. l. 11. before fable, add a p.
266. l. 28. r. Archimedes, p. 270. l. 8. add, with p. 286. l. 11. for alone,
r. all-one, and ibid. l. 14. for decres, r. decrees.


