T he Copy of a Letter Descri bing the wonderful work of G od in delivering a
Maiden withi n the City of Chester, from an horrible kind of torment a nd
sickness 16. of Fe bruary 1564.

O England thou behold a fact most (...)
Showed forth by God in this thy native land
Sith by gods word thou setst so little care.
God. God I say, begyns to stretch his hand.
As in this book thou may well understand.
A Maid but young, late with great ill (...)
But now by God she is again re^est.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dewllyng in little Britayne street,
beyond Aldersgate. 23. of March. 1564.

To his very friend Master J. D.
AFter hearty salutacions letting al other matters pass, these chiefly are to
signifye unto you: That here of late has happened a wonderful cure of a Maid
with in this City, wrought by Gods power in his faithful Minister and Preacher
of Jesus Christ, Master Lane, to the auancement of Gods glory, and to the
great marueiling of all those inhabiting in these parts. And least the same
should be misreported, or the wicked suffered to wrest things, to abuse Gods
Preachers, and for that the thing is so rare and notable that it should not be
kept from the posteritye, I have therefore sent you the whole true discourse
thereof, described with the hand of Sir Wyllyam Caluerley knight, Richard
Hurleston Esquire, and mine own. I could have had every man here to have done
the like, but considering we have had good proof the one with the other, I
thought this shall suffice, praying you to put the same in print.

From the City of Chester the.xv. of March. 1564. Your friend J. F.

The copy of a letter describing the wonderful work of God, in delivering a
Maiden within the City of Chester, from an horrible kind of torment and
sickness, 16. of February. Anno. 1564.
Having received your letter, and thereby understanding as well what brute has
lately happened in your parts, concerning the delivery of a woman here within
the City of Chester, from a most monstrous and horrible kind of torment and
disease, as also how desirous you are to learn the truth thereof: I am
contented in gratefieng this your request, to signifye herein as is for truth
known and accepted. The storye therefore was this:

Anne Mylner a Maiden of the age of.xviii. years, daughter to Ra^dulphe Mylner,
and brought up in her Fathers house, within the bridge street of the same
City, went the.xviii. day of October last, to bring her Fathers Kyne into the
fields. And at her return, coming in the high way near to the City, was
sodaynlye taken with great fear, and thought that she saw a white thing
compassing her round about, and so amassed, came to her fathers house, and in
the next morning felt her self grieved, and very sore in all the parts of her
body, which so increased, that thereupon she was enforced to keep her bed,
being very sick. And during the space of five days then next ensuing, did
not take any kind of bodily sustenance, as her Parents has sundry times
declared. She had her fyt and trance almost from hour to hour, and had never
above three hours rest in the day and night. Neither did eat during the time
of her sycknes, but once in each xxiiii. hours, and then most commonly a little
quantitye of bread and cheese, which notwithstanding was done with wonderful
snatching and rashness.

The manner of her disease and sycknes was such (as here after, touching the
time of her cure, shall be more perticularly described) that unto her out of al
parts of the city, repair of very many was made. Yea, insomuche that after
Master John Pierce, one of the Canons of the Cathedral church of Chester,
and Reader of the Didinity Lecture there, with diverse persons of reputacion had
seen the Maiden, he with his Auditorye in December last, at the end of his
Lecture, kneling upon their knees made special prayers unto God, for her
deliuerace.

After this it chanced Master John Lane, late fellow of Christ's College in
the Uniuersity of Ca^bridge, and now a famous and godly Preacher of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, within the County of Chester, preaching at Torperley, at the
request of Raufe Done Esouyer, about the xxi. of Januarye last, metther with
two men of the said City, the one being a nere neighbor to this woeful woman:
who then among other talk, demanded of Master Lane, whether there were not
some possessed with spirits as in times past, and for confirmacion hereof spoke
of the said Maiden, and alleged the horryblenes of her torment to be such, at
the time of her trance, that it could argue nothing else, but that she was
possessed with some spirit. And further said, that she had remained in that
miserable plight.xv. or. xvi. wekes, and (as I suppose, having heard how it
is well known to diverse credible persons in these parts, what rare and
syngular remedy god has wrought by M. Lane, to some that sustained of late no
small decay of mind and memory, or else being of that religion, as in these
days seek miracles to confirm Gods word) desired him at his next coming
to the City of Chester, to see the tormented Maiden, and they would bring him
unto her.

Master Lane then condecending to their request, and at his next repair unto
the said City, lodged in the house of Sir William Caluerly Knight, whereon
Friday being the.xvi. of Februarye last (at which time the Assise was hloden
in Chester) met again by occasion with the said two men: who after they had
put him in remembrance of his promise, and had disclosed the manner of the
Maidens torment to Sir William Caluerley, sir Wylliam Sneyd Knights, and my
Lady Caluerley, with diverse other then desirous to see the Maiden, went al
together, and brought master Lane unto the said Mylners house (to see the
Maiden, and the^ to him unknown) about two of the clock in the after noone of
the same.xvi. day of February, and there finding the Maiden in her trance
after her accustomed manner, lying in a bed within the haule, her eyes half
shut, shalfe open, looking as she had been aghast, never mouyng either eye or
eye lyd, her teeth something open, with her tongue doubling between, her face
somewhat red, her head as heavy as lead to lift at, she lay still as a stone,
and feeling her pulce, it beat with as good measure, as if she had been in
perfect health. And in this sort beholding her, almost during the fourth part
of an hour, her bellye began to move, swelling up and down, sometime beneath
her chest, sometime up to the throat, in such vehemenry, that a man would have
thought she would have burst. Then suddenly she lifts her self up in her bed,
bending backwards in such order, that almost her head and fete met, falling
down sometime on the one side, sometime on the other, but rysyng again so
suddenly, that the beholders could not imagine how if might be possible so
quicklye she could without aid of hand, cast her self (her belly being
upward) into the form of a hoope.

Master Lane demanded of her that kept this cruel handled creature, whether
she could not keep her down? Who answered no, and said that she had once
tried it, and then was almost cast into the fire. Then desired he that she
would permit him to assay if he could hold this doleful woman down.
She answered yea, but yet said it would not prevail. W^l said Master Lane,
by the grace of God it may prevail. And thereupon after that this pitiful
Mayde^ had lifted her self. 4. or v. times in such wonderful manner as before is
noted, he took her in hand, and with much ado plucked down her feet, and with
more ado kept them down, holdinge her hands, sytting upon her legs, in whom
he found such strength and vehement panges, that he was fully persuaded she was
possessed.

The people present, seeing him so to continue with her, and her pains
increase, some thought best he should let her alone, saying that it would have
the course. Whom master Lane desired to be quiet, and let God work, willing
them to pray to God for her, for as much as in him only consists her
deliverance from that pain, and that god was as strong as ever he was. And
when she was in the vehement panges the beholders called upon god for her,
master Lane secretly said the fifty Psalm, and often desired God, through the
blood of his son Jesus Christ, to ease the Maiden, not doubting of his mercy
in that behalf.

And when he had thus striued with her the space of two hours, that the drope
trickled down his face, he had thought to have commended her unto God: but
then again it came to mind to tarry the end, and so began a fresh to strive
with her, ever secretly praying and calling upon the blood of Christ, and when
her belly was pressed down with as much weight and strength as could be, by
those yt were present, she stryued more the^ before, and diverse times with the
vehement swelling of her bellye, she was very like to have thrown them over,
that so held down her body.

At the last Master Lane called for viniger, whereat the sta^ders by marueiled,
saying, that yt thing with much more had been often times attempted, but to no
purpose. Notwithstanding he ceased not to call still for it, saying, that God
might do that then, which he did not before, and so received viniger, put it
into his mouth and blewe it into the Mayde^s nostrels, whereat she cried a Lady,
Lady. He the^ willed her to call upon God, and the blood of Christ, and in these
doings she being astonished* he called again for more viniger. Whereat she
cried: No, no, no more for Gods sake.

The^ master Lane willed her to speak and say after him, and so he and all
the^ present, said the Lords prayer and Te deum, she saying after them.

After this her deliverance, she then continually called upon God, and by the
appointment of master Lane, she had her clothes put on, and meat brought,
whereof she did eat a little. This done, master Lane willed to try whether she
could go. Whereunto, albeit that those then present answered that it was not
possible, for that she had not gone in all the time of.xvii. weeks then last
past, yet master Lane affirmed that the same God which gave her speech, could
give her strength also to go: and so departing the place, until the women had
gotten on her hosen, and then coming in again, wyl^ed her in the name of God
to come to him, standing in the other side of the house, which she did. And
thereupon after talk had with her of the manner of her taking, and admonishing
her to have a steadfast faith in Christ, and to occupy her self in prayer, left
her.

My Lady Caluerley, maistres Erauenor, wife to John Erauenor, with diverse other
credible per so as were present, during such time as master Lane was with the
maiden, and are eye witnesses to these his doings.

The next day following, master Lane preached at saint Mary's within the said
City, before John Chrogmarton Esquier, the Queen's majesty's high Justice in
the Countye of Chester, at which sermon the late recovered Maiden was present.

Upon this so wonderful a cure great talk was had in each company within the
City, that thereupon the Maiden was not only brought unto the said Justice,
and master Lane afterward upon earnest request by some of his friends,
half constrained, did write his whole doings therein: but also master Rogers.
Archdeacon of Chester, in his sermon made in the Cathedral Church of Chester,
the iiii of this instant month of March, before the Mayor of the City, the
Bishops of Chester and of Saint Assaphats, with a great multitude of the
Citizens besides, having occasion offered by the words of the then present
Gospel, touched this fact: Alleging that what so ever was the original cause
of so great and strange a disease, yet was the cure wonderful, and wrought by
God, either to the great commodity, or else for the great plague of the City of
Chester, and the country adjoining. The Maiden remains at this present
(praised be god) in perfect good health and lyking.

Thus truly, and as briefly as I might, you have the effect of your request.

Written at the City of Chester, the.viii. of March. An. 1564. The names of the
witnesses hereof, which also did set to their hands. Sir William Caluerley
knight, Richard Hurlestone Esquier. John Fisher Gentleman.



