A Watchword, OR, The Alarm, OR, A good Take Heed.

A SERMON Preached at White Hall in the open Preaching place the last Lent
before King CHARLES.

By the R. R. Father in God T. F. the then Bishop of Landaffe, now of S. David's.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper for Nath. Field.

1628.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY.
DREAD SOVEREIGN, Though it pleased your Majesty to translate me into the
number of those Magi, who give gold for New-yeares gifts (for which the great
Bishop of our souls bless you) yet J cannot suddenly leave my Custom for
these many years paid to your blessed Father and Self, of presenting Paper
withal to wrap it in. This more precious than gold, For, for want of (Good
take heed) Men run the hazard, and fall into danger of Body, Soul, and Estate.
The times are dangerous, our Enemies many and cruel, no man free. Here Is a
Good take heed for all, It is useful for the lowest of your Subjects, as for
your Highest Self: but most needful for You, since your Sacred MAJESTY is
worth 2 Samuel 18. 3. Lament. 4. 20.
ten thousand of us, yea, you are the breath of our Nostrils, and on your
safety depends all ours. Vouchsafe to turn a gracious Eye, as you lent a
patient Ear, to

Your MAJESTY'S faithful servant T. M.

A VVATCH-WORD TO WAKEN US.
DEVT. 4. 9. Attend tibi; Take heed to thy self.
GOod Counsel, short and pithy. These words, like REVBEN; are strong, full of
life, though few in number, Deuter. 33. 6. Here is (as S. Basil speaks) (...),
the full weight of few words. Virtus maxima, in mole minima, very, very much in
a little, Ilias in Nuce, Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, (...) In searching the
veins of the earth (says Clemens Alexandrinus) we find a little gold in a
great deal of Ore: But in searching the Mines of holy Scriptures, within the
compass of a little ground, we find a great deal of gold.

They are the words of a great Commander, Moses the Law giver. Though (as he
excused himself) he was slow of speech, yet was he Exodus 4. 10.
deep in knowledge, well seen in all the learning of the Egyptians, and Acts
7. 22.
better learning then theirs. He was (...), weighty in his sentences. And here
is Imperatoria breuitas, a Lord-like breuity, the more authority the word he
gives, carries with it. He speaks ex Cathedra, his word is a law. It Is short,
for fear man's brittle memory should come short of it; and to avoid obscurity,
it is expounded, and reinforced in the words following, Et custodi, etc. And
keep thy soul diligently, lest being short and dark, it might be slippery
too, and slip the sooner out of mind and memory. Duo verba, duo luminaria.
Genesis 1. 16.
These two words, like the two great lights in heaven, serve to direct us all
in all our ways. As celestial lights they look upon all that look upon
them, and cast their beams upon every head that hears me this day. They
compass this great assembly (even every one) within their sphere, yea, all
the men of the world. There is no son of man that is out of the compass of
this Text. Now God give Grace, that every heart here present, may hence borrow
some influence, light, and motion. Have ye not seen the great lights of Heaven
mounting above the Horizon, how they first shine upon the Hills, and high
Cedars; and after upon the valleys, and lower shrubs? Even so This, and such
like lights, or Caueats, Imprimis, Primos, do most eminently direct men in
eminency, and (not skipping over medios, those of the middle sort) in due order
descend ad infimos, to them of the lower form, call upon all Gods people (as
it were) by the poll, even from Him that sits upon the Exodus 11. 5
Throne, to him that grindeth at the Mill. See this graduall descent, Psalm. 72.
3. The mountains shall bring forth peace, and the little hills righteousness
unto the people. Gods Grace is like the deaw of Hermon; like the precious
ointment which was powered Psalm. 133. 2.
upon Aarons head, descended on his beard, and to the utmost skirts of his
garments. Behold here is a Beacon set on fire on the holy Mount. It behoues
every one of us to look to himself. Some great sudden danger there is toward
from within, and from without too. Homo homini Lupus, A man is a perilous beast
to himself, who should be custos, a keeper; who should be Deus, a God. Cain
lost himself, when he refused to be Genesis 4. 9.
his Brothers keeper, which every man should be, much more his own. Alter
Scneca.
alteri Theatrum sumus, we are all Theaters one to another; wherein we may
observe what is well acted, what is amiss. Yea every man is a City, a
Commonwealth, a World within himself. Ye are not pressed to any foreign
service: Every man is both Custos, and Castrum, the Watch, and the Cittadell;
when the Beacon is fired, when this Alarm (Attend tibi) sounds in our ears,
he that does not gird up his loins, he that does not stand upon his guard, is
a traitor to his own soul.

I come not into this Presence with an Attend mihi, a suit for my self, nor
Attend gregi, Take heed to thy Acts 20. 28
flock; But like the poor Italian Beggar with an Attend tibi: For Gods sake
be merciful, be charitable to thine own soul. If ever precept came home to
the heart, it is this; if ever a charge was reasonable, and easy, it is this,
Attend tibi; be thine own Guard, and Guardian, Ouerseer, and Keeper. I may
term it a Writ of Ne exeat, to confine every rouing eye, and every straggling
ranging thought. Look not, think not on (...), things without you, nor on
(...), on the outward appearance of things, the iugling shows of the world:
Non alijs, non alienis, non tuis; sed Attend tibi; look not at other persons,
other matters, think not on thine own business. Let not thy soul gad abroad
with Dinab, Genesis 34. 1. Psalm. 4. 4.
but commune with thine own heart, retire to thy best Fort, and arm thy self
against the subtle stratagems of Satan. Here is periculum animae, thy soul
lies at the stake, thy soul lies a bleeding, (...), Time and Place, are
powerful perswaders. These be the perilous Times in S. Paul's Prognostickes, 1 Timothy 3. 1. This world is the wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. 1. the very Region
of Death. Under every stone there is a Scorpion, and in every bush a fiery
Serpent. In auro, S. Hierom. S. Bernard.
in cibo laquei. There are snares in our Coffers, and snares in our dishes,
there is death in the pot, Mors in 2 Kin. 4. 40
olla, mors in ollis carnium, etiam in sinu nostro Synones. Our bosom is a
Trojan Horse, and within it are the worst traitors, the most dangerous enemies.
It Is time to look to our selves. So that whether I look on the place we stand
in which is holy ground; or the time we are met in, which is the holy time of
Lent; or the face of Christendom; which is mangled with selfe-giuen wounds,
and besmeared with her own blood; or the persons before whom, and to whom we
speak; or the importance of the message; so nearly concerning every soul
here present: in all these considerations, Moses is a necessary Monitor and
Remembrancer at every man's elbow, and ear, with an Attend tibi, a Take heed
to thy self: yea, Behold a greater then Moses is here, even He, by whom the
Gospel came, Christ Jesus, the great shepherd of all our souls. Solus verus
(...), the only deliverer of his people, of whom Moses was but a Type. The
spirit of Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
God in the mouth of Moses does startle our dull, and drowsy senses with an
Attend tibi. This my Text is to pass as a Watchword from one to another; to
which military form of communicating the Watchword, the warlike Prophet
alludes where he says, Thy word runs very Ps. 147. 15.
swiftly, when the Watchword is once given by the General, it is suddenly in
every quarter of the Army. Entertain then this Text as a Watchword from the
Lord of hoasts, ecchoed in the ears of all Israel, by their great Leader
Moses, Take heed to thy self.

For our orderly proceeding, rather in dispersing than dividing this Text, not
long enough for a division, (for a Watchword must be carried entire:) let your
attention go along with me, and by the guidance of Gods holy Spirit I shall
show you three watches and wards employed in Attend tibi.

The first is Attend corpori, a strict guard over the body, in appointing
every man to be the Squire of his own body. For as there is a body of sin,
so there are sins of the body; corporal uncleanness, and fleshly 2 Cor. 7. 1
lusts, which are the Devils Soldiers, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
to fight against the soul. There is a fault in the Caske, a rust of the
Scabberd, the body is but Vagina, the Sheath, the faculties of the soul are
the weapons: Scowre both for the watch and the war.

The second is, Attend animae, the souls ward, and this must be more
carefully kept: For by the sins of the body (lust and drunkenness) men
become beasts; but by the sins of the soul (Pride, Envy, and such like) men
become Devils.

The third is Attend Deo, the watch on our bulwark, most carefully to be
kept, Our waiting upon God: which is requited with Gods watching over us. This
alone secures body and soul. In vain do we trust our blind skouts, and
drowzy Sentinels, except the Lord keep our (...), our City and our Cinque
ports. Our first Watch may be called Custodia Carceris, the second Custodia
Palatij, the third Custodia Templi. The Watch is set, and the watch word given.
Three Watches there were, before we come to reuew them in order, listen we a
while to the two voices that excite us to diligence in keeping this watch. The
first is Vox Naturae, every creature would preserve it self, and by natural
instinct preaches, (as it were) this Text to man, to every man, Attend tibi,
Take heed to thy self. The Roe auoides the toiles, by the quickness of her
sight (as S. Basil S. Basil.
says) being therefore called (...). Frustra iacitur rete ante oculos
pennatorum, surely in vain the Prou. 1. 17.
Net is spread before the eyes of any Bird. The Birds have eyes to see, and
wings to escape the Springes. And shall only man, like a tame fool, run his
neck into every noose? In vain then has God given him reason, which flies
beyond the swiftness of of any wing, which sees beyond the compass of any
eye; by reflection, sees into it self.

The second is vox Gratiae, the voice of Grace, and that rises many notes
higher. Take heed to thy self, take heed of thy self. For man is turned
rebel to God, thereby become a desperate Asassinate to himself. Nemo laeditur
nisi a seipso, no man takes hurt but by his own fault. Take heed of this,
look to thy being: look to thy eternal being; look to thy soul, the life
of thy body; and look up to God, (...) the life of thy soul. Ipse est (...)
animae tuae, for God is thy life (...) 20
Deuteronomy. 30. 20. And here by the way let me point at the goodness of God, and
our own benefit: both are manifested in this watchword, Attend, take heed,
On Gods part, there is Gratia excitans, A Grace stirring us up: our benefit, (if
we give due attendance) is Salus safety, of state, body and soul. By nature we
are careless, and drowzy in matters of salvation; like the Inhabitants of Laish,
we lie open and secure: Judge. 18. 7. 1 Samuel 26. 7
yea like Saul we are in a dead sleep, we may loose our arms, our lives, our
souls before we awake. It is a remarkable art of Gods exciting Grace, to
goade us in this lethargy, to quicken every man with an Attend tibi, take
heed to thy self.

This exciting Grace does snatch us out of the fire and water. It called upon
Lot, to avoid that hell from heaven, Ge. 19. 15.
fire and brimstone. It stirred up Noah to prepare an Arc against the Genesis 6.
18.
deluge: and it still sweetly whispers in every one of our ears; Look to thy
self: prepare an Arc, now that God does threaten an inundation of judgment.
Every passenger in a ship is to look to himself, the Pilote more especially
to all. Quis vtilem causae alienae S. Ambrose.
iudicet, quem videt invtilem vitae suae? Who will esteem that man useful for
another man, that is not careful for himself? says Saint Ambrose. The Lion
King of beasts, and the Eagle King of birds are most vigilant and circumspect.
Our Moses in the text stout as a Lion, but meek as a Lamb; strong-tallond as
an Eagle, but innocent as a Dove; is a pattern of a pious and a prudent
Governor; who looks to the safety of Israel in state, body and soul.

And when Moses does call upon us, to look to our selves, we should be ready
to look to Moses. How forward ought all true Israelites to be to power in
their oil for supply, rather then the light of Israel should be put out? And
so now I come to the three watches: and first of Custodia carceris, or
corporis, the watch over our bodies.

We are here in the body as in 1. Custodia corporis.
a prison, or dark dungeon: Some lights or inlets we have, but they serve
only to let in sin. They more abase the body who will have (...) the body no
better than (...) a Sepulcher, (which is true of the surfetted body) wherein
the soul lies buried. We will allow it to be an instrument of the soul, but
a dull and untoward one: Corpus degrauat animam, the body is a burden to the
soul, says the wiseman. Sap. 9. 15.
Be it one of the essential parts of man; it is the worser, the earthy, and
the brute part. And here admire we with adoration, and adore we with
admiration, the wisdom and power of God, who united and joined togein so
sweet and stable a yoke of marriage (as it were) two so unsuitable things, as
are Heaven and Earth, a Spirit and Flesh; which flesh of ours, (through the
taint of sin) like Jobs wife, becomes a bosom enemy, a traiterous inmate to
our selves, a broker and pander for Satan. I take it now as it is, a cage of
unclean birds, a foul den of beastly lusts: for being swept, it is a temple
of the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6. 19
If we give the body too much, we feed a foe, If too little, we kill a friend.
It behooues us therefore in a godly jealousy, to beat down this rebel
flesh; who like Platoes friend is (...) a changeable creature, a very Camelion:
Sometimes so treacherous, that Scriptures and Fathers cry out Crucifigatur,
crucifigatur, let him be crucified. Sometime so obedient, that Saint Bernard
restores her to her dowry, and the right of a wife, Amet S. Bernard.
Adam Euam suam, Amet Anima carnem suam, ita tamen amet, vt non tota in carnem
transeat. Let Adam love his Eve, the soul her flesh; but let her so love it,
that she takes heed that she become not altogether fleshly. While she is as
Sarah was to Abraham, and calls the soul Lord, 1 Pet. 3. 6. she is worthy to be
loved and cherished. Yet take we heed, that by favoring of the body too much,
we effeminate not the soul. Now if I should make an anatomy of this body, I
could discover in every limme, in every vein and artery, an Inlet for Sin
and Satan.

The body is as tinder, apt to be fired by every spark the Devil casts upon it.
It is therefore requisite, that this powder be kept in close vessels, and that
the passages be stopped; according to the rule of Saint Gregory: Ad cordis S.
Gregory
munditiem sensuum disciplina seruanda est. Cleanse the Limbecke of the senses,
lest thence some pollution drop into the soul. The Arabians proverb is
elegant: Obstrue quinque fenestras, vt luceat domus, shut the five windows,
that the house may be lightsome. Attend oculis, Take heed 1. Eyes.
to thine eyes, that they look not out to behold vanity, that they grow not
red through lust and drunkenness Et dixit quidam, Iuuenes habere in oculis,
(...) 2 Pet. 2. 14.
(...), in Greek signifies Girls, and the pupils of the eyes. S. Peter saw
both together, Eyes full of adultery. The Eye is an Arch-traitour to the heart,
with whom it is of counsel; yet keeps intelligence with the Devil, man's
grand enemy: blabs to Him, his most secret and sudden thoughts; thereby
excites him to assault us, when we are at weakest; and upon his first assault,
yields up our strongest Fort. Until Adam and Eve lusted with their eyes, Sin
and Satan entered Gen 3. 1.
not their hearts. An ill thought is brought forth, grown up, and able to
work, before one can say, Take heed, he that looks upon a woman and lusts
after her, eue^ in that cast of his Math 5. 28
eye, has already committed adultery. What guard then is sufficient to set
upon these swift thoughts, which like lightning, blast and retire; like
thunder, claps and strikes dead, and all in an instant. It is Gods goodness to
us, that has placed in the eye both the Malady, and the Remedy, Visum and
fletum, the faculty of seeing, and the sluice of tears, vt qui delinquant
vidende, poeniteant plorando, (as one well notes) that they who have offended
by seeing, may be recovered by weeping.

Attend auribus. The Ears are 2. Ears.
given us to be conueyers of Faith, and Conduit pipes of knowledge; but we
make them impure tunnells to suck in greedily (...), the very dregs Ephe 4. 29
and lees of rotten communication, which corrupt the manners, and defile the
soul of man; learn of the deaf Adder to stop them.

Attend ori, attend linguae, Take 3. The Tongue. Iam 3. 5 6.
heed to thy tongue, It is a wild beast, world of wickedness. It sets on fire
the whole frame of Nature. It speaks ill of them that are in authority, blurs
innocence, sets private men together by the ears, disturbes the public peace
of the State. The Portcullis of the Teeth, and the Counter-scarfe of the lips,
are not sufficient to keep in this unruly member; unless with David we daily
pray, Set a watch before Psalm. 141. 3
the doors of my lips, and that God hear us, which we have need to do
incessantly. For the mouth though it be Lyra animata, a living Harp, yet it is
more apt to be a Babylonian dulcimer, then an Instrument for the Songs of Zyon.
I might here block up the other Ports, and pursue the rest of the Traitors:
but let it suffice that as in the suppression of a great Rebellion, I show the
heads of the chief Rebels (as it were) upon stakes.

And here I cannot pass by without looking into the Traitors vault, the Heart.

The Heart as it is the Center of the 4. The Heart.
body, is but a little lump of flesh, and will scarsely serve a Kite for a
breakefast, yet all the world will not serve it to wander in: there is such an
endless maze of exorbitant desires in it: it continually casts up
sulphurous flames of lust and revenge. And which makes the malice and malady
thereof more incurable, that of the heart, is a secret and subtle wickedness
unsearchable to man, himself, or others. The heart of the sons of men is
full of evil, and madness is in their heart Eccles. 93.
while they live, says the wiseman. Eccl. 9. 3. And again, Cor hominis Deo,
vt lutum figulo, man's heart is in Gods hands, as clay in the potters. Whereupon
says an ancient Father, It is indeed lutum deo, as stiff and hard clay to
God, had need of much tempering, before it can be made conformable to Gods
will: But it is also, Caro Doemoni, a heart of flesh to the Devil, very
pliable to any wickedness he shall put it to, or into it.

Should we never see ill example, should we live out of any outward
tentation, yet our own heart in it self is so wicked, that it would tempt us
to, and teach us all manner of wickedness; there is such a perpetual spring
of wickedness there, that without Gods special Grace, we could not one minute
of our life, cease to do wickedly in the highest degree. Omnia S. Basil.
reliqui, sed cor meum non reliqui, I have left all, but my heart, I cannot
leave it, (says Saint Basil) in the wilderness. In that he had his heart with
him, he had ill tentations enough. And were it not for this deceitful,
deceivable heart of ours, other outward tentations could not hurt us. Adam and
Eve were not effectually tempted, until they were corrupted in their hearts.
Let every man then apply to his heart that which the prophet speaks to
Jerusalem, O Jerusalem Ier. 4. 14.
wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall
thy vain thoughts lodge within thee. It were well our wicked thoughts would
lodge and abide within us; but they break out into wicked deeds. So our
Savior tells us, that every thing that defiles the man Mat. 15. 18
comes from out the heart. The filthiness of man's heart was so great, that it
was feign to be washed with a deluge of waters. And it is grown so Genesis 6.
filthy again, that all the water in the world will not serve to wash it, it
must rather have a world of fire to purge it, to consume it. Every man
therefore must circumcize his heart. Circumcision Ierem. 4.
will not serve the turn, we must use Incision, that is not enough: we must (as
Esaias speaks) not only circumcidere, pare it about; and incidere, cut it
deep; but decidere, and excidere, and deprimere, cut it off; and if it rise
again (like hidras heads) cut it out, or press it down, even beat it to
powder, and annihilate it, that God may create a new heart within us.

It Is Lent-time, a Time of fasting, and prayer; a time of penance and
contrition. Lent in the ancient Saxon language signifies the Spring: now then
most fitly, when our rank blood recouers the pride of it is spring, should we
by a slender diet beat down 1 Cor. 9. 27.
our bodies, and keep them under. Now is the time to put our knives to our
throat, to use Daniels fare, and Daniels prayer. By prayer will the soul
learn to command the body, and by fasting, the body will learn to obey the
soul. Nature is content with a little, Grace with less. It is now a time of
mortification, and ashes. High-fed lust, and high-wrought fury, and high-flowne
pride, are Lordly companions, but are not to be trusted with the Empire; which
if you transfer from Reason to Passion, (as Constantine removed from Rome to
Constantinople) it is the only way to ruin both soul and body, as he ruined
that which he thought to enlarge. Such a state of body natural or politic,
is like the Serpent A^phisbaena, whose tail goes foremost. Wake not therefore
to dream of Kingdoms, as the mad Spanish Lacquey did, who took himself to
be King of Spain, the Pope to be but his Chaplain, talked of nothing but his
Indies, and of the return of his Plate-fleets, and would go no less then the
universal Monarch.

This is Spanish pride, beware of it, and use towering thoughts, as men use
rising Bees, Cast ^ust upon them, let meditation of mortality bring them down
again. Art thou rich? thou art but rich earth, and Gold Ore is richer then
thou. Art thou honored, and even adored of thy enemy? many a rotten block
has been made a greater Idol. Art thou beautiful? thy picture well drawn
will one day be better to lock on, then the face it was drawn by. Remember
thou art richly mortal, honorably mortal, beautifully mortal, how ever
mortal. Look oncc into a charnell house, a Golgotha, and see if by the bones,
or the skuls, thou can discover who was rich, beautiful, or honorable:
where now are the Nimrods, and Belshazzers, the Giants of the old world? their
names we find registered, but it is for their Gyantly vices; and they are now
inter potentes, qui potenter peccauerunt, and potenter torquebuntur, amongst
the mighty men, which shall be mightily tormented.

This is a time to manacle the hands, Sap. 6. 7.
those instruments of violence, bribery and extortion: to gird up the loins,
those Seminaries and banks of concupiscence: to stock the feet, those swift
supplanting blood-drawing Cursitors, and in a word, to crucify the old man.
Let not the proclamation and the Almanache be the only arguments and proofs
that 'ts Lent: let our brawnie knees, our course backs, our thin bellies, our
amended lives, proclaim the same; and so stop the complaint of Saluian,
Christian viuere dedecus est, to live like good Christians, to fast and pray,
is turned to our reproach. It Is sign the old Serpent does lurk in our old
walls, when being sick of the Mother, we still long after forbidden fruit. Let
it be thy discretion to give each part his due, to thy soul the government; to
thy body necessaries, raiment and food, exercise withal, and correction. And
in this there must be observed a Ne quid nimis, a due proportion to either. The
soul ought to (...), rule, but not (...), tyrannize over the body. The
Primitive and purer discipline does not put iron whips and lanching knives into
your hands to cut and furrow your flesh. Let the Priests of Romish Baal use and
inioyn such exercise and heathenish incision. I commend unto you a weeding hook
and a pruning knife, to pare away luxury and excess, and to pull up (...),
the root of bitterness. O^cidat, Heb. 12. 15
modo imperet, let my Son kill me so he may be Emperor (says Agrippina of
Nero.) It were a happy degree of mortificatio^, would our proud flesh be
content to say, Let me be crucified, so my soul may reign with God. S. Lucy
in the Legend, who pulled out her own eyes, mistook the Text. A darling sin
is that rigbt Matt. 5. 39
eye, which thou art to pull out; and some wicked beloved instrument is that
right hand, which we are to cut off. If we cocker Adoniah, our own flesh, let
us know that one day this 1 Kings 1. 5, 6.
wanton will prove a Rebel, and we shall be scourged with a Scorpion of our
own bowels.

By this time we see that this Attend tibi, is a frontlet for our eyes, a
jewel for our ears, a golden chain for our necks, a bracelet for our arms,
a tablet for our breasts, and a privy coat for the whole man.

S. Ambrose upon occasion of the Cant. 8. 6.
words of the Spouse, Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and as a signet upon
thy arm, does sweetly observe, that Christ is a seal on our forehead, when we
openly confess him; a seal upon our heart, when we sincerely love him; a
signet upon our arm, when we work righteousness and fence our selves
against these Iebusites, and Edomites, our souls enemies. Thus have we passed
the first watch, Attend corpori, Take heed to thy body. We enter now upon the
second, Attend animae, which is Custodia Palatij, the watch about the Palace,
or the Kings Pauilion. Si tanti Vitrum, quanti Margarita? be so valued, at what
shall the orient Pearl be prised? If we be so careful for the Cabinet, the
body, how many millions of new and greater cares should we take for the Jewel,
which is our soul?

Provide a good guard for this Queen, she is the great Kings daughter, and the
spouse of Christ. It was no base purchase, which cost the Son of God his
dearest heart-bloud. 1 Pet. 1. 19
It is no mean booty which Satan so hotly pursues by compassing Sea Job 1. 7.
and land. It is not a thousand rams, nor ten thousand rivers of oil, nor so
many sacrificed sons the fruit of thy body, can satisfy for the sins of
thy soul. It cost more to redeem a soul. Mica. 6. 7.
How much more? David wants Arithmetique to express it, and where he fails,
who can tell the proportion, or rather infinite disproportion betwixt any price,
and that great purchasse. Christ who best knew the price of souls (as being
sole purchaser) does pass all the world in the value of the ransom of our
souls: what shall a man give in recompense of Mar. 8. 37.
his soul? and in the verse before, wbat shall it profit a man, though he win
the whole world, if he loose his soul? Sure he will be a most wretched
bankrupt by the bargain. In the Philosophers Scale, Anima muscae est sole
praesta^tior, The soul of a silly fly is more excellent (in nature though not
in use) then the glorious Sun in the firmament. In the Ciuilians account,
Omne membrum est inestimabile, Every limb of a man is vnvalewable: Can you
give me the just price of a leg, of an arm, of an eye? Now Saint Chrysostom
has S. Chrysostom.
well observed, God has given membra duplicia, two eyes, two arms, two legs,
that the failing of the one, may be supplied by the other. Animam vero vnam,
but one soul, when that is lost, there is no supply. Admit there were so many
worlds, as there are motes in the sun: lay them all in one scale, they will
not counteruaile one soul, which is not redeemed with Silver and Gold, but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled. 1 Pet. 1. 19
Oh the prodigals of our age! I tremble to point at their unthriftiness: what
cost and care is bestowed upon houses, horses, hawks, dogs? mean while what
cheap account, what wilful neglect of souls? The house Plutarch. lives.
must be like that of Valerius magnificently built, and furnished, the horse
fat and fair, (...) all things must S. Chrysostom.
be brave, and gorgeous; but there is no care taken, that there be (...) a
Basil.
beautiful soul. Should I tell this press of people, that that there were
many cutpurses amongst them (as there use to be in crowdes) every man would
presently put his hand into his pocket, and look to his purse. The safest man
here is in such danger, as he had need of some friends to cry loud and
suddenly, Take heed to thy self. Give me leave to tell you, ye have brought
with you, even within yourselues an Impostor, a heart-stealer, even now whilst
I call upon you to the scruteny of conscience, to arraigne your selves in
interiore domo, in the inner closet (as Saint Bernard calls it.) There is an
Absolon at the gates, that S. Bernard.
steals away the hearts of the people. Look to your selves, and apprehende 1
King. 15. 6.
the traitor, your self-love, and selfe-flatterie. Deliver me, O Lord, from
the evil man* id est, from my self, prayed that holy Father S. Austin. Let
every S. Austin.
one lay his hand upon his heart, and say to himself in the language of the
prophet Abacuck, I will stand upon Abac. 2. 1.
my watch. I for my part will look to one, I Will take heed to my soul. There
are two sorts of evil thoughts, 1. immissae or iniectae, infused or cast into
us, which are of the Devils darting into the heart. 2. ascendentes, which as
vapors naturally arise out of the heart. A 3. sort there are good,
descendentes, inspired by the holy Ghost, clap a guard of thoughts upon your
thoughts, of good ones upon bad ones; prevent them, by divine meditations,
divert them, by fervent eiaculations; correct them, by sighs, and speedy
repentance. In bad thoughts ye may observe, ingressum et progressum, the
ingresse and the progress. For the first; the vapor will ascend you cannot
hinder it; it is well if you can but come to this to quench, and to repress it,
that it go no further: and when your strength fails, pray with Saint Anthony
in Eusebius, Domine, cupio saluari, sed non permittunt cogitationes meae, has
reprime, bone S. Anthon. in Eusebius.
Jesus and salua me, Lord, I would gladly be saved, but my thoughts will not
permit me: sweet Jesus repress these, and save me. And for the other, Take
along with you Saint Austins council and comfort, Si tentationes pulsant cor
tuum, suspira. If temptations beat at thy heart, sigh and ease it. Si non
superant, respira, but if they overcome thee not, take heart agrace again, take
breath and be comforted: if they have not overcome thee, thou have overcome
them. Mark how the holy Ghost in this guard of the soul, does excite a
watchman to grapple with every sin, and is a monitor to check every ill
motion. Idolatry is covetousness, and covetousness is Idolatry. Attend
vtrique. Is there fear of Idolatry by mixture of nations? Attend tibi ipsi.
Take heed of Canaanites. It is the scope of the text, and the text is a
special Amulet against that infectious sin. Peccare dicitur quasi pellicare,
sin intices like an harlot. Such sinners especially go a whoring after their
own inventions, the soul that thus sins is an adultresse, a Messalina,
prostitutes her self to the inferior creatures. The Egyptians did worship the
pyed Ox Apis, and thence Exodus 32. 4
the Israelites did learn to make a golden Calfe. The Canaanites adore the
Moon; there is danger that the Israelits may offer Cakes to the Queen of Ier.
7. 18.
heaven. Of all outlandish and newfashions, new-fashions in Religion are most
dangerous, the subversion of the State. Does Covetousness make a drudge of the
body, and a slave of the soul? Attend tibi, non tuis, look to self, not to
pelf. Set not a higher rate upon a wife, a farm, a preferment, Luke 14.
then upon thy soul: prize not things temporal, as if they were eternal;
neglect not things eternal, as if they were temporal. Saint Chrysostom. does
fitly S. Chrysostom.
compare toyling worldlings to men that work in a dangerous mine, Effodiunt
and necantur, in seeking gold they dig their own graves, and are buried alive.

Curiosity peep in at a Neighbors window, and meddle without commission?
Attend tibi, non alijs, non alienis, look to thy self, not to other men or
matters, thou have work enough at home, Occupa te in proprijs vitijs, Pull out
the beam that is in Luke 6. 42.
thine own eye first. [First sweep before thine own door, before thou
beatest thy neighbor with the broomsticke. Be thine own examiner one half of
the day, and then will thou have little leisure (I suppose) the other half to
sit as Judge upon others.] Rigid censurers, and hypocrites, who cry out of
sins in others, and dispense with their own, are like cunning Robbers, who
first raise the Hue and Cry, that whiles they pursue others as seeming honest
Officers, themselves may escape who were the offenders.

Does Security, (...), that poison in a golden cup, cast us into a deep
sleep. Attend tibi ipsi, Friends cry, and fall; Foes come on. Simon dormis,
and Judas non dormit? Does Peter sleep, when Judas wakes? The Devil like
Dalilah, will not suffer a man to see his danger till it be too late. Up
Sampson, the Philistims are Judge. 16. 12.
upon thee. And if Sampson will not use his eyes in time, he shall loose them.
What is a State without vigilance, but a Polyphemus, a vast body without eyes,
running headlong to it own ruin? And an eye to our selves will not make all
sure without an eye to Heaven. Thither our soul (which came thence, and
thither will) will teach us to look. Sibi maxim attendit, Act 17. 28.
qui maxim attendit Deo, He best looks to himself, that best looks toward
God. In him we live, we move, and have our being (...) with him and by him, and
through him we are, and can do all things; without him we not only can do
nothing, but are nothing. And thus am I come to the third watch which is the
last, Custodia Templi, the watch about the temple.

Gregory upon the fourth of Ezech. does well note, that Custodes Templi, the
warders of the mystical Temple do betoken the devout souls that frequent the
church, and by a holy kind of of violence, keep possession of Gods house. In
humane Policy Fear is but a bad and unsafe keeper, not like long to hold out;
a iaylor rather then a guardian: but in christianity the Fear of God is the
best dorekeeper of the Temple. And Nazianzen Nazian.
in the praise of Hieron, does praise Piety (...), for the greatest and safest
guard of man's life. The greatest have greatest need of this guard; and the
poorest are not so poor, but they may be thus guarded in all perils. For every
good soul has a trained band of faculties, ever ready summoned to wait upon
God. And to such as wait on him, God will send aid from Heaven. In vain does
Joshua lift up his hand to fight against Amalech, except Moses lift up his
hands to pray for Joshua: when we have done all we can to keep our Exo. 17.
13
selves, we must fly for protection to the great keeper of Israel, who never
sleeps, nor slumbreth, or else we have lost, Psalm. 121. 4
and shall loose our labor and our selves. Our best Armory is in the Temple,
and not in the Tower. Wait upon God, and he will appoint a guard of Angels
Psalm. 91. 11
to wait upon thee; yea God does wonderfully order his thoughts toward men,
when men do least order their thoghts toward God. God does marshall Psalm. 40.
6.
the means for our safety, when we do not know the lists, and order of the
troops that guard us: Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or Psalm.
8 4.
the son of man that thou so regardest him? yea Lord, what is man that he is
so unmindful of thee: or the son of man, that he so little regards thee? And
yet from on high thou regardest the lowest, even the refuse, the offskowring
and rubbish of men. A word of comfort to the least and lowest here. What though
the vnpreferd, and unprovided for Courtier be compared to a Blackamore, In ortu
solis positus, habet colorem noctis, He lives where the Sun rises every day
in his eyes, and yet his face looks like night. Disconsolate man who ever thou
be, if thou waitest upon God, know that his eyes are upon thee for good, and
that a roab 2 Timothy 4. 8
and a crown is laid up for thee. Thou have not here glittering servants to
attend thee; yet have thou the Sun and Moon to run before thee with their
glorious torches, both day and night. Yea, God has given his Angels charge
Psalm 91. 11 Heb. 1. 14.
concerning thee. They are ministering spirits sent forth for thy sake, thou art
an hopeful heir of salvation.

Iehu, may demand, what need have we to look every man to himself? If God
do muster his Angels to look to every one of us? prime cause does rather
include, than exclude subordinate means. God can, but does not ordinarily
work without them. He has made Stars to direct the Pylot, but he made not
Stars to steer the ship. O culus ad Coelum, manus ad clauum, there must be
an eye to Heaven, and a hand to the Helm: when we work with God, God will
work for us. Did the Eastern wisemen neglect the use Matthew. 2. 2.
of tongues, and feet, because they had a Star to guide them? A glorious band
of Angels shall be your conuoy in all your ways, In vijs, non in praecipitijs,
in your ways chalked out by the line of the law, and the rule of the Word, not
in your headlong courses, and desperate downfalls. And that you may know your
way, Attend Legi, look to the Law, how read thou? there is the old way the
law of Moses. Look in Malachy, there you are bid to remember it, upon the
going Malac. 4. 4
out of it in the last of the Prophets, and to Christ (prefigured in Eliah) the
fulfiller of the law, who is the new way.

Attend verbo, look to Gods word, there is the pillar of fire that goes before
all true. Israelites in the way. The way of the Gospel has many beaten
paths: Keep these with thy heart, and they well kept, will keep thy Prou. 4.
4.
heart, so that it shall live for ever.

The Heart is an unskillful and guilefull guide, it had need to be guided, and
kept, Keep thy heart with all diligence, Prou. 4. 23
for out of it are the issues of life. Therefore follow not the ways of thine
own heart, in which there be so many windings, and turnings, that Anselme
compares it to a Mill that is ever grinding, still setting us on work with more
commandments, then ever God gave us. He gave us but one in the Law, Fac and
viues, do this and live. One in the Gospel, Creed and viues, believe and thou
shall live: or rather one in both, Ama and viues, love and live. If thou
followest the many bywaies thereof, thou go in infinitum; and there is Error
immensus, an endless wandering, and the end of that error is horror and
endless confusion. But give thou thy heart unto God the preserver of souls.
Commit thy ways Psalm. 37. 5.
to Christ, who is both (...), the true way, and a true guide, for he is the
truth, Et ipse est via, ipse est patria, he John 14. 6.
is thy way, he is thy dwelling City. If thou walk in this way, which is
but one, in this truth, which is but one, there is aliquis terminus, some end;
thou art sure to come at last to thy ways end, Rest and Peace: he is the God
of both, he will bring thee home to himself, and as he said to Abraham Ipse
erit tibi merces magna nimis, he Genesis 15. 1.
will be thy exceeding great reward.

Mean while, in this our present warfare, though his pleasure be not, that we
should fight at our own cost and charge, yet his charge here is, vt quisque
attendat sibi ipsi, that every man should stand upon his own guard, serve in
his own person, and his own furniture. Atte^de tibi ipsi, I have heard of an
abuse in Country Musters, that diverse show borrowed Arms: look into their
houses, ye shall find them naked, and unprovided for the enemy. I would to
God, the case were not alike in our spiritual armor. Many in good days can
discourse of Abraham's faith, Jobs patience, Joseph's care to preserve his soul;
and in so doing, they do but show other men's armor. For when they are pressed
themselves, and put to the stresse in the day of tentation, when it is their
turn to watch, they give no evidence of their own care, faith, or patience. No
borrowing, no substitution will serve the turn here, Attend tibi ipsi, look
to thy self, thou can not look to thy self by a Proxy, or Deputy. The
good Kings David, Asah, and Iehosaphat, did not serve God by their Chapleines,
in the days of their danger, their own prayers are for ever Chronicled. And
it is a high point of Piety worthy to be chronicled, that our Moses, Summus
loco, summus exemplo, our good King, who is first in place, has also been
foremost in example, is the Coryphaeus, the first proclaimer, and in his own
person keeper of solemn Fasts, most frequent at prayers, a royal praecentor
in Gods house and service. Then do men on earth live like those glorious
Courtiers (Angels) in Heaven, when they most diligently wait upon God. It
should be amongst men, as it is amongst the Elements, the higher the purer, the
nearer to the Stars, the more conformable to heavenly motions; yea the great
Rulers among the Stars (whom God made to govern Genesis 1. 16.
day and night) do give this light and example to great Rulers amongst men,
that they should ever be watchful, ever in motion, for the good of inferiors,
and regulated by the prime Motor; so doing, these great lights shall never be
eclipsed. Think not that Stellae nebulosae, the lesser stars only borrow
light, but remember the greater stars receive the greater light: And if there
be not a fair aspect from, and to the Sun of Righteousness, they suffer the
greater eclipses.

God is (...), an universal Bishop and ouerseer, out of his high watchtower,
whence he beholds all our ways. It is therefore meet, that we in all our
ways should set him before our eyes: he gives (says the Apostle) (...), life
and breath unto all. To the Ant as well as to the Elephant. If we live in God,
rather than in our selves, we must endeavor to live rather to God than to our
selves. If God do bestow breath upon us, oh let us bestow the best of our
breath upon God. Attend deo, wait upon God, that has made thee the
masterpeece of Nature; and redeemed thee' the prime object of Grace, and
sanctified thee, to be an heir of Glory. Oh Luke 1. 37.
let thy soul be a devout Anna, divorced from the world, and wedded to the
Temple; yea let thy zealous soul speak of this mantle of flesh, and mount up
in a fiery chariot: (...). 2 Kigs 2. 11. 1.
Oh my soul look upward, be not glued to this base earth; grouell not in this
Cabul, a land of dirt, in Hyrams 1 Kigs 7. 13.
map; stoop not to every, to any base Lure. The proper motion of the soul is
an ascension unto God; not by the philosophers scale: for Saint Austin
confesses, that this ladder per exteriora, by outward means, is too short to
reach to heaven, there must be a Jacobs ladder to reach home.

The pile of creatures is but the Mount under our feet. The illuminated
understanding and the sanctified will, are the two Seraphicall wings that carry
us up before the throne of Grace.

The life of the devout man is a kind of a continual ecstasy, their souls
do wait upon God in the Galleries of heaven, even while their mortified bodies
do walk toward their graves; and like drowzy watchmen are ready to drop into
this slymie gutter. I have kept you too long waiting upon this watch: to draw
toward the discharging thereof for this time. Dearly beloved in our Lord, ctc.
Be we excited every one of us, diligently to keep this watch, that we may
walk on in the power of God, and the strength of our prayers. It is not a
moate of the Sea, or a wall of Cliffs, nor our own arms that can defend us,
except God fight for us; except our Land be compassed with the Ocean of Gods
mercies, and fortified by the rock Christ Jesus. Be first at peace at home
within your selves. Love brotherly love, which is the Ephesians. 4. 3.
bond of peace; then look to your inbred foes, your bosom traitors, your
enemies at home; and ye shall be the safer from your enemies abroad. It does
cost other nations much effusion of their own blood and others, to defend them
selves and keep back their enemies; shall we sit at home, with our thumbs
under our girdles (couetously,) with our naked throats (cowwardly) expecting
the sword of our enemies? [choose rather to loose our lives, than lend our
monyes to the supply of our good King, and the defense of his and our three
Kingdoms?] At least shall we not spend our breath, or rather the groans of
the spirit, in our own defense, in the defense of our wives and children,
lands and liberties, against so proud and cruel an enemy?

Oh pierce the heavens with your vollies of prayers, for the safety of the
state, your own welfare, and the welfare of your souls, that our Pathmos
(this Island) may still be Gremium pacis, the lap and bosom of peace, even to
strangers; and that our selves, even every one of us, may enjoy the peace of
our own bosoms. We are encompassed with whole seas of danger; it will be our
only wisdom and safety, to anchor our selves upon God, to sail by the
compass of his word; and to have an eye to that Pharos, that guides us to the
land of promise, to the land of the living; so shall that of Tertullian be
verified, Sperando timebimus, timendo cauebimus, cauendo salui erimus, In
hoping we shall fear, in fearing, take heed, and by taking heed, be saved.
If we keep our bodies as the temples of God, and Psalm. 18. 1.
our souls as his pauilion; he will make his own name our tower of defense.

Thus much for the discharge of my conscience and duty at this time; but yet I
may not quite discharge, and break up this watch; we must at all times stand
upon this watch, and never lay down our armor, till we shall lay down our
lives, and be translated to that kingdom, where there is no enemy, nor danger.

To the which he bring us, who has so dearly bought us, Christ Jesus, by the
conduct of his holy spirit. To whom with the Father etc. three persons, one
true, ever living God, we desire to ascribe, as his due, and our duty, all
praise, power, honor, glory and thanksgiving, this day and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

