Spudeus. Ever pla^^ng Gelasmie:
Lord, when will you be wise and sad.
In scholars should be modesty:
But you play ever the wanton lad.

Gelasimus. Is this your first salutation?
You appear some quarrels to pick,
In few words make relation,
Wherefore with me you are so quick?

Spudeus. I must in few words show my mind
Whersoeuer I chance to come,
Idle and vain I do you find
Lo, here I have told you the some:
And I know well that your parents
To learn vertew, put you to schole:
You defraude them of their ententes
For daily you play the wanton fool.
Also sittyng at schole among us
What do you else but play and toye
So that of you, all scholars say thus:
Gelasimus is a wanton boy.
Tu leuior foliis, tunc cum sieve pondere succi,
To you I may this verse apply
You are lighter then leaves without sap
For good exercise you let go by
And your own self in Idleness wrap.

Gelasimus. Of you God send your friends much joy,
I think you will prove a sage Solon
O God save you and sweet saint Loy
You are like to be a wise man anon,
Se you not lo, a good body
When did my friends to you complain?
Meddle you with your own study
I do not your manners disdain.
Multa facere ect, vbique putridum:
About many things busy to be
In every place (quoth he) does stynke.
Curiouse you are in checkyng me
But of your self you do not think.
Now sir, because you do thus report.
When did you me so Idely find?

Spudeus. Every hour full of play and sport
And as light as feathers in the wind.

Gelasimus. If I play, I am not Idle in deed
As you your self have testified:

Spudeus^ Idle as he, as says saint Beede
Which is never well occupied.

Gelasimus. Interpone tuis, interdum gaudia curis:
Sometime, says the wise man Cato:
Interlace mirth among thy cares.
Wherefore do sobre men unto plays go
But to ease their minds in great affairs*
What says the wise man Tully?
Gamnyng and pastyme we may use
As sleep and other rest truly
Which no honest person will accuse.
Dum fata sinunt, viuite lati*
Does not Seneca this verse write,
While fortune suffers, be merry.
And so will I for all your spyte
Play and sing, hay dery dery.
^era nimis vita est crastina, viue hodie,
Yesterdayes life is very late,
Live to day. Asmoch to say:
Be merry and play with thy mate,
Yea forsooth and that every day.

Spudeus. As your memory I do commend
In that you can Authors rehearse
So I must needs you reprehende
Because you abuse a good verse,
I mean the verse of wise Cato
which you did english competently
But the sentence of Cicero
You passed over negligently.
We may right well use play and game
As we use sleep and other rest
But for what cause may we do the same?
In that place, it is manifest.
Than (says he) when we have satisfied
Other matters both weighty and grave
Also when we have rectified
Euylles, wont public weals to deprave
For he says in his offices
That nature has not brought us forth
To use plays, games and fantasies
Which are matters nothing worth.
But rather to severity
And to more weighty studies
Meet for men in authority
And health for souls and bodies.

Gelasimus. What speak you of senators
In whose hands commonweals did depend
They were great learned orators
Whose wisdom we can not comprehend
Quod medicorum est*
Promittunt medici, tractant fabrilla fabri
That longs to Phisicians
Thereof they promise and talk largely
Carpenters for their furtherans
Talk and treat of Carpentry:
We are laddes, Scholars and Students
Let us talk, as to laddes is semely:
So shall we please God and our parents
And men shall judge well of us truly.

Spudeus. Well, of Idleness we began to speak
Whereto you are much given I do see
From that I coueyte you to break
That more studeouse you might be
A few sentences you have caught
Which plainly you do much abuse
You apply them not as the Authors taught
But your own Idleness to excuse.

Gelasimus. You talk here like a great divine
And altogether of Idleness
I pray you vouchsafe the same to define
Because it is so great wickedness.

Spudeus. In the Tusculane questions
Of Idleness, thus says Tully,
As touching all honest actions
Idleness is an ignary uncomely
Also an ircksomnesse of the mind
When any good matier is begone.
And therefore seeks some other kind
Wherabout vainly it may run
As thus you are set to schole now
To learn both vertew and science
This is a good thing begone in you
Godly is parents will and pretense
But a none ircksomnesse of heart
And lothsomnesse of well dooyng
Cause you to take another part
And to give your self to plaiyng.

Gelasimus. A certain wise man gives warnyng
Not over much in study to stand
For to some body Art and learning
Are as a sword in a mad man's hand
Doctrina scelesti, ect gladio in sani similis.

Spudeus. Truth, a wicked person without dout
To whom no honest thing is good
Mischeuously utters learning out
As one does a weapon that is wood:
But I would have you to note two things
First: The goodly sequels of students
Some have been counselors to Kings
Yea, though they have come of poor parents
What were the chief counsels of Rome
I mean when vertew flourished,
Learned and grave in judgment and dome.
Who their Comunaltie most nourished.
A thousand I could rehearse by name
Of whom I read in diverse stories
Which through learning have come to fame*
And attained unto high glories.
Qui probus atque idem doctus diademate talem
Quis dignum neget? hic aliis precellit vt aurum
Est oricalcho nobilius vitroque pyropus.
He that is good and learned withal
Who will deny suchone worthy
To enjoy an honor royal
Which we call a diadem truly
For such one does other excel
As far as gold does the copper pass
And as precious stone or Birrall
Excels counterfaites or glass
Yet must learned men come of poor lignage
Example of Mark Tully by name
Virtue is a most sure heritage
For that enhaunceth to honor and fame.

Gelasimus. Truly your words make me to smile
You speak not of the ends of the same
Either they were driven to exile
Or else suffered death with shame.

Spudeus. Impute that to ingratitude
Mark this: Such is ever the reward
Of the ignorant multitude
Which did never virtue regard
Suffered with shame say you? forsooth no:
Happy are they which for virtues sake
Suffer death, or into exile go
So that patiently they do it take
Also I will tell you as I think
He that is endued with doctrine
Shall never want money, meat nor drink
So that to virtue he do incline
But the fallible chances of fate
He shall be hable to withstand
And if he be deposed from his state
Learning preserves him in any land.
Ipse tamen vidi nunquam, and vix credere possunt
Vel perijsse fame, vel mendicasse disertum,
I did yet never see, the poet does say,
And scarsely believe it I can
That for honger any shall decay
That is in deed a learned man.

Gelasimus. Friend Spudeus I will be plain
To obtain glory, I bend not my hope
They that coueyte honor to attain
At noone days for the way do grope.
Ergo honor and fama* and myrtalis gloria laus*
Somnia sunt prorsus nil conducentia,
Honor, fame worldly, glory and praise
Are but dreams, for nothing profitable
Therefore I am bent nothing that ways
For I look not to be honorable.

Spudeus, Lo this is your commune fascion
To truncate and destroy the verse
Still for your own excusacion
And will not the whole sentence rehearse.
Somnia sunt prorsus nil conducentia, quando
Sort magis quam virtute acquiruntur,
They are dreams nothing profitable
But when? when by chance they are acquired
Rather than by virtue honorable.
who so does not desire honor
The same does no virtue regard
For honor in good men ever more
For virtue is a just reward.

Gelasimus, Ha ha ha, to laugh you compel me
In the fault wherein you did me charge
Most euedently in you I see
As I shall declare more at large.
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum*
It is a foul thing to a teacher
When the same fault in him is fownde
Which he rebukes in other
Himself first to teach he is bownde
I did truncate a verse you say
Your later verse now do you scande
And whether I say true, prove you may,
Or whether as a vexse it may stand.

Spudeus, Serte magis quam virtute acquiruntur, at esto?

Gelasimus, At esto? Have you found, at esto?
In your first rehersall that did lack
You talk so much de honesto
That you cast rectum at your back.

Spudeus. That ( at esto) begins a new sentence,
Which had been prolixe to rehearse.

Gelasimus. I perceive your cautelouse pretense
That sentence would your words requite
Because you would appear fautlesse
Taking upon you other to blame
What follows I will express
Earnestly without mock or game:
At esto,
Quod tantum dignis tribuantur, dic mihi nunquid
Corporibus prosint? certe nil. Animis ne?
Tantundem hos inflant potius tumidosque leuesque
Nec non solicitos reddunt: se sub dear multis,
Et seruire solet multis, Ambire praecari,
Munera largiri quisquis festatur honores.
My formour words I must again rehearse:
For honor (I say) I do not much care
Hereto tends my formour verse
Now these in english I will declare.
Be it so, that honor and fame
Are given only to the worthy
What profit have men by the same?
They profit nothing their body
What commodity are they to the minds
Even asmoch: they fill them full of pride
And make them as light as the wyndes
And fill them with care on every side
Many must one serve and many flatter
Pray, speak fair, and money pay
Stoutly he must bear out the matter
That will have honor at this day.
Lo, who so hunteth for honor
This disquietnesse he shall find
To the body a long dolor
And a continual sore to the mind.
O bona paupertas, o non dum cognita diuum
Munera, virtutum custos and amica pudori.
O Good poverty, o Gods good gift,
Unknown is thy commodity
Keeper of virtue through thy shyft
And a very friend to honesty.
A mean state is surest of all
Daungerouse it is high to clyme
The mighty Oaks have greatest fall
When the low shrubbes grow out their time

Spudeus. Your words be good, but you digress
And declyne much fro my purpose

Gelasimus. Go to hardely: your mind express
Spare not your learning to disclose

Spudeus. I counseled you lightness to leave
And to give your self to study
To virtue I would have you to cleave
Commodiouse to soul and body.
By examples ancient and old
Stearyng up your hope as I thought
But with sentences stout and bold
You have set my counsel at naught.
As I could have told you by name
Of such as study in youth have loved
Which have attained honor and fame
And worthy men have been proved.
Likewise of innumerable
I can tell you also by name
Which of birth have been honorable
And yet their ends have been shame.
Wherefore? this is the cause for a truth
Their time full Idely they did spend
And would not study in their youth
Therefore shame and dishonor was their end.
Let all youth of Idleness beware
For it is the steppedame of virtue
If you be caught ones in her snare
All myschefes beside will soon ensue.
Otia enim fomes Vitiorum est otia mentem
Ad mala multa trahunt, oti comes ipsa libido est.
It is the provoking of wickedness
To many myschefes it draws the mind
Unclennes accompanyeth Idelnes
No greater enemy to mankind.

Gelasimus. You may perceive well by my words
That I have not been idle always
Though sometime I set pytfalles for birds
I am not idle, as perceive you may.

Spudeus. Your goodly wit I do commend
And to praise god you have great cause
But I have seen that does me offend
As I said in my former clause.
Emollit otium Vires sicut rubigo ferrum.
Idleness weakeneth the strength
Like as rust does the yrone freate
Quick wits it dulled at length
And bredeth infirmities great
Have you not heard men of gravity
Wish that they had learned in youth
And have bewailed their vanity
Cursyng themselfes with their own mouth
Vidi iam iuuenem praemeret, cum ferior aetas
Moerentem tardos praeterijsse dies.
I have seen (says Quid) a young man
When with more age pressed he was
Mournyng in himself now and than
That idely he did let the days pass.
Idleness brings in voluptuousness
Whom good saints call the devils bayte
In voluptuousnes is all wickedness
Wherein youth to catch, the devil does wayt

Gelasimus. An old proverb: Young saint old devil
Which to you I may well apply.

Spudeus. Thus rather he that in youth is a dreuyll
Is most like a devil to dye
He that in youth no virtue will use
As the commune proverb does say
In age all goodness will him refuse:
Which to hell is the pathe way
As no fruit is found in that tree
Whereon no flower did before appear
Some age he can come to no degree
Which in youth will use no virtue clear.
Iuuenis existens multa bona disce:
While thou art young, says Menander,
Many good things study and learn.
About folly let not your mind wander
Give ear to wise men which do you warn
Well may you be named Gelasimus
Which scornful does signify
For whatsoever good men discuss
You turn it to a scorn utterly.

Gelasimus. And Spudeus may well be your name
Which signifies studious
You study to get honor and fame
So that you will be come furious.

Spudeus, Not so, I trust there is a mean,
I have learned to use modesty
Not so will I to study lean
That I shall forgette honesty.
I study not virtue to acquire
Fame and honor thereby to attain
Virtue for her own sake I desire
In whom alone honor does remain.
Propter se virtus petitur non propter honorem.

Gelasimus. I pray you let all this reasonyng pass
And tell me this: may I not sometime play?

Spudeus. You remember what our talk was?
As sleep and other rest Tully does say.

Gelasimus. I am glad of that by this light
I wish that my master so would say.
Men use to rest and sleep every night
Than so might I play every day.

Spudeus. Whether you may or no, you do
Yea truly, and that without measure
And such wantonness you add thereto
That none other in your play have pleasure.

Gelasimus. In good faith I play not other to please
I use to play for mine own solace.

Spudeus. But in your play you do other disease
And in so dooyng you do trespace:
Est modus in rebus sunt certi den^que f^n^s
Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
There is a comely mean in all things
Therbe also certain limits pyght
Beyond the which if you pass the strings,
Nothing that you do, can be done right
In your play, and in all your affairs
Learn you honest manners to use
Let not idleness catch you in her snares
And evil company do you refuse
Corrumpunt etiam Sanctos commercia praua,
Evil company does corrupt always
Even those that be well disposed
Conceal no falshed night nor day
But of you let it be disclosed
Serve God daily before any thing
Fear him, beware his laws to offend
Honor, love, and truly serve the king
And where fautes be, learn to amend:
Your Father, Mother and Master
Love, fear, serve, and gentely obey:
Of their goods be ye no waster
With truth help to get that you may.
Of ton^^ and hand be you ever true,
^ oaths to swear,
(...) do you rewe:
(...) bear.
^
^
And you shall never go out of the way.

Gelasimus, I have not so little wit, good frynde,
But that I perceive your intent
I thank you both with heart and mind
Your counsel is honest and prudent
This one thing of you I would desire
Daily that we may together talk
At such a time as you shall require
When you are best disposed to walk.

Spudeus. I shall be content with all my heart:
Fare ye well, God have you in his keeping.

Gelasimus. Seeing that you will hence depart
God preserve you wakyng and flepyng.

Finis.
Here after (...) the Dialogue (...) living of (...) which (...)
Eda. GOd for me this day (I trust) has wrought
For yonder comes she, who^ I have sought
I am glad that I have met with you Agna.

Agna. And I as glad to see you merry Eda
It ts a strange thing to see you here alone.

Eda. My sister is but even now fro me gone
And in deed we should have gone together
But that I did see you coming hither
To speak with you is my tarying here
I thought to salute you since you were so nere.

Agna. I thank you gentle Eda for your good will
Tell me dwell you with your Father still.

Eda. Yea I thank god, and still I purpose to do
For I have none so good a friend to go too
I see whereto this wretched world is bent
Therefore I mind not other houses to frequent
In our last talk you did to me disclose
A goodly sentence of holy saint Ambrose
Which while I live I shall bear in mind
For great virtue forsothe therein I find.

Agna. Good lord do you those words so long remember

Eda. If I should forget them, my wit were slender.

Agna. As I did recyte them, can you say them again?

Eda. To here me say them, will you take the pain

Agna. Yea truly that I will, yeuen with all my heart
And help you, if you mysse in any part.

Eda. That virgin which for Christ does enquire
To be among rude people, ought not to desire.
Seldom seen without cause in the market place
Never alone in the streets to show her face.
It is not virgin like to be high in voice
Neither in vile words or songs to rejoice
Maiden like without nycenes in her pace
No token of wantonness in her eyes or face.
Lo Sister Agna these be the words I suppose
Which you taught me out of Saint Ambrose.

Agna. Saint Ambrose wrote this of the virgin Mary
From whose sentence you do not much vary
Let her humility and form of virtue
Be examples for you all your life to ensue.
Who so does the reward of Mary require
Must follow Mary's virtue, with humble desire
How meke, how pure how holy she was in deed
You know, so yt more to declare we shall not need.
To know good things is right commendable
But to follow them is most profitable.
I praise greatly your goodly memory
Yet I must warn you to beware of vaynglory
That is a vice of so crafty a vilany
That it seeks even virtue to accompany.
Therefore a certain Doctor does monishe
All persons which in virtue do floryshe
Of vainglory above all things to beware
For he calls it a crafty gyuue or snare
Whereby Satan wayteth to catch the vertuose
And to frustrate them of their godly purpose.

Eda. I thank you truly, for your godly council
Your words I find as true as the Gospel
God to witness, I have a purpose sure
To keep both body and mind clean and pure
So that neither consent word nor countenance
Shall appear vain, by gods help and governance
Yet I have had a delight to be commended
And therein I wotte well, I have offended
For though I do things never so commendable
Yet am I but a servant unprofitable.
I do but that which is commended to me
Neither all that, as in the Gospel I do see.

Agna. Because you remember so well Christ's doctrine
I will teach you a lesson of holy saint Austine:
Uainglory of this world is great vanity
And not else but a fallible suauitie
An unfruitful labor, a perpetual fear
A sublimitie perelesse for any to bear
A beginning without good providence
And an end with unprofitable penitence.
Lo good Eda, this is a virtuous lesson
Ponder it with earnest discrecion
And with your chaste mind and purity
Pray to God to give you humility
For somoche the more to God you are preciouse
How much in your own eyes, you ar conteintuos

Eda. I trust in God also this lesson to bear away,
And to follow it, I will do that I may:
But gentle Agna, do you not yet depart
For to you I would show the secrets of my heart

Agna. Your request stands with so good reason
That I must needs tarry with you a season.

Eda. Truly one thing makes me much to lament
And that is, sometime for mine own document
I would keep company with Maids very feign
And I find the most of them raumpysh and vain
And like as many of them are past all shame
So fear they not God, neither honor his name*
If I chance with any of them to walk,
Of beauty, or of gay raiment is their talk
Else of mar^age, or of young bachelors
To speak shortly: they are vain claterers.
Speak to them of God, and of obedience
They fare as persons without intelligence
So that in their company keeping in deed
Of.ii. perilles, it is expedient to take heed:
One is, (if I be not like to them) obloquie,
The other is (if I be like the company)
Lewd condition, by talk uncomely:
Which things are a great grief to me truly.

Agna. Children and servants are representations
Of their parents and masters abominations
Like as many parents ar without the fere of god
So from their manners the children be seldom od
My counsel is such Maids company to forsake,
What they talk of you, no matter it does make
So that a pure conscience bears you record
That faithfully you serve Jesus christ our lord
Never be you without some virtuous book
Whereon at void times you may diligently look
In good books truly is all my solace
For in them I learn things wisely to compace
First how I shall fear god our lord omnipotent
To my Prince and parents to be obedient
To love my familiers, to honor my betters
To pitye the needye, and to forgive my detters.

Agna. As I will you to use books well, if you have any
So I counsel you not to use very many
For so many heads, so many wits they say
Among the which all take not the right way.
For some have written asmoche for affection
As for any good zeal or instruction
And as virginity is nothing without humility
So neither of the^ is ought worth without verity
Uertuous in good persons are so lynked together
That one can not avail without the other:
What is virginity worth, joined with error
Nothing but pain taking for infernal terror.
That mind can never be scincere and pure
Which in the faith of Christ stands not sure.
In Christ's Testament be stable eruditions
Thereafter frame your life and conditions.
Saint Ambrose wrote the life of saint Cecily
Wherein are notable examples verily.

Eda. Saving your tale, I have read the same story
Where I find many things sounding to gods glory
And chiefly this I noted in saint Cecily
That the Gospel she bare in her heart secretly
And as a Be busely goes from flame to flame,
So she in all things served God day and hour*
And when other did sing and with instruments play
Unto our Lord in her mind she did thus pray
O Lord let my heart be pure and immaculate
That I be not confounded with the reprobate
She was no vain babbler of the holy Gospel
But framed her life according to Christ's counsel

Agna. O well noted good sister Eda in deed,
God grant you in knowledge forward to proceed
As you say, bablers there are to many
The flowers they have, but they taste not the honey
Saint Cecily kept the Gospel in her breast
But in the mouth now only it does rest.

Eda. Better it had been never it to have known
Then so vily in the streets to have it thrown.
Saints in time past studied the Gospel
To thentent that in good life they might excel,
As it is to see very well in their lives,
Yea both of men and women, maids and wives*

Agna. Have you red the life of saint Agnes?

Eda. I readde it ones in Englysh doutlesse
If it be truly translated as it was
All other Uirgins of that age she did pass
Thirtene years of age, little past infancye
Marterdome she suffered with great constancye.

Agna. Saint Ambrose, as it is thought by the style
Did her life in latin eligantly compile
At.xiii. years of age (says he) death she lost
And found eternal life, though her life it cost,
Full well loved she the flower of Uirginitie
That would die rather then spotte her integrite

Eda. What I am hable to do, I do not find
But without doubt I am of the same mind
Uirginitie? oh can there be any greater pleasure,
Into this world we brought none other treasure

Agna. It is even so: when into this world we came,
Much misery we brought as the children of Adam
Yet with us we brought this commodity
In thought, word and deed, pure virginity.
Nothing in mankind God loves more
Nothing so much aduaunceth his honor
Therefore scripture compares virginity to Bisse
The finest lynnen cloth that ever was or is,
Writers thereof which do the nature know
Say that it is a cloth as white as snow
As Bysse does all one lynen pass in purity
So above all virtues god loves virginity
It over passes man's nature Doctors do say
And make men like unto Angels always
Greater (say they) is virgyns victory
Than the triumph of Angels in glory.

Eda. Where as you speak of that kind of vesture
Bysse is a precious cloth, that is most sure.
But year it come unto the perfection
It requires great labor and correction
For before to the whytenes they can it bring
They use to beat it often, and often it to wring*

Agna. You say truth, yeuen so virginity
Must eftsoon be beat with humility
It must be wrong with abstinence and prayer
Before it be perfight, pure, clean and fayer
It must be rubbed with the soape of penance
And bleached in the hot sun of sufferaunce
Here to must we add perseverance to the end
Which is our life in defense thereof to spend
Thus shall we make a fayer garment of Bysse
And therewith enter, before the king of bliss.

Eda* Lord why have not the christen maids this talk
When they meet, or together do walk

Agna. I told you before that the parents negligence
Causes most this, and like inconvenience
The filthy perswations of such as be old
Kyndle much evil and make maids ever bold.
Again, the bringyng up of them in idleness
Is thoccasion of much vnthriftenes
They have no respect also unto the company
Which to virginity is a great vilany
Whosoever touches pitche shall be defiled
So by evil company many one is begiled.

Eda. Where as you talk of such as be aged
I know that some have to filthely raged
Having no respect their vile mouths to open
Showing therewith many an unchaste token
Yea forsothe, and that before young girls and boys,
Whereby they learn to practice wicked toys.
Ancient women and wives assemblyng together.
Many times do not their talk honestly consider,
Neither what they speak, where, nor before whom
No truly little wisdom without, and less at home.

Agna. O little regard they the terrible sentences
Of Christ our Lord for such great offenses.
Better were it for such a corrupt person
About his neck to have hanged a mylstone
And so in the myddest of the sea drowned to be
Than to offend any little one that believes in me
Also for every idle word spoken in vain
They shall render a strayte compte again
For they do not only themselves condemn
But they cause other Gods law to contempne.

Eda. Uerely sister Agna, my mind does me give
That the word of God such men do not believe,
I would they heard what God speaks by Esaias
A boy of an hundredth year old shall dye
Namely when he laketh manners to age corespo^de^t
That is gravity, discretion, and a mind sapient
Understande me not here in any wise
That I go about aged persons to dispyse.

Agna. No I dare say, for you are taught otherwise
Before the honorable and aged, do thou arise
The order of nature where as is intelligence
Teaches us age in all men to reverence
But where as evil manners in aged men be
As from the face of a serpent we ought to fly
Three things says Syrach my soul does hate
Wherewith I am grieved and at great debate:
A poor man proud, a rich man a liar
An old man a fool, and full of fleshly desyer.

Eda. I flee the company both of old and young
Which be not honest in gesture deed and tongue
With the holy, thou shall learn to be holy
Among fools we shall learn but folly
Wherefore if I see any bent to inhumanytie.
I avoid his folly and lewd vanity.
With non do I use to common or dispute
But with such, by whom I may have sum fruit.

Agna. For so doing God be thanked for his grace
A token that you intend virtue to enbrace.
I read in a book of virginity lately
Where one compares it unto a Lyly.
Which if it be towched, as he does express
A none it will lose all the fair whytenes.
So if virginity be touched a little
Either with unclean thoughts or words idle
It will lose the purytie thereof anon
Yea and the savor pleasing god will be gone.
Wherefore hedge we in our garden with faith sure
That our Lily from touching may be kept pure.

Eda. I have read in a sermon of good authorytie
That abstynence is a friend to virgynitie
Contrarywyse, a full belly is an enemy
Unto all maids that will live honestly
I have heard my father talk of that matter
He said that maids would fast with bred and water
And did labor asmoch, and took pains as great
As any day that they eat their meals and meat
But as fasting is turned into surfaityng
So is work turned into idle leuteryng.
This I see in all states now for a surety
The most part are given to fleshly liberty
As sum withold ye truth of god in unrighteousness
So of his word they make a cloak of maliciousnes
Yea young and old, maids, widows men and wives
As it does appear to plainly by their lives.
To the good town they must go to drink wine
Though they come again as drunk as swyne.

Agna. Among the Romans no greater offense there was
Then for women at Tauernes their times to pas
A law there was, that they might no wine drink
Which was no evil truly I do think.
But when young gyrles will be wine bybbars
It follows, that they intend to be evil lyuers
Wine says Hierom, youth and lustines
Is a doble kyndeling unto voluptuousnes.
Madness it is to add oil unto a fire
But more madness to give youth their desire.
There is better pathe to life everlasting
Than (is being in the faith) prayer and fasting.

Eda. May you tarry no longer here trow you?

Agna. The time draws nere that I must depart now.

Eda. Let us talk.iii. or.iiii. sentences mo
And than in gods name you shall go.
Me think that there is a great falte in parents
Concerning their daughters attire and garments

Agna. As all things are clean to them that be clean
So in all things there is an honest mean
I do not much pass of the outward vesture
So the mind be morned with christen or nature
Asmoche mekenes may be under a velvet gown
As in one that wereth the worst coat in the town
and asmoch pride in him that wereth a patched coat
As in him that wears gold about his throat,
Superfluous disguisyng is very evil
But paintyng of the hearre comes of the devil.
o woman says Ambrose, you blottestout gods pictur
When thou with paintyng alterest nature.
I can not praise these new found disguisynges
Through pride they were of Satan's dyuysinges
A holy man says, that external superfluity
Is a sign of an internal vanytie
Whersoeuer says he, nyce garments ye find
You may be sure there to have the nicenes of mind
Would to god in garments there were more modesty
I allow clenlines in apparel with honesty.

Eda. As of virtuous matters here we do talk
So in our living, God give us grace to walk.
How say you by singing and dancing
To sin I judge them a great aduauncing
My father will have me to play at the Lute
Also at the Uirginalles wherein is small fruit.

Agna. As in godly matters you are very wise
So in things indifferent be not to nyce.
The best gifts of God may be abused
The gifts therefore may not be accused,
But they which abuse gods good gifts
As all they do which are carnal unthrifts
To can singe truly is right commendable
If the cyrcumstances be alowable.
As the song to be good, sunge with good intent
The person the time the place honest and decent.
In like manner at instruments to play
A goodly gift of God it is truly I say.
But abused, they may be through vain pride
And when better things for them are laid aside
In holy scripture we find that young damsels
Sang Psalms, songs, and played at Tymbrels
Such Instruments as they used than
Which have not ben rebuked of any wise man.
But those things were ever done in time
To the honor of god, wherein was no crime.
I tell you in this thing my poor aduisement
But lean you to a wise bodies Judgment.
Now as for dancing, I wot not what to say
Holy men have spoken against it til this day.
And though king David dau^ced before the Arc
I wot not what to say for I am no clarke.
But this is the sentence of some that be wise
Dancing can be scacely used without vice
For by their own judgment you can not dance finely
Without a great pride and secret envy.

Eda. God save me then from learning that art
Herodias daughter played a wicked part
For through her dau^syng, most holy saint Ihon
By Herodes commaundment was beheded anon
Pride and envy are sins which I detest,
To avoyde thoccasion of them I think it best
When I see that any virtue thereby does chance
Then diligently will I learn to dance,
God grant me grace to learn him to please
To my mind that shall be the greatest ease.

Agna. I must bid you fare well till to morrow
Tha^ to talk with you more, a time I will I borow

Eda. I thank you heartily for your great pain
I shall think long till I speak with you again*
I desire you, this night in your meditation
Devise in your mind against our next communication
How I may serve god as he does require
Let this be our next talk I do you desire.

Agna With a good will you shall know my heart
God have you in his keeping I must depart.

Eda. God be with us in farewell and greeting
And send us again a merry meeting. Amen.

Finis.
Here after follows A Dialogue concerning wysdom and Will. Who reason together
thus.
TO spend the time honestly a season
I think this to be a talk convenient
Of Will and Wisdom a while to reason
And who may justly be called sapient
I think it meet therefore Wysdom to defyne
Tully calls it a knowledge or science
Of matters as well heavenly and divine
As of humane things, in thordre of prudence.
So that perfightely to know gods will
That is, what of man, god does require
And the same in word and deed to fulfill
Is the highest wisdom whereto man can aspyre.
Also what percayneth to cumly order
Among men at all times to be used
And to keep the same in every bordre
Is wysdom, of none to be refused.
According hereto a Christian Poet
Certain pleasant versis in Latin does write
Which if a while you will be quyete
As well as I can, I will recyte.
Sed fortasse aliquis quaerit sapientia quid sit:
Nil aliud certe est nisi prima scientia, per quam
Men's pura and nulla mortali pondere praessa
Libera terrenis affectibus atria coeli
Scandit, and aethera cum dijs versatur in aulae,
Sum perchance will ask, what is sapience
Nothing else but a science principal
Whereby (a mind spotted with no vncongruence
Neither pressed with any sin capital
But free from affections terrestrial)
Unto the heavenly palaces does ascend
And is conuersaunt with spirits celestial
In heaven I mean, where god is without end.
Many noble sentences be in that place
Right worthy to be talked of in deed
But because they require more time and space
I leave them and will to other things proceed
As in few persons is this Sapience
So in all men living is there a will
Which through stoborne disobedience
Many one, both soul and body does spyll.
Will. Somewhat of Will here by your patience
I must say according to learning
And as you have praised sapience
So of Will, let me say my meaning.

Wisdom. Will plays the wanton boy now and than.
When Will without wit, reuelleth alone
He undoes many a wylfull man
Who would repent when the time is gone

Will. Will is an appetite given to goodness
According to prudent Aristotle's mind
In the first book of Rethorickes he does express
The same sentence, or much of that kind
And the same Poet which you did rehearse
(A Poet? no forsooth. rather a Divine)
Right nobly speaks of Will in a verse
As though Will, does not to evil incline.
Suntque voluntatis bona plura and quatuor horum
Praecipua existunt, prudencia* iustitia atque
Grandia quae aggreditur fortis discrimina virtus,
Net non quae frenis nos temperat atque modestos,
Efficit. etc.
There be many good things longyng to Will
And chiefly.iiii. Prudence, and Justice,
Strength, that noble virtue great things to fulfill
Temperance, who restrayneth sensual vice.
These.iiii. be called virtues Cardinal:
For of them all other virtues depend
Of the which virtues, Will is thoriginall
Wherefore, Will I may justly commend.

Wisdom. I say still, that Wit is a crafty boy,
Feign he would his wilful folly excuse,
He has played even now a subtle toye.
For a learned sentence he did abuse
Aristotle in the place of you aledged
Whereas you say, he does Will define,
Is of you triuicated and abredged
Contrary to the Philosophers doctrine,
Will is an appetite of goodness says he
Coniuncte or rather subject to reason
I say when Will to reason does agree
Than all things be done well, and in season
But I speak only of that sturdy Will
Which to obey reason does proudly disdain
Than both it self, it does destroy and spyll
And puts many another to pain.
In that Will, which to reason does consent
Is all kind of good virtues contained
Than it does nothing whereof it should repent
For all vices thereby are restreyned.

Will. Me think you make little difference
Betwyxt Will and sensualytie
Will is equal with sapience
Yea and higher in authorytie.
For what could sapience or reason do
Or any other power of the mind
Except Will, would consent thereto
Who has power both to loase and to bind.
Only in Will is free liberty
When Wysdom and reason have devised
Will has this power for a suertie
To let all that they have practysed.
Example. Reason and Wisdom do teach
Perform this they can not which they preach
Except Will thereto shall liberty give.

Wisdom. The pride of this stoborne Will, breaks out
And by little and little does the self declare
Will is proud, Will is sturdy and stout
And yet miserable, being left bare
Every man through Will alone is made a wretch
But the more wretched as Austen does publish
When the same Will does it self stretche,
So far that he may his desire accomplish
And also it follows, that through evil Will
Not every man a wretch is made
But also the more wretched when he may fulfill
That evil whereto evil will does persuade,
Thus he means, the more power Will has
To do evil, the more wretched it is,
The more power Will has reason to scathe,
The more bond, and the more does a mis.

Will. You have talked of evil will a long season
I pray you what do you call the same evil will

Wisdom. That Will which is not subject to reason
But seeks his sensual rage to fulfill
Now to make answer to your comparison.
Where you prefer Will before reason,
In deed, Will, and his wylfull garrison
Compare with God from who^ all goodness come
But in this point, wisdom does will excel
Wisdom is always good, and Will sometime evil
Wisdom obaieth God, Will sometime does rebel
Wisdom, of God is led, Will sometime of the devil
And let not will rejoice in his wicked power
For the more power he has to commit evil
The more servile, the more vile day and hour,
And the more draws he unto the devil.

Will. To your sentence I can not much disagre
In few words you have showed ye bondage of will
Now I pray you declare how it may be free
And I will humbly hark unto your skyll.

Wisdom. When Will to Wisdom wyllyngly does incline
(Now what Wisdom is I declared before)
Than Will, not of merytes, but of grace divine
Is enfrenchesed, and made free evermore
Recte igitur quidam, liber solus sapiens est
Dixere, Hic etenim solus ratione Magistra
Castigat motus animi sensumque rebellem.
Certain learned men forsooth said ryghtly
A wise man only has a free will
For a wise man through lady reason aptely
Chastises evil lusts, and the flesh rebelling still.
Reke this order. And than the will is free
With Solomon ask of God his sapience
Than to reasons rule always agree
And hold sensuality in obedience
He that can observe purely these.iiii. lines
Not only a virtuous man I do him call
But also I compare him to a divines
And to the highest learned of them all.

Will. I have Ministered communication
Sumwhat contrary to verytie
That by your wyttie declaration
I might be brought out of ambyguitie.
For by reasonyng and argument
Matters of contr^uersy and in doubt
Are opened, made plain and euydent
And the verity searched and boulted out.
Now to God humble thanks let us render
For his wonderful work in mankind
Who our misery so greatly did tender
That he sent his son his lost sheep to find.

Wisdom. Say this before dinner or supper:
Glory, honor and praise to God the father
For all his benefits given unto us
Who by his spirit vouchsafe us to gather
Into the true faith of his son Christ Jesus,
We beseech that one God in Trinity
To bless his creatures for us prepared,
Render we thanks with all humility
For his kyndnesse to us in all things declared
He grant us his gifts so meanly to take
That our bodies may be in subjection
Wherewith, such a lively sacrifice we may make
As before him may be in acception.

Will. He keep our tongues from talk of vanity
From backbityng, sclaunderyng or liyng
At our table let there be such humanity
As becomes his people both living and diyng.
In Gods name now take your refection
We have ended our talk for this season
After your meal I must make an objection
Concerning the highest parre called Reason.
After dinner or supper say this

Wisdom. Approach my frynde I pray you and come near
Go to now, propugne your objection
And in the truth, show you a direction.

Will. You said before that Will is than free
When it is subject to reason and sapience
This sentence to reason does not agree
There is no fredom where as is obedience.

Wisdom. If Will has any liberty at all
The most is reason and Wisdom to obey
The freedom of Will, of it self is but small.
When it refuses reason to be his stay.
To have license to do evil is no liberty
But the most vile bondage that ever was
Now reason through grace has this property
To cause Will in the way of truth to pass.
He that does sin, is servant unto sin
O what servitude is like unto this
Non other advantage thereby do they win
But hell, where Satan the Devil dampened is.
Contrary wise, there is no liberty
Like the subjection unto virtue
For that erecteth the soul into felycitie
If unto the end we do it ensue.
Behold, here obedience is lybertye
And liberty (if I may it so name)
Is vile bondage and utter seruylitie
Which brings many a man to shame.

Will. You have well satisfied my mind
But where as you talked sumwhat of reason
I would know what reason is in kind
Whom you say, Will must obey in season.

Wisdom. Est autem ratio lumen quoddam atque animi Vis
Qua curuum a recto secernimus, atque ab honesto
Turpe. Oculusque solet mentis quandoque Vocari*
Reasson is a certain light and strength of the mind
Whereby we discern the crooked from the right
The fylthy from the honest thereby we do find
Therefore of the mind it is named the light.
Lo here is this great Clearkes dyffinition
Whereby what reason is you may learn
Also reason is a perfect erudition
By the Which good from evil we discern.
Now reason, as the philosopher says
Ever more approaches unto the beast
A directry of life an handmayd of fayeth
Which loves virtue, and does vice detest.

Will. Than I see if Will follows reason
It shall consent to all that is honest
But sensualytie works much treason
And does both reason and Will greatly molest
But where as in your diffinicion aforesaid
Of the mind also you made mention
This term (mind) ought to be wayed
Therein let us also know your intencion.

Wisdom. Men's igitur sol est animae, sunt sidera sensus.
The mind to the soul is a sun bright
Which illumineth the same with her clear shine
By the mind the soul sees to go right
And needs not out of the way to declyne.
As for the senses are as the dyuine stars
Which give a shine, but not to work by
Yea against reason they be obstacles and bars
The motions of reason to stop or deny.
Senses alonely do the brute beasts beutyfie
But reason and senses both do enorne mankind
Yet reason excels senses verily
As a man a live excels a man dead and blind.
Reason is the more noble part in deed
For to heavenly things the mind it does carry
Senses hold man down, on the earth to feed
And thereby man from beasts do not much vary.

Will. You put me in memory of a sentence
Which the great clarke Lactantius does write
Would to God I had the wit and science
As he meant it, the same purely to recyte.
That high artyficer God our parent dear
Has given to man, sense, reason and sapience
That man to be made of him it might appear
For God is sense, reason, Wisdom and intelligence
Of all the creatures that ever God did make
In man he showed most his omnipotencye
Alas why did Adam his precept forsake
For through sin he lost his innocencye
Wysdom, Will, reason, mind be here declared
If you will speak a word or.ii. of sense
Which God in man has also prepared
I will no more trouble you, but depart hence.

Wisdom. Sum learned men call sense a power passyue
That is suffering obiectes variable
Sensualytie is an appetite sensityue
To the outward felyng very delectable.
But senses are divided of philosophers
Into senses external and internal
Auicenna, Thomas, and their folowers
Speak also of senses Intellectual.
Touching the senses external there be five
That is, seeing, hearing, smellyng, tasting, feling
Both men and beasts as many as be alive
Have these five commonly, without differyng
These are as wyndowes to intelligence
For by them all things enter into understanding
Of the which things, reason and sapience
Apoynt an order after their determining.
We might minister hereof more matter
Than to the auditors should be profitable
Of many things to utter much clater
Is loss of time, and nothing laudable.

Will. There is not a word spoken this season
But thereof some fruit I have gathered.
The knowledge I have not farther to reason
Which I trust is right well considered.
To God if it will please you thanks to give
Which with his benefytes does us feed
We shall do but our deutye, and I believe
That in all our acts, the better we shall speed.

Wisdom. Thanks to the o father our creator
Thanks to the Jesus Christ the way and verity
Thanks to the o spirit our consolator
Thanks to the one blessed God in Trynitie.

Amen.
Finis.
Compiled by Ihon Fysher student in Oxforde.

Imprinted at London in Smithfyeld at the sign of the Mytre, by Ihon Tisdale
for William Pickeryng dwelling at saint Magnus corner.

In the year of our Lord God M.D.L.UIII.

The.v. day of March.


