A Learned Sermon preached before the King at White Hall, on Friday the 16 of
March: by M. Doctor Field: Chaplain to his Majesty.

At London, Printed by James Roberts, for Ieffry Chorlton. 1604.

Jude. verse. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence, to write unto you of the
common salvation, it was necessary for me to write unto you, to exhort you,
that you should earnestly contend for the maintenance of the Faith, which was
once delivered unto the Saints.
THE blessed Apostle Saint Jude, finding that many in his time began well, and
ended ill, who being seduced by wicked miscreants made shipwreck of the
faith, forsook their first love, departed away from the living GOD, and
embraced this present world: writes this his Epistle general to the
Christians of those times, to strengthen the vveake, confirm the doubtful,
and stay such as were ready to fall.

The argument whereof is contained in these words, which I have now read in
your hearing; wherein three things are to be observed. First, he makes known
unto them his love: in that he calls them his beloved. Secondly, his careful
and diligent study and endeavor, not only by word being present, but also by
writing being absent, to procure their everlasting good, and to direct them to
the attayning of eternal salvation, in that he professes, he gave all
diligence to write unto them of the common salvation: Thirdly he shows, what
it was, that in those his careful deliberations (how he might most happily
work their eternal good) he found most necessary to write unto them of. It
was necessary for me to write unto you to exhort you to contend etc. Of these
things in order, as they lie in the words of the Apostle, and first of the
first, which is his love.

Many and great are the things Almighty God requires of them, whom he
appoints Rulers and Governors over his people. For as he communicates unto
them part of his own honor, gives them his own tytles, sets them upon
his own seat, commits the care of his people unto them, and trusts them
with the execution of his own justice and judgment, so he requires of them,
and puts in them a spirit of more, then ordinary wisdom, courage, and
magnanimity, fit to sustain and bear the weight of so great a burden. But
above all he requires of them a tender and loving affection toward his
people, of whom they take the charge, that they seek not their own private
pleasure, profit, or content, but the good of them over whom they are set.

And as this is required generally of all Rulers, so most principally of them,
to whom the Word of reconciliation, the dispensation of the Divine mysteries,
and the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven is committed. This our
Savior showed by his manner of proceeding, and the course he took, when
having accomplished the work of redemption, and being ready to return back to
him, that sent him, he resolved to send out his Apostles with most ample
Commission for the gathering of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, and
the conversion of such, as he had bought and purchased with his most precious
blood. For though he had made choice of such men for that employment, as had
been conversant with him in the days of his flesh, seen his miracles and
works of wonder, and heard the words of his heavenly wisdom, and were most
fit to be witnesses of all the things he did and suffered, and to publish the
joyful tidings of salvation to the people of the world, yet would ^^ give them
no Commission, till he were assured of their love. And therefore, though he
had promised to build his Church on Peter's faith and ministry, Math. 16.
and to give unto him the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, yet before he
performed this promise, and said unto him, John, 21.
Feed my lambs, feed my sheep, he demanded thrice of him concerning his
love. Neither does he ask him of his love toward them, he was to take charge
of, but of his love toward himself, thereby the more to enforce it, and raise
it to a higher degree, as if he had thus said: If I have de^erued any thing of
thee, if my death and bitter sufferings deserve thy love, if thou owe any
thing unto me for the benefits of the heavenly calling, the knowledge of that
truth, which flesh and blood could not reveal unto thee, and the dignity of
an Apostle, wherewith I have honored thee, as (I say vn^to thee) thou owe
more then thy self: turn the course of thy love upon the people of my
purchase: for they are the inheritance my Father gave me, when I came into the
world, the reward of my labors, the recompense of my travails, and the price
of my blood: for their sakes I left my throne in Heaven, put off my robe of
Majesty, and put upon me the habit of a servant, they are my Temple, in
which I am worshipped, my Church, in the midst whereof my Name is called
upon, my spouse, whom my soul loves, and my body, with out which I am not
complete and full.

An example of this love, which God requires of us, himself gave us, when he
loved us, and gave his Son for us, whiles we were yet his enemies. An e^ample
hereof Christ showed us, when he poured forth his soul in bitter passions, to
redeem his people from their sins. An imitation of these examples in the
highest degree, that ever was found amongst mortal men, we have in Moses,
that desired to have his name blotted out of the book of life, rather then GOD
should be dishonored, or his people destroyed: and in Pa^ule, who wished to be
Anathema from the Lord Jesus, for the Jews his brethren and kinsmen according
to the flesh. A portion, degree, and measure of this love, rests upon all the
true servant of God, whence it comes that so often, when they speak unto
the people of God, they call them beloved. So much of the Apostles love. His
diligence follovveth.

Diligence or study, is an intentive fixing of the mind on some one thing
much esteemed, and respected. The diligence of the Apostles, and Apostolic men
in the work of the Ministry, the gathering of the Saints, and procuring the
everlasting good, and eternal salvation of Gods people appears in three
things; the multiplicitie of the things, they do for the working of this
intended good: the sedulitie in doing them: and the diverse manner of doing of
them.

Touching the first: who can express the variety of the things, they do for
the good of them, whom GOD has committed to their charge? They teach the
ignorant, convince them that err, seek them that are lost, bring back them
that are ou^ of the way, heal the sick, bind up the broken hearted, comfort
the heavy, and such as are dejected with sorrow, they strengthen the weak,
confirm the doubtful, stay them that are ready to fall, and raise up them that
are fallen.

This multiplicity of endeavors, to procure the good of Gods people, we shall
find in the blessed Apostle Saint Paul more, then in all the rest: who though
he were the last, and esteemed himself the least, and not worthy to be named
an Apostle; yet labored he more, then all they, who sometimes disputes,
sometimes exhorts, sometimes commands, sometimes entreats, sometimes
counsels, sometimes threatens, sometimes promises, sometimes terrifyeth,
and sometimes comfort; sometimes comes in the Spirit of meeknes, and
sometimes with a rod in his hand, calls back some, as being out of the
way, encourages others, and makes himself one of their company, as being
in a good way: some he calls his joy, his crown and glory, and to some he
objects folly and madness; to some he gives milk, to some strong meat:
sometimes he proscribeth and banisheth from the Church, sometimes he confirms
his love toward the same again. These are the diverse and different things the
Apostles and Apostolic men do for the good of Gods people.

Now as their diligence appears in this variety, and multiplicitie of things
they do, so likewise in their sedulitie in doing them, in that they do them in
season, and out of season; and in the different manner of doing them, in that
they perfome them by word being present, and by Letters being absent. The
Apostle Saint Jude, desiring to benefit the whole Christian Church, (with
all the parts whereof it was not possible for him to be present) shows his
diligence in writing: It was necessary for me to write unto you. Where we
are occasioned to speak first of vrryting in general: and secondly of sacred
writing, and and the object of it.

Great and inestimable is the benefit of writing, for by it all the treasures
of wisdom, piety, virtue, and learning, that ever God poured forth upon the
sons of men, are communicated to posterities. By it we may commune withal
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Fathers of the Church
(the lights and wonders of the world) that ever were; and whenever any doubt
arises and troubles our minds, we may call a greater and more general
Council, then either Constantine, Theodosi^s, or any of the Roman Emperors
either did, or could do.

The benefit of writing will appear to be the greater, if we compare them, who
(being renow^ed for wisdom and learning) never wrote any thing, (as Pythagoras
Socrates and others, of whom very few things remain) with Plato, Aristotle,
and the like, that committed the treasures of their learning, and wisdom to
writing, who, being dead long since, yet live, and are the great Masters of
the world even unto this day. Hence it is that no treasure was anciently, nor
is presently esteemed greater, then the holy library of the church; in which
respect the Romanistes deserve exceeding ill, that did formerly, and do
presently adulterate the monuments of antiquity, and leave nothing sincere,
and vncorrupt, as their manifold forgeries in former times, their Index
expurgatorius and other like practices of these times make it too plain

This being noted in general touching the benefit of writing, let us come to
the more especial consideration of sacred writing and the object of it. In the
Apostles times men admired their writings, but despised their words, and
personal presence, as not being accompanied with that greatness, they looked
for. His letters say they (speaking of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul that
trumpet of the Gospel, and ^^ood of Christian elo^uence) are peremptory, and
full of au^horitie and power, but his words, and ^ersonall presence weak,
vile, and con^emptible.

But now contrariwise the Romanistes ^egarde not their writings, but magnify
their words, delivered by tradition, char^ing their writings with obscurity,
insuf^^ciency, and imperfection, comparing them to a shipmans hose, a nose of
wax. Lesbian rule; affirming that but few things were written, non vt
praeessent, sed v^ ^bessent fidei nostrae, not to command and ^uer-rule our
faith, but to be ouer-ruled ^y it; that the Apostles received a com^andement to
preach, but none to writ; that they meant not to compose a perfect work,
containing the rule of our faith, but wrote only occasionally, as they ^ere
entreated, or as the particular ne^^ssities of the Churches did require.

This their censure of the divine Scrip^^res is injurious, in that they think
them ^^ be so obscure, and the sense, and mea^ing of them so uncertain, and
doub^^ull, that wicked men may wrest and abuse them, according to their own
pleasures, and no man be able to repro^e and convince them by the evidence and
for^^ of the Scriptures themselves: Impious^^^ that they think they proceeded
from the private motions of the Apostles and Evangelists, without the immediate
and special instinct, motion, and command o^ the spirit of truth:
Inconsiderate in tha^ they think the men of God entende^ not to compose a
perfect work.

The absurdity of which conceit wi^^ appear, if they will but take a view ^^
the books themselves, they have le^ unto us. For the writings of the
Evangelists contain a perfect history of the things Christ did, and suffered
from the time of his birth, till the time he w^^ assumed into Heaven. The Acts
^^ the Apostles, the coming of the holy Ghost, and the planting of the
Churche^ after Christ's ascension. The Epistles, t^^ clearing of the questions,
and doub^^ which troubled the Churches of thos^ times. And the Revelation, a
prophes^^ of the future state of things, to the e^^ of the world.

The object of these sacred writings is Salvation. Three things are delivered
unto us in the books of God, the creation, the fall, and the restoration and
salvation of man. Salvation is the preservation from those dangers and
deliverance from those eternal evils we were subject unto by the fall. This is
the greatest benefit that ever God bestowed on men, and the principal matter
and object of the divine Scriptures. For we might with Job curse the day of our
birth, wish the knees had never received us, the arms never embraced us, nor
the pappes given us suck, that the womb had bin ourgraue, and that we had bin
like the untimely fruit, that never saw the Sun; that the Mountains would
fall upon us, the Rocks cleave in sunder, and the de^ouring Gulfes swallow us
up; that we might cease to be, and be as if we had ^euer been, if we had no
part in the salvation mentioned in this place.

Behold says Gregory Nazianzen magnifying this benefit of salvation) in ^he
creation God gave us the best things ^e had, when as yet we had nothing, but in
the restoration he makes an exchange with us, he takes the worst we have,
and gives us the best he has* he takes our nature, and gives us his grace,
he takes our sin and gives us his righteousness, he takes our curse and
gives us his blessing, he takes our misery and gives us his happiness, he
takes our death and gives us his life, he humbles himself and exalts us.

This Salvation is said to be common, not as if all men of how vile condition
and wicked conversation soever should be partakers of it. For the Apostle Saint
Paul protests against this frenzy, saying. Know you not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? And again, be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
covetous persons, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

Touching this matter there were four dangerous errors in the primitive,
Church: the first of Origin who thought that all (even the devils themselves)
after certain reuolutions of times shall (...) saved: the second of them, who
not daring ^ing to proceed so far as Origin did, ^et thought, that all men
shall in the end be saved, as by fire. The third, that not ^ll men, but all
Christian men, notwith^tanding whatsoever wickedness, Schis^e or Heresy shall
in the end be saved. The fourth, that not all Christians, but ^ll Catholic,
Or^hodoxe, and right ^eleuing Christians shall in the end be ^ued, as by fire,
holding the foundati^n of a right profession. This last error ^any of the
fathers fell into, as appears ^y very pregnant places in Hierome, and ^hers
tending to that purpose, and by ^ustines own confession, where he ^riteth
against it, calling it a merciful ^ror of some Catholic divine.

Against this error Austine opposes himself, August: de ciuitat: dei de fid:
et oper: In enchir: ad Laur:
but very fearfully; professing, (...) he will not peremptorily deny, but at
a mitigation or suspension of the ^^nishments of the wicked may be ob^^ned
after they are departed out of this ^^rld, so that their punishments be
^nfessed to be eternal. And if this will ^^ satisfy them, from whom he is
vn^ling to dissent, he says that though men professing the faith, being wholly
wicked and void of love, cannot be saved, as by fire, but must perish
eternally, yet he dares not deny but that men, that do believe aright, and
have love (though mingled with much imperfection) may be saved by a kind ^^
purging fire after this life, which whether it be so, or not he cannot tell.

Thus we see in what sort Austine was driven upon the opinion of purgatory,
and how doubtfully he speaks ^^ it, yet was he the first that ever spoke ^^
this kind of purgatory in the Church of God. So doubtful a beginning ha^^
this article of the Romanistes faith, wh^^ yet rest not in the judgment of this
f^ther, that only some lighter sins a^ wasted, and consumed away in this
pu^ging fire, but imagine that the iusticed God in it is satisfied, and the
punishme^^ of mortal sins suffered (the faul^, an^ not the punishment being
remitted (...) this life) which things Austine ne^ dream^ of.

But to return to the words of the Apostle; Salvation is said to be comm^^ ^
absolute unto all, but unto them that ^re called, and sanctified of GOD, and
^serued in Christ Jesus.

As in nature the best things, and things ^f necessity, are either absolutely
and ^qually, or at least in some mediocritie ^mmon unto all, but things of
orna^ent and delight, are proper to some few^ ^ is it in the matter of faith,
and saluati^^. Among the things of nature, what better, then air, fire,
water, earth, ^owers of rain, the fruits of the field, ^uses to dwell in,
garments to put on, ^alth and strength of body, length of ^yes, comely
proportion, and statu^e body, quicknes of sense, sharpnes of ^^, and
faithfulness of memory, the use ^^d benefit of these is in some sort com^on unto
all, and the poor man often ^oyeth them with more contentment, ^n the rich:
neither is there any man and to be so great a Tyrant, as to de^ to enjoy these
common benefits a^^: but gold, pearls, precious stones, ^t array, and things
of that kind, are (...) peculiar lot, and portion of some few. likewise in the
matter of faith, and grace, the Law, the Prophets, the couenaunts of Grace, the
sufferings of Christ, regeneration, the Gospel, the giving of the Spirit,
Faith, Hope, Love, and eternal Salvation are common unto all, that are called,
and sanctified of GOD, no^ as Manna in a certain measure, but every one takes
as much of them as he^ will: the gyfts of tongues, miracles, prophecy, the
degrees of ministry, and (...) like, are proper to some few.

When the Law was given upon Mount Sina, Moses, and the Elders only went up,
the people (though prep^red and sanctified to meet the Lord had bounds set
unto them, and mig^^ not so much as touch the Mountain Moses only entered into
the cloud, co^muned with GOD, and received from him the tables of the Law; but
vvh^ Moses came down from God, the La^ the Couenaunts, the Sacrifices,
cerem^nies, and all that Moses learned of Go^ was imparted and communicated to
(...) the people.

Thus much of the Apostles diligen^^ in writing. The matter whereof he w^^teth,
follows, It was necessary, for me to writ unto you to exhort you to contend.
etc. In the matter, whereunto the Apostle exhorts them, three things are to
be observed. For first they must contend, secondly they must contend earnestly,
thirdly they must contend for the maintenance of the faith. It may seem a
thing very needles to exhort men to contend. For the world is and ever was to
full of contentions. The contentions of Christians have scandalized many, they
have been the cause of the overthrow of many famous Churches; and the removing
of those golden Candlestickes, in the midst whereof the Son of God some^ime
walked. So that all good men dissuade from contentions, and seek to extinguish
the flames of that fire, which has already wasted, and burnt down so many,
and so worthy parts of the house of God.

Austine understanding of the bitter invectiues, Epist. 15.
that Hierome and Ruffinus had published one against another, breaks forth
into these words, expressing the sorrow of his heart: Hei mihi, qui vos ^licubi
simul inuenire non possum: forte ^ nunc moueor, vt doleo, vt tim^^, pr^cid^rem
ad pedes vestros, flerem quantum v^l^rem, rogarem quantum amarem, (...)
vnumquenque vestrum pro seipso, nunc vtrumque pro alterutro, et pro alijs, et
m^xime infirmis, pro quibus Christus mort^^s est, qui vos tanquam in theatro
huius v^ta^ cum magno suo periculo spectant, ne de vobis ea scribendo
spargatis, quae quandoque concordes delere non poteritis. Woe is me (says he)
that I can no where meet with you two together for if I could, as now I stand
affected, as I sorrow for these beginnings, and fear what will be the issues
of things so ill begun, I would fall at ^our feet and weep till I had dried
up the Fountain of tears, I would entreat you so long, as the affection of
love, that reigns in me, could suggest unto me one word of entreatie, no^
entreating and beseeching each of you for himself, now either of you for
other, and for others, most of all the weak, for whom Christ dyed, which not
without great peri^^ behold you in these your contentions, brought upon the
stage of this world to be gazed on, I would entreat you, not to publish those
things in writing one of another, which hereafter when happily you may be
friends, it will ^ot be possible for you to blot out again.

That we may therefore see, in what sense the Apostle exhorts to contend, we
must observe, that the things, for which men contend, are of three sorts; the
first are things indifferent. Such was ^he contention in the Primitive Church
about fasting on the Saturday, in which observation the Church of Rome, and
some other Western Churches, differed from the Churches of the East, which
fasted not on that day. Some condemned the Church of Rome in this behalf, ^ut
Austine thinks the matter to be indifferent, Epistle to Cassulanus.
and shows, that when his Mother Monica came to Milan (where Ambrose was
Bishop) where the Saterdayes fast was not kept, and was doubtful what to do,
Ambrose being consul^ed, answered, she should do as he did. She thinking she
must not fast, because ^e did not, he replied, he meant not so: ^ut that she
should comforme her self ^o the manner of that Church, where she should happen
to be, as he in such cases used to do. And Austine adds, that if in the same.
Churches there be different customs, men should follow the example of the
principal Pastors.

This judgment we take to be much better, then that of the Fathers of the sixth
Council in Trullo, who condemned the Church of Rome (as violating the
Apostolic, and ancient custom) in that it fasted on the Saturday. Of this
nature was the difference between the East, and West Churches, about
consecrating in leauened, or unleavened bread, dipping, or sprinkling the
baptized^ thrice, o^ once; and such have been the contentions of some in our
Church, about round and square, white and black, sitting, standing, and
kneeling. In which things if any man list to be contentious, we say with the
Apostle, We have no such c^stome, neither the Churches of God.

The second kind of things, for which men contend, are things mistaken. An
excellent example in this kind we hau^ in the Oration of Gregory Nazianzen, in
the praise of Athanasius, where he ^^porteth, that when the Bishop of Ro^^ and
the Bishops of the West Church affirmed, that there is one essence of God, and
three persons, and the Eastern Bishops, one essence, and three hypostases, or
subsistences, the contention grew so ho^e* that the whole Christian world was
in danger, to be rent in pieces upon the difference of these syllables. Hierome
living in the East parts, and being required to acknowledge three hypostases,
or subsistences in God, writet^ to Damasus, entreats and beseeches him, per
crucifixam mundi salutem, per ^omousion trinitatem, vt sibi ^^ Epistolis suis,
sieve tacendarum, sieve dicendarum hypostaseon detur a^thoritas, and protests
he greatly fears, least satan has transfigured himself into an Angel of
light. The Grecians judged the Latins, to be Sabellians, and the Latins the
Greeks to be Arrians. Athanasius (that worthy of the world, in whose lap
our wearied Mother the Church did often repose, and lay her head, seeking rest
from her forsaken children) in gentle and loving manner interposed himself,
and examining either party, found they meant one and the same thing. Thus was
this division composed more easily by friendly mediation, then it would have
been by writing or disputing, which often rather increase contentions, then
end them.

Of this nature doubtless are the differences between the Divines of Germany,
Denmark, Sweden, and other parts embracing the confession of Auspurg^, and the
Churches of Heluetia, France, and other, touching the vbiquitarie presence of
Christ, and his presence in the Sacrament, touching the losing, or not losing
of grace once had, and touching predestination; in all which I am verili^
persuaded, if the meaning of each part were fully known to other, there would
be no difference amongst them.

For the divisions of our own Church, our hope is, that by the goodness of God,
and the godly care of our gracious Sovereign, they are now at an end: so that
whosoever hereafter shall blow the coals, and kindle the fire of that
dissension any more, he shall for ever be branded with the note and mark of a
turbulen^, unquiet, and factious spirit. Let not our adversaries therefore
insult upon us in respect of our divisions. For I dare undertake to prove,
there are more real, and material differences amongst them in some one point
of Christian religion, then amongst all the reformed Churches in all.

The third sort of things for which men contend, are such as we ought to
contend for; to wit, matters of faith, no part whereof we must betray, how
dear so ever the defense of it cost us. For these things we must contend
earnestly. Indifferency in matters of faith and religion displeases God. If
God be God, let us follow him; if Baall be God let us follow him. There is no
communion between light and darkness, righteousness, and unrighteousness, Christ
and Beliall, the temple of God, and Idols, and what part has the believer with
the infidel? But it will ever be true, which Christ observed in his time; the
children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light. The Pharisees then, the Jesuits and others of that sort now, omit no
opportunity, take all occasions, and compass sea and land, to make one
Proselyte, to make one of their profession, though they make him the child of
hell seauen-fold more, then themselves. But the Orthodoxe and right believing
Christians are negligent, and are so far from gayning, that they lose the
advantages they have.

It is observed, that in the time of the Arrian heresy, at the first the
Catholics had all advantages on their side, the determination of the Nicen
Council called and confirmed by the royal authority of Constantine was for
them, and Constantine resolute to suppress that heresy, and to send into
banishment the maintainers of it. The Arrians seeing into what straites they
were brought, rested not till they had insin^ated themselves into Constantines
favor, and perverted Constantius the next succeding Emperor, a man the
Catholics might easily have possessed. There were two things (as Nazianzen
reports) tha^ much disquieted and afflicted his mind at the time of his
death, the one, that h^^ had followed new and strange opinions in matters of
faith, the other, that he should leave Julian a wicked miscreant to succeed
him in the Empire.

But what followed upon this careful diligence of the one sort, and security
and negligence of the other? by the means of Constantius the Arrains so
prevailed, that in the Councels of Arimmum and Seleucia, the synceritie of the
Christian profession (agreed on in the Nicen Council) was betrayed, all the
Bishops of the world, ( Athanasius, Eusebius, Hilarious, and some very few
more, if yet there were any more, excepted) were drawn away and abused by the
Arrians. Ingemuit totu^^rbis et miratus est, sefactum esse Arria^um.

In our times, they of the Romish faction by fair promises, and sweet and
sugared words, draw unto them the choysest wits they find amongst us, they
observe wherein each man is most likely to excel, and employ him accordingly,
some in writing, some in reading, some in preaching, some in disputing, they
have some for School divinity, some for positive, ^ome for the study of the
Fathers, and courses of antiquity. But with us all the^ things are neglected,
and therefore (...) go before us, not in the goodness of (...) cause, but in
the good and wise managing of an evil cause. For I dare undertake that if a
choice be made, and me^ may have those helps and encouragemen^ that are fit for
men so employed, this national Church will yield men more th^^ matchable with
the greatest of the adverse faction, in all those courses of learning, wherein
they seem most to excel.

But to return to the words of the Apostle, we must contend, not for thinge^
indifferent, not mistaking one another* but for the maintenance of the faith.
A^^ the name of hope, sometimes signifies the things we hope for, (as when the
Apostle says, If we had hope only in this life we were of all men the most
miserable) sometime the desire and expectation of the same things: so the name
of fayt^ sometimes signifies the act or habit of believing, sometimes that
sum of Christian doctrine, the conclusions wherea^ are not demonstrable by
reason, but (...) he believed by faith. This doctrine of faith (least we
mistake it) is described by two circumstances. It was once delivered, and it
was delivered to the Saints. It is said to have been once delivered, to
express the difference between the manner of the divine revelation formely,
and since Christ appeared. For before, the heavenly truth was revealed, not all
at once, but in diverse sorts, and degrees, according as the time wherein the
revelation was made, was nearer, or more remote from the appearing of Christ,
but in the last times God spoke by his own son, and b^ him at once delivered
all that, that shall be known concerning himself, till the ends of the world.
So that we which are Christians must be^^eue nothing but that which was
delivered at the first beginning of Christianity.

So that the error of the Montanists is to be rejected, which imagined, that
Christ revealed not all the mysteries of his kingdom to Peter, on whom he
promised to build his Church, to John, the disciple he ^o dearly loved, which
leaned on his breast at the mystical supper, and to the rest of that blessed
company, but reserved many things till the spirit descended upon Montanus, and
his prophetesses: as also the frenzy of those heretics in France, which
affirmed, that as the Father was author of the old Testament, and the Son of
the New, so the holy Ghost in the last times must be the author of a third,
which is a law of love, which because it is the last, to continue for ever, and
to have none after it, may (as they suppose) be rightly termed the eternal
Gospel, so abusing the place of the revelations of Saint John.

But passing by these errors of phanaticall and vain men: in that the faith is
said to have been once delivered, we observe two things; the f^rst, that that
only is true which was delivered at the first. For howsoever many things be
more fully, distinctly, and expressly known in latter times then they were
formerly, yet they were delivered at the first infolded in generalities, out of
which they are afterward more distinctly, and expressly deduced, even as a
child, when it is first borne, has all those parts of body, that ever after it
has, though not expressed and enlarged as afterward they are, as Vincentius
Lerinensis most aptly notes.

Secondly we may observe, that whatsoever may be proved to be most ancient,
is undoubtedly true, as being immediately inspired from the spirit of truth.
Quod primum, verissimum: the truth is before the counterfeite, the thing before
the imitation of the thing, the habit before privation, and good before evil:
the good seed was first sowed, and then the envious man came, et
superseminauit zizania, and sowed tares, where the good seed was before.

We deny not therefore, but most willingly grant unto our adversaries, that
Antiquity is a note of the true Church; not as if that Church were always
purest, and most vncorrupt, which first re^eiued the faith, and has longest
conti^ued in the profession of it: for then the Ethiopian and Asian Churches,
would prove themselves as pure or purer, then any Churches in the world: but
because that is the truest and purest Church, which holds that doctrine, and
discipline that was first delivered.

The Romanists are wont to stand much upon this note of Antiquity, but how
will they prove, they have the faith which was first delivered. They prove it,
because they once had it, and it cannot be showed, when they departed from it.
For answer whereunto we say, that in many things we can show, when the
alteration began. Georg* Cassa. in praefa. ordi^: Roma:
For who knows not, that Charles the Emperor with threats, and punishments,
forced all the Clergy in the Provinces subject unto him, to forsake the
ancient forms of divine service, and public administration, they had
formerly used, and to receive the Roman order; and that the Spaniards (as
being most stiff in all their courses) held their own rites, till in the
time of Gregory the seventh, they were forced by Alphonsus the sixth, to leave
them, which they did not without great sorrow expressed with tears.

And though we could not preciselie note the time, when their errors and abuses
entered into the Church, yet the consequent were not good, that therefore they
have not departed from the first and original purity. For there are and have
been many errors in the Church, not only so judged by us, but confessed to be
so by them, the precise time of the beginning whereof is not known. The
opinion of the necessity of giving the Sacrament of the Lords body unto
infants, August. d^ peccat: rem:
and the practice of the same continued in the Latin Church, (as Maldonatus
confesses) six hundred years, and is retained in all the Oriental Churches
to this day. This was an error, and yet neither the time when it began, nor the
author of it known. The opinion, that none shall see GOD, nor enter into
heaven till the resurrection, was the error of many of the ancient, yet the
author of it, and the time, when it began is unknown. The opinion of two
resurrections the one of the just, the other of the wicked, (there being
between the one and the other above a thousand years) was an error amongst the
ancient, the Author of ^t, and the time when it began, is not ^nowne.

To leave these things that were ancient, and to come to the things now
priuayling in the Church of Rome; it was the old custom, that the Sacrament
of the Lords body and blood, was given to all that were present, at the time of
the mystical blessing, consecration, and operation: all the Catech^meni,
poenitents, and not communicants missis, et exclusis, being sent away and
excluded: whence the whole mystical action is called Miss^. This custom
continued till the time of Gregory the first, in whose time the Deacon after
the reading of the Gospel pronounced those solemn words, si quis non
communicate, exeat. This does Cassander prove at large in his preface before the
book called Ordo Romanus, shevving that many doubted, whether the words of
the Canon of the Mas^e, which imply a communion of the people, may be used in
private Masses. By degrees they fe^^ from the public, and solemn communion
of the people, and the Clergy alone communicated with the priest. Afterward,
they also (though present) abst^^ned, and communicated not. When these private
Masses began, it is no^ known.

The custom was to give the sacrament in both kinds to the people (as Lindan
proves) and it was thought necessary, as the book called Ordo Romanus
shows: And all the Churches of the east retain this custom unto this day.
When the half communion began it is not known. In the time, that Luther
began, almost all believed and taught, that Mary was conceived without sin,
and thought it a matter of piety to be of that judgment. In 3 sent: did: 3.
quaest: 2.
Bonauentura in his time ^ime professes, that he never saw the writings of any
one, that was of that opinion nor never could meet with any one that so
thought. Who was the first that ^roached this opinion and published it in
writing unto the world, it is hard to ^inde.

Besides all Romish religion stands of contradictory assertions, as that the
Pope may err, and that he cannot err, that he may depose Princes, and that he
may not, that one body may be in many ^laces, and that it cannot be in many
^laces, the one sort of them denying, that the other affirms: yet is not
(...) first author of any of th^se contradictory opinions known. Thus we see
how weakly the Romanistes prove the antiquity of their faith and religion,
whereof they so insolently glory and boast. But le^ us leave them and return
to the words of the Apostle.

The second circumstance, whereby the doctrine of faith, for which we must
contend is noted and described, unto us least we should mistake it, is that as
it was once delivered, so it was delivered to the Saints. So that if we desire
to find the undoubted truth of Heavenly doctrine we must seek it, non in
confusione paganorum, non in purgamentis haereticorum, non in languore
schismaticorum, non in coecitate Iud^orum, not in the confusions of pagan
Infidels, not among out cast and forsaken Heretics, not in the con^enticles
of Schismatiques, not among the blind and hard hearted Jews, but amongst those
Disciples of Christ Jesus, which cannot be justly challenged either for
innovation, or division. According to that in the Canticles, where Christ is
inquired after. Show thou me O thou whom my soul loves, where thou ^eedest,
and where thou lie a^ noone. For why should I be, as she that turns aside
to the flocks of thy companions? and immediately he shows how he may be
found. If thou know not O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by
the steps of the flocks, and feed thy kids by the tents of the shepherdes. In
which words we are directed to seek our Savior Christ in the troops, and
companions of Christian people and pastors, which are named Saints in this
place by the Apostle, because they are called to sanctification, and have the
happy means of it. In these companies we shall be sure to find our Savior
Christ and the doctrine of faith ^e left unto us, if we have an eye to them,
upon whom no note of innovation or ^iuision may justly be fastened. So that ^f
those societies in which we live have ^orrupted their ways, and left their
first ^uritie, we must (as Vincentius L^rine^sis ^irecteth us) look to other
Churches, and ^^st our eyes up higher, to the times that ^ere before us. For
example, in the days of our Fathers, they had private Ma^^ half communions,
and sundry others abuses, the most of the guides of God people taught men to
put trust in papal indulgences, and such like lying vanities. Who soever
doubted and made question of any of these things, if they did but cast their
eyes upon the Eastern^ Churches that then presently were, or the Churches in
former times, they might easily find, that in them there was no such thing.

Thus then in the Church we have certain direction to find out the truth,
neither are any other to hope to find it, but such as reverence her judgment,
and se^^ it in her communion. Whereupon Ter^ullian pronounces, that none but
such as are so affected, are to be admitted ^^ any question or dispute of the
Scriptures, and matters of faith: and brings in the Church speaking unto
her^^ tickes, and praescribing against them i^ this sort: quid agitis in meo,
non mei? what do you meddling with my things, you that are none of mine? By what
right do^ thou Marcion cut down my wood ^ho gave thee leave Valentinus, to
turn ^he course of my Fou^taines? By what ^uthoritie do thou Apelles
remove ^^y ancient bounds? It is my possession, that do you here the rest of
you, sowing and feeding at your own pleasures? It is ^^y possession, I
possessed it of old, I ^ossessed it before you, I have the cer^ine original of
it from them, whose the thing was, I am the heir of the Apostles, as they
disposed by their last will and testament, as they committed it unto my ^^ust,
as they adjured me, so I keep it; ^ou they know not, you they disclaimed and
rejected, as strangers, as enemies.

This true and Orthodoxe church, which is the only mistress of Heavenly
truth, makes use of them, that err, to her own good, and their bettering and
correction, if they refuse not her instruc^ions. Vtitur Gentibus ad materiam
ope^ationis suae, haereticis ad probationem doc^^inae suae, schismaticis ad
documentum sta^^ilitatis suae, I^daeis ad comparationem pul^hritudimis suae;
altos inuitat, alios exclu^it, alios relinquit, alios antecedit: omnibus
^ratiae dei participandae dat potestate^, sieve ^lli informandi, sieve
reformandi, sieve reco^^^^ di, sieve admittendi sunt. Infidels are the matter of
her divine work of con^e^^ion. Heretics serve for the trial, proving, and
approving of her doctrine, Scismatiques to show her constancy, the Jews
imperfection to show her perfection and beauty; some she inuiteth, some she
excludes, some she forsakes, and some she goes before in diui^^ perfections;
to all she offers the participation of divine grace, whether they be to be
informed, or reformed or r^conciled, or to be admitted to a hig^^ degree of
knowledge, and a more perfect estate. Thus have we heard the exhortation of the
Apostle, moving us to con^end earnestly for the maintenance of the faith, and
describing it to us, by the Antiquity of it, and that company of me^ amongst
whom it is to be sought: Let u^ beseech almighty God to enlighten or
understandings, that we may know it, (...) frame our hearts to the love of it,
and (...) make us ever constant in the defense o^ it. Amen.


