Hereafter follows a morning remembrance had at the month mind of the
noble princes Margarete countess of Rychemonde and Darbye mother unto king
Henry the.vii. and grandame to our sovereign lord that now is upon whose
soul almighty god have mercy.

Dixit Martha ad Ihesum.
THis holy gospel late red / conteyneth in it a dyalogue that is to say a
comynycacyon betwyxt the woman of blessed memory called Martha and our savior
Ihesu / which dyalogue I would apply unto this noble pry^ces late deceased /
in whose remembrance this office and obseruau^ces be done at this time. And
three things by ye leave of god I will entende First to show wherein this noble
princes may well be lykened and compared unto ye blessed woman Martha. Second
how she may complain unto our savior Ihesu for ye paynfull death of her body
/ like as Martha did for ye death of her brother Lazarus. Third ye confortable
answer of our savior Ihesu unto her again. In the first shall stand her
praise and co^mendacyon. In ye second our morning for ye loss of her. In
the.iij. our confort again. First I say yt the comparyson of them two may be
made in.iiij. things. In noblenes of person / in dyscyplyne of their bodies /
in or deryng of their souls to god / in hospytalites kepy^ge and charitable
dealing to their neybours. In which.iiii the noble woman Martha (as say ye
doctors entreatynge this gospel / and her life) was syngulerly to be
commended and praised / wherefore let us consider like wise whether in this
noble countess may any thing like be found. First ye blessed Martha was a
woman of noble blood to whom by enheritau^ce belonged ye castle of bethany /
and this noblenes of blood they have which descended of noble lygnage. Beside
this there is a noblenes of manners / withouten which the noblenes of blood is
much defaced / for as Boecius says. If ought be good in the noblenes of
blood it is for that thereby the noble men and women should be ashamed to go
out of kind from the virtuous manners of their auncetrye before. Yet also there
is another noblenes / which aryseth in every person by the goodness of nature
/ whereby full often such as come of right pore and vunoble fader and mother /
have great abletees of nature / to noble deeds. Above all these same there is a
four manner of noblenes / which may be called an increased noblenes / as by
marriage and affynyte of more noble persons such as were of less condycyon
may increase in hyer degree of noblenes. In every of these I suppose this
coutesse was noble. First she came of noble blood lyneally descendynge of king
Edward the.iij. with in the.iiij. degree of the same. Her fader was Johan duke of
Somerset her mother was called Margarete right noble as well in maneres as in
blood. To whom she was a very daughter in all noble manners / for she was
bounteous and lyberall to every person of her knowledge or aquayntaunce.
Auaryce and couetyse she most hated. And sorowed it full much in all persons
But specially in any yt belonged unto her. She was also of synguler casynes to
be spoken unto / and full curtayse answer she would make to all yt came unto
her / Of meruayllous gentylnesse she was unto all folks / but specially unto
her own / whom she trusted and loved right tenderly. Unkynde she would not be
unto no creature / ne forgetefull of any kyndnes or service done to her before
/ which is no little part of very noblenes. She was not vengeable / ne cruel
/ but ready anon to forgete and to forgive injuries done unto her at ye leest
desire or mocyon made unto her for ye same. Merciful also and pyteous she was
unto such as was greuyd and wrongfully troubled And to them yt were in poverty
or sekenes or any other myserye. To god and to the church full obedyent and
tractable searching his honor and pleasure full besyly. A warenes of herself
she had always to eschew every thing yt might dyshonest any noble woman / or
dystayne her honor in any condycyon. Tryfelous things yt were little to be
regarded she would let pass by / but the other yt were of weight and
substance wherein she might prouffyte she would not let for any pain or
labor to take upon hand. These and many other such noble condycyons left
unto her by her auncetres she kept and increased them with a great dylygens.
The third noblenes also she wanted not which I said was ye noblenes of Nature
/ she had in manner all yt was praysable in a woman either in soul or in body.
First she was of singular wisdom far passing ye common rate of women she
was good in remembrance and of holdyng memory A ready wit she had also to
conceive all things. Albeit they were right derke / right studyous she was in
books which she had in great nombre both in English and in Frensshe / and
for her exercise and for ye prouffyte of other she did translate diverse matters
of devotion out of Frensshe in to English. Full often she complained yt in her
youth she had not given her to ye understanding of latin wherein she had a
little perceiving specially of ye rubrysshe of ye ordynall for ye saying of
her service which she did well understand. Here unto in favor / in words /
in gesture / in every demeanor of herself so great noblenes did appear / yt
what she spoke or did it meruayllously became her. The.iiii. noblenes which
we named a noblenes gotten or increased she had also. For albeit she of her
lynage were right noble / yet nevertheless by marriage / and adioynyng of other
blood it took some encreasement For in her tender aege she being endued with so
great towardnes of nature / and lyklyhode of enherytau^ce many sued to have had
her to marriage. The duke of suth folk which tha^ was a man of great
experye^ce most dylygently procured to have had her for his sone and heir. Of
ye contrary part king Henry ye.vi. did make means for Edmonde his brother
then therle of Rychemo^de. She which as then was not fully.ix. years old /
doutfull in her mind what she were best to do asked counsayll of an old
gentylwoman whom she much loved and trusted / which did advise her to
commend herself to saint Nycholas ye patron and helper of al true maidens /
and to beseech him to put in her my^de what she were best to do. This cou^sayl
she followed and made her prayer so full often / but specially yt night when she
should ye morrow after make answer of her mind determynatly. A meruaylous
thing yt same night as I have herd her tell many a time / as she lay in
prayer calling upon saint Nicholas / whether slepynge or wakyng she could not
assure / but about.iiii of ye clock in yt morny^ge one appeared unto her
arrayed like a bishop / and naming unto her Edmonde had take hy^ unto her
husband. And so by this mean she did enclyne her mind unto Edmonde ye
kings brother and earl of Rychemonde. By whom she was made mother of ye king yt
deed is / whose soul god perdon / and grandame to our sovereign lord king
Henry ye.viii. which now by ye grace of god governs ye realm. So what by
lygnage what by affinite she had.xxx. kings and queen's within ye.iiii. degree
of marriage unto her. Beside earls / markyses / dukes / and princes. And thus
much we have spoken of her noblenes.

Second ye blessed Martha is praised in chastysynge her body by christian
dyscyplyne / as in abstynence / fasting / sharp clothes werynge / chastity with
other. Which thing albeit necessary to every christian person willing to be
saved / yet it is much more to be praised in the nobles / having this worldy
lyberte As it was in this noble princes late deceased whom my purpose is not
vaynly to extol or to magnyfye above her merytes / but to ye edefyenge of other
by thexa^ple of her. I would reherce somewhat of her demeany^g in this behalue /
her sobre temperau^ce in metes and drynkes was known to al them yt were
conuersau^t with her wherein she lay in as great wait of herself as any person
might / kepinge always her strayte mesure / and offendyng as little as any
creature might. Eschewy^ge bankettes / reresoupers / ioncryes betwyxe meals.
As for fasting for aege and feebleness albeit she were not bound yet tho days
yt by ye church were appointed she kept them diligently and sereously / and in
especyall ye holy lent through out yt she restrained her appetyte till one mele
and till one fysshe on ye day / beside her other peculer fastes of devotion / as
saint Anthony / mary Maudeleyn saint Katheryn with other. And through out al ye
year ye friday and saturday she full truly observed. As to hard clothes
wering she had her shertes and gyrdyls of here / which wha^ she was in health
eueri weke she failed not certain days to wear sometime yt one / sometime yt
other / yt full often her skin as I herd her say was perced therewith. As for
chastyte though she always continued not in her vyrgynte yet in her husbands
days long time before that he deyede she opteyned of him license and promised
to live chaste / in the hands of the reverend fader my lord of London /
which promise she renewed after her husbands death in to my hands again /
whereby it may appear ye dyscyplyne of her body.

THyrdly ye blessed Martha is commended in ordering of her soul to god / by
often knelynges / by sorrowful wepynges / and by contynual prayers and
medytacyons wherein this noble princes somewhat took her part. First in prayer
every day at her vprysynge which comynly was not long after.v. of ye clock
she began certain deuocyons / and so after them with one of her gentylwomen ye
matynes of our lady / which kept her to then she came in to her closet /
where then with her chapelayne she said also matyns of ye day. And after yt
daily herd.iiij. or.v. masses upon her knees / so contynuynge in her prayers
and deuocions unto ye hour of dinner / which of ye etynge day was.x. of ye
clock / and upon ye fasting day.xj. After dinner full truly she would go her
stacyons to three aulters daily. Daily her dyryges and co^mendacyons she would
say. And her euensonges before souper both of ye day and of our lady /
beside many other prayers and psalters of Dauyd through out ye year. And at
night before she went to bed she faylled not to resort unto her chapel /
and there a large quart of an hour to occupye her in deuocyo^s. No meruayl
though all this long time her knely^ge was to her paynfull / and so paynfull
that many times it caused in her back pain and disease. And yet nevertheless
daily when she was in health she faylled not to say the crown of our lady
which after the manner of Rome conteyneth.lx. and three aues / and at every aue
to make a knelynge. As for medytacyon she had diverse books in Frensshe wherewith
she would occupy herself when she was weary of prayer. Wherefore diverse she did
translate out of Frensshe in to English. Her meruayllous weeping they can
bear wytnes of which here before have herd her confession which be diverse
and many / and at many seasons in ye year lightly every third day / can also
record the same tho ye were present at any time / wha^ she was housylde which
was full nigh a dosen times every year: what flodes of teeres there issued forth
of her eyes / she might well say. Exitus aquarum deduxeru^t oculi mei. And more
over to thentente all her works might be more acceptable and of gretter merit
in the sight of god such godly things she would take by obedyence which
obedyence she promised to the fore named fader my lord of London for the time
of his being with her. And afterward in like wise unto me whereby it if may
appear the dylygent order of her soul to god.

Fourth the holy Martha is magnyfyed for her godly hospytalyte and charytable
dealing to her neighbors. Much besynes there is in keeping hospytalyte. And
therefore our lord said unto her. Martha martha solicita es and tbares erga
plri. The household servants must be put in some good order. The strangers
of honest which of their curtesy resorteth for to vysyte the sovereign must
be considered. And the suitors / also which comes compelled by necessyte to
seche help and socoure in their cause must be herd. And the poor and nedy /
specially would be releued and conforted. First her own household with
meruayllous dylygence and wisdom this noble princes ordered prouydynge
reasonable statutes and ordynau^ces for them / which by her officers she
commanded to be read.iiij. times a year. And oftentimes by herself she would
so louyngly courage every of them to do well. And sometime by other mean
persons. If any faccyons or bendes were made secretly amongst her head
officers / she with great polycye did boulte it out and like wise if any strife
or contreuersy / she would with great dyscrecyon study the reformacyon thereof.

For the strangers / o meruayllous god what pain what labor she of her very
gentylnes would take with them to bear them manner and company / and intrete every
person. And entertean them according to their degree and hauour / and provide
by her own commandment that nothing should lack yt might be conuenyent for
them / wherein she had a wonderful ready remembrance and perfyte knowledge.

For the suitors / it is not unknown how studyously she procured Justyce to be
admynystred by a long season so long as she was suffered. And of her own
charges provided men learned for the same purpose euenly and indyfferently to
here all causes / and admynystre right and Justyce to every party / which were
in no small nombre. And yet mete and drink was denied to none of them.

For the poor creatures / albeit she did not receive in to her house our
savior in his own person as ye blessed Martha did / she nevertheless
received them that does represent his person. Of whom he says himself
Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis michi fecistis. Poor folks to ye nombre
of.xij. she daily and nyghtly kept in her house / gyuynge them lodgyng / mete
and drink and clothing / vysytyng them as often as she conuenyently might.
And in their sykenes vysytynge them and confortynge them / and mynystrynge unto
them with her own hands. And when it pleased god to call any of them out of
this wretched world she would be present to se them depart and to learn to
deye. And like wise bring them unto the earth / which as Bonaue^ture
affermeth is of gretter merit than if she had done all this to the self
person of our savior Ihesu. And ye other servants and mynystres of our
lord. Whom she herd were of any devotion and virtue full glad she was at al
times when she might get them to whom she would like wise show the comfort
yt she could. Suppose not ye that if she might have gotten our sauyoure Ihesu
in his own person / but she would as desyrously and as fervently have
mynystred unto him as ever did Martha / when thus much she did until his
servants for his sake.

Thus it may appear some comparison of ye blessid Martha and of this noble
princes which was the first promised.

FOr the second that is to say for the complaining and lamentacyon yt the
soul of this noble princes might make for the death of her only body. It is
to be considered that oftentimes in scripture ye virtuous and holy faders
makes lamentable exclamacyons against almighty god / for that he seems to be
more indulgent and favorable unto ye wicked person then unto the good liver.
The prophet Dauyd says in this manner. zelaui super iniquos: pa cem pcto^rum
videns. Quia non est respectus morti eorum nec firmamentu^ i^ plaga eoru^. That
is to say it perceth my stomach to se the rest and case that sinners often
have It is not looked for ye death of them / nor none abiding stroke or
punysshemente falls upon them. The prophet Iheremy says also complaining
upon god. Quare via impiorum prosperatur been est oi^bus qui preuarica^tur et
inique agunt. Why does the wicked persons prospere in their way. well it is
with all them that break the laws / and do wyckedly. The prophet Abacuc says
like wise cryenge upon god. Quare respitis contemptores et taces conculante
nupio iustiorem se. why lokest thou favorably upon them yt despise the. And
suffrest a sinner to bear down him that is more ryghtwyse than he is. And the
holy-man Job. Quare ergo i^pii viuu^t subleuati su^t confortati qm diuitiis.
why then be the wicked persons suffered for to live. They be set alofte / and
they be comforted with richesse.

The reason that moves them thus to murmr and complain may be this. There
is in almighty god.ij. virtues specially commended and magnyfyed through out al
scripture. That is to say mercy and ryghtwysnes And both these should move him
rather to be favorable unto the good than unto ye badde. First his mercy
should move him thereto have pity and compassyon where is the gretter cause of
pity but the greuaunce trouble and vexacyon of the good person has gretter
cause of pity and is much more pyteous than of the evil person. wherefore it
may be thought that almighty god which of his own proprety is mercyful and
ready to give mercy. Deus cui proprium est misereri. He should rather show his
mercy upon ye good than upon the badde. And here unto his ryghtwysnes also
should enclyne him / for of his ryghtwysnes he should give unto every person
according to his deserte. But the good deserves rather by their goodness to
have favor showed unto them then the badde. Wherefore the holy faders seeing
in this world the wicked in prosperyte And the good in trouble and aduersite
make these complayntes and exclamacions above rehearsed against almighty god and
some cry upon him as though he were a sleep. Exurge qua re obdormis domine.
Some other threpe yt he has forgoten them. Quare obliuisseris in opie nostre
/ and tribulationis nostre. Some thy^ke there is no god at all. Dixit
incipiens in cord suo non est deus. Some weneth at ye leest he is absente and
asks where he is. Ubi est deustuus. In this condycion was ye blessed woman
Martha. She knew that our savior Ihesu was so good and merciful / And showed
his goodness generally to al persons / she byleued faithfully that if he had be
present at ye death of Lazarus her brother whom for his goodness he loved so
much he would not have suffered him to deye. And therefore she said unto hy^.
Domine si fuisses hic frater meus no^ fuisset mortuus. That is to say Sir if
thou had been present my brother had not ben deed. And in like manner ye soul
of this noble pry^ces which had ye body adjoined unto it in favor and love as
sister and brother it might complain for the death of ye body / sith every
part of yt same body had been so occupied in the service of god before. Her
eyes in wepynges and tears sometime of devotion sometime of repentance /
hereares herynge the word of god and the dyuyne service which daily was kept
in her chapel with great nombre of priests / clerks and children to her great
charge and cost / her tongue occupied in prayer much part of the day / her
legs and fete in vysytynge the aulters and other holy places going her
stacyons customably when she were not let / her hands in gyuynge alms unto
the poor and nedye / and dressynge them also when they were syke and
mynystrynge unto them mete and drink. These merciful and lyberall hands to
endure the most paynful cra^pes so grievously vexynge her and compellynge her
to cry. O blessed Ihesu help me. O blessed lady socoure me. It was a matter of
great pity / like a spear it perced ye hertes of all her true servants yt was
about her and made them cry also of Ihesu for help and socoure with great
haboundau^ce of tears. But specially when they saw ye death so have upon her
and that she must needs depart from them / and they should forgo so gentle a
maystrts / so tender a lady then wept they meruayllously / wept her ladies and
kynnes women to whom she was full kind / wept her poor gentylwomen whom she
had loved so tenderly before / wept her chamberers to whom she was full dear
/ wept her chapelaynes and priests / wept her other true and faithful
servants. And who would not have wept that there had been present. All
England for her death had cause of weeping. The poor creatures yt were wont
to receive her alms / to whom she was always pyteous and merciful. The
studyentes of both the vnyuersytees to whom she was as a mother. All the
learned men of England to whom she was a very patroness. All the virtuous
and devout persons to who^ she was as a louy^ge sister / all ye good
relygyous men and women whom she so often was wont to vysyte and comfort. All
good priests and clerks to whom she was a true defenderesse. All the noble
men and women to whom she was a myrroure and exampler of honor. All ye common
people of this realm for whom she was in their causes a common mediatryce / and
took right great dyspleasure for them / and generally the hole realm has
cause to complain and to morn her death. And all we considering her gracyous
and charytable mind. So universally and considering the redynes of mercy and
pity in our savior Ihesu may say by lamentable complaynt of our vnwysdome
unto him. Ah domine si fuisses hic Ah my lord if thou had been present and
had herd this sorrowful cries of her thy servant with the other lamentable
morny^ges of her friends and servants thou for thy goodness would not have
suffered her to dye But thou would have take pity and compassyon upon her. It
follows in the gospel by the mouth of Martha. Sed et nunc scio quia
quecu^que poposceris a deo dabit tibi deus. That is to say what so ever thou
wylt ask of god thy fader I know well he will grant it unto the. who may
doubt but ye sone of god of whom saint Poule says. In diebus carnis sue
preces et supplicationes / offerens exauditus est pro sua reuere^tia. That is
to say in the days of his mortalite when he was mortal here in earth yet
nevertheless he was herd of almyghtye god in his prayer and asking / his fader
for his reuerente behauoure. Who may doubt but much rather now he shall be
herd when he is in so glorious manner above in heaven. And there present
before the face of his fader for our cause as says saint Paul. In troiuit
ipse celum vt appareat vultui dei pro nobis. He has entered the heaven to
appear before ye vysage of his fader for us / to show the wounds which he
did suffer for the delyueraunce of us from syn If in his mortal body he
prayed and asked forgyuenes for his enmyes that crucefyed him and cruelly put
hy^ unto the death. And yet nevertheless he opteyned his petycyon for them.
Much rather it is to suppose that he shall opteyne his asking her that had so
often compassyon of his blessed passion / and did bear it so often in her
remembrance as did this noble princes. Tha^ for his mortal enmyes which were
many and but vylaynes / he prayed vndesyred of only / he let not so to do by ye
grievous pains of death which he there suffered Now therefore he being in so
great glory above and at all lyberte. If all we call and cry upon him prayer
for this one soul of this most noble princes which was his faithful and
true servant. Who may think but yt he for his infynyte goodness will have
mercy there upon. We will not crave upon him yt he shall restore the body
again to life / as he did the body of lazarus / we must be content with the
death of it / and learn thereby to prepayre our own bodies to ye same point
within short time. But we shall with most entyer minds beseech him to accept
yt sweet soul to his great mercy to be parteyner of yt everlasting life with
him and with his blessed saints above in heaven / which I pray you al now
affectually to pray / and for her now at this time most devoutly to say one
Pater noster.

First ye have herd ye goodly condicyons of this noble princes whom we did
resemble unto the blessed woman Martha. Ye have herd also in the ij. place a
pyteous complaynt of the part of her soul for the death of her body made unto
our savior Ihu^ Now will I rememembre ye comfortable answer of our merciful
sauyoure again unto her whereof we all may be gretely comforted and take cause
and matere of great reioysynge. It follows in the gospel. Dixit ei jesus
resurget frater tuus. That is to say in English. Ihesu said unto her / thy
brother shall rise again. I said before that considering the love and amyte
that is betwyxe the soul and the body they may be thought to be as brother and
sister. A truth it is the souls that be hens departed out of their bodies /
have nevertheless a natural desire and appetyte to be knytte and joined with them
again / which thing not only the theologyens witness / but ye philosophers
also. A great comfort then it is unto the soul yt has so longing desire
unto the body to here yt the body shall rise again. And specially in yt manner
and form of rysynge / whereof saint Poule speaks in this wise. Se minat in
corruptione: surget in incorruptione. Sei^atur in ignobilitate: surget in
gloria. Sei^atur i^ infirmitate: surget in vtute. Sei^a tur corpus ai^ale
surget corpus spu^ale. Four condycyons ye body has when it dies and is put
in to the ground. First it anon begins to putrefye and resolve in to foul
corrupcyon. The air does alter it: the ground does moist it / the worms
does bread of it and feed also. Second it is vile and lothely to behold and
right ungoodly to ye sight. Third it is unwieldy / and not of power to styre
itself or to be conuayed from place to place. Fourth it is so gross yt it
occupyeth a row me and keeps a place and lets other bodies to be present in
ye same place. Against these four ye bodies of them yt shall be saved shall
take at their rysynge again.iiij other excellent gifts. Against ye first it
shall be in yt condition yt neither ye air / ne ye water / ne fire / ne knife
/ nor wepen nor stroke / nor sekenes shall anoye it.

Against ye.ij. it shall rise bright and glorious and in ye most goodly and
beauteous manner. Against ye third it shall be more nymble and more ready to be
conuayed to any place where ye soul would have it then is any swalowe. Against
the.iiij. it shall be subtyle yt it shall perce through the stone walls
without any anoyau^ce of them. This shall be a far dyfference and a great
dyuersyte of her body as she had it before / and as she shall in conclusyon
receive it again. But yet me think I se what the soul of this noble
pryncesse may answer again somewhat to less and to mynysshe this dysconfort
after the same manner that Martha did answer unto our savior Ihesu. Scio quod
resurget in resurrectione in nouissimo die. That is to say I know well yt it
shall rise again in the last day of ye general resurreccyon / but yt is
far hens / that is long to come. Et spes que diffentur affligit animam. And
the hope of a thing delayed tormenteth ye soul in the mean time. Therefore
our savior more comfortable answers to her again and says in this manner.
Ego sum resurrectio and vita. That is. I am says he the very cause of
raysynge of the body. And I am also the veraye cause of life unto the soul. As
who say tho the rysynge of the body be delayed for a season / the soul
nevertheless shall for the mean time have a pleasant and a sweet life. A life
full of comfort a life full of joy and pleasure / a life void of all sorrow
and encombrau^ce / a life not like unto ye life of this wretched world which is
always entermelled with much bitterness / either with sorrows / either with dredes
or else with perils. In hoc mundo non dolere no^ timere non periclitari
impossible est. Says saint Austyn. It is impossyble to live in this world
and not to sorrow / not to dread / not to be in peril. This same noble princes
if she had continued in this world she should daily have herd and seen matter
and cause of sorrow as well in herself as in her friends parauenture. Her body
daily should have waxen more unweldy / her sight should have be derked / and
her herynge should have dulled more and more / her legs should have faylled
her by and by. And all the other parties of her body wax more crased every
day / which things should have been matter to her of great dyscomforte And
albeit these things had not fallen unto her forth with / yet she should have
lived always in a dread and a fere of them. Dare I say of her she never yet was
in that prosperyte but the gretter it was ye more always she dredde the
aduersyte. For when the king her sone was crowned in all yt great tryumphe and
glory / she wept meruayllously. And like wise at the great tryumphe of the
marriage of prince Arthur. And at the last coronacyon wherein she had full great
Joye / she let not to say yt some aduersyte would follow / so that either she
was in sorrow by reason of the present aduersytes / or else when she was in
prosperity she was in dread of ye aduersyte for to come. I pass over ye
perils and dangers innumerable which daily and hourly might have happed
unto her whereof this life is full And therefore saint Gregory says. Uita hec
terrena eterne vite comparata mors est potius di cenda quam vita. And for that
cause who yt ones has tasted the pleasures of yt life / this is unto them a
very death for ever after. Example of Lazarus which after yt he was restored
to ye myseryes of this life again / he never lough but was in contynuall
heaviness and pensyfnesse. Now therefore would I ask you this one questyon. Were
it not suppose ye all this considerd a meetly thy^g for us to desire to have
this noble princes here amongst us again to forgo ye joyous life above to
want ye presence of ye glorious trynyte who^ she so long has sought and
honored to leave yt most noble kingdom to be absent from the most blessed
company of saints and sayntesses and hither to come again to be wrapped and
endau^gered with ye mysteres of this wretched world / with the paynfull dyseases
of her aege / with the other encomberaunces yt daily happethe in this miserable
life. Were this a reasonable request of our party / were this a kind desire
/ were this a gentyl wysshel yt where she has been so kind and louy^g a
maystresse unto us / all we should more regard our own prouffytes then her
more synguler well and comfort. The mother yt has so great affection unto her
sone yt she will not suffer him to depart from her to his promocyon and
furtherau^ce but always keep him at home / more regarding her own pleasure
than his well / were not she an unkind and vngentyl mother / yes verayly / let
us therefore thy^ke our most loving maystres is gone hens for her promocyon /
for her great furtheraunce / for her most well and prouffyte. And herin
comfort us / herin rejoice ourselfe and thank almighty god which of his
infynyte mercy so gracyously has dysposed for her. But ye will say unto me.
Sir if if We were sure of this we would not be sorry / but be right hertly glad
and joyous therefore As for suerte very suerte can not be had but only by ye
reuelacyon of god almighty. Nevertheless as far as by scripture / this thing
can be assured in the end of this gospel folowingly iz made by our savior a
strong argument almost demo^stratyue of this same thing / ye argument is
this. Every person yt puts their full trust in christ Ihu^ Albeit they be
deed in their bodies yet shall they nevertheless have life in their souls / and
that life yt never shall have end. But this noble princes she put her full
trust in christ* Ihesu verayly byleuynge that he was the sone of god and came
in to this world for ye redempcyon of sinners / wherefore it must necessaryly
follow yt albeit her body be deed her soul is in yt joyous life yt never shall
cease. The first part of this argument follows in ye gospel. Qui credit in
me etiam simortuus fuerit viuet. That is to say who yt fully trusts in christ
Ihu^ / albeit they be deed in their bodies / they nevertheless shall live in
their souls. But yet we want a little I said more than this. I saw yt life
shall never have end / and for this also it follows. Et oe^s qui viuit and
credit i^ me no^ moriet ineternu^. That is to say every person yt has this
life and this full trust in Ihesu shall never dye. So here appears well yt
first part of our argument. For ye.ij. part now yt this noble princes had full
faith in Ihesu christ it may appear if any will demand this questyon of her
yt our savior demanded of Martha / he said to her / Credis hoc. Byleuist you
this? what is yt / that this ge^tylwoman would not believe / she yt ordained.ij.
contynual reders in both ye vnyuersytes to teache ye holy dyuynyte of Ihesu /
she yt ordained prechers perpetual to publysshe yt doctrine and faith of
christ Ihesu / she yt builded a college royal to ye honor of ye name of crist
Ihesu / and left till her executours another tobe builded to mayntayn his
faith and doctrine. Beside all this founded in ye monastery of westmynster where
her body lies three prestes to pray for her perpetually. She whom I have many
times herd say yt if ye christian princes would have warred upon the enmyes of
his faith she would be glad yet to go follow ye host and help to wasshe their
clothes for ye love of Ihu^ / she yt openly did witness this same thing at
ye hour of her death / which saying diverse here present can record how
hertly she answered when ye holy sacrament contayny^ge ye blessid Ihu^ in it
was holden before her / and ye questyon made until her whether she byleued yt
there was verayly ye sone of god yt suffered his blessed passyo^ for her and for
all mankind upon ye cross. Many here can bear record how with all her heart
and soul she raised her body to make answer there unto / and confessed
assuredly yt in yt sacrament was contained christ Ihesu ye sone of god yt dyed
for wretched sy^ners upon ye cross in whom holly she put her trust and
confydence / these same words almoost yt Martha confessed in the end of this
gospel. Ego credidi quia tu es christus filius dei qui i^ mu^du^ venisti. That
is to say I have byleued yt thou art christ ye sone of gad which came in to
this world. And so sone after yt she was aneled she departed and yielded up her
spyryte in to ye hands of our lord / who may not now take euydent lyklyhode
and conjecture upon this yt the soul of this noble woman which so studyously
in her life was occupied in good works / and with a fast faith of christ / and
the sacraments of his church was defended in yt hour of departing out from
ye body was borne up in to ye country above with ye blessed au^gelles deputed and
ordained to yt holy mystery. For if ye herty prayer of many persons If her
own contynuall prayer in her life time. if ye sacraments of ye church orderly
taken. if indulgences and pardons granted by diverse popes / if true
repentance and teeres / if faith and devotion in criste Ihesu / if charity to
her neighbors / if pity upon ye poor / if forgyuenes of injuries / or if good
works be auaylable / as doubtless they be / great lyklyhode and almoost
certain conjecture we may take by them / and all these yt so it is in deed.
Therefore put we aside all weeping and teeres / and be not sad ne heavy as men
withouten hope / but rather be we glad and joyous / and each of us herin
con^ort other. Always praysynge and magnyfyenge the name of our lord / to
whom be laud and honor endlesly Amen.

Thus ends this lamentable morning. Enprynted at London in Fleet street at
the sign of the son by Wynkyn de Word.

W^C



wynkyn.de. word.


