A TREATISE OF PRAYER, AND OF THE FRVITS AND MANNER OF PRAYER.

By the most Reverend Father in God JOHN FISHER Bishop of Rochestre, Priest and
most eminent Cardinal of the most holy Catholic Church, of the title of S.
Vitalis.

Translated into English by R. A. B.

Printed at Paris by Will: Baudry

M.DC.XXXX.

bookplate Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO THE VERY HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY THE LADY ELIZABETH HERBERT, Wife to
the honorable Sin Percy Herbert, of Powis Castle in Montgomerie shire.
MADAME,
The noble favors I have received from your Ladishipp have not only made me
studious to preserve a grateful mind in my self, But also encouraged me to
undertake these small pains in your Ladyshipps behalf. I know good MADAME,
that by your daily exercise in prayer, you have atteined to a great perfection
in that art: Yet with all, I know your Ladishipps humility to be such, as you
will not scorn nor disdeigne to better your knowledge from the instructions of
the most able, and most pious understanding of the age in which he lived.
MADAME, I present here unto your Ladyshipp a Treatise of the most Reverend
Father John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Priest and most eminent Cardinal of
the holy Roman Catholic Church; as you see, MADAME, sufficiently recommended
hy those titles he deservedly obtained, correspondent to the virtues of his
most holy and blessed life. My care has only been to render him faythfullie
and for your Ladishipps benefitt, as the gravitie of the argument requires, not
giving him any other orname^t the that of truth, which I supposie makes it more
agreeable to your Ladyshipps virtues, and with all I desire, it may be accepted
from him, who glories in nothing more then the title of being

MADAME, Your Ladyshipps most humble servant and beadsman. R. A. B.

APPROBATIO.
NOs Frater Clemens Raynerus Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti
Benedicti, Presbyter and Monachus eiusdemque Congregationis Praeses Generalis:
per praesentes facultatem concedimus typis mandandi deuotum Tractatum
Reuerendissimi in Christo Patris Iohannis Fisheri Episcopi Roffensis, and
Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalis Eminentissimi, de Oratione a Reuerendo Patre R. A.
eiusdemquc Ordinis and Congregationis nostrae in idioma Anglicum traductum. In
cuius rei sidem his subscripsimus, sigillumque nostrum apposuimus die sexto
Februarij, anno Domini 1640.

Fr. CL. RAYNERVS Praeses Generalis. Locus sigilli.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST PART.
HOw We may alwa^se (...). Chapt. I. page 1. The first reason why God is to be
prayed unto. Cha. II. p. 17. The second reason why God is to be prayed unto.
Cha. III. p. 27 The third reason why God is to be prayed unto. Cha. IV. p. 37.
The last reason why God is to be prayed unto. Cha. V. p. 44.
THE SECOND PART.
Of the three chief fruits of prayer. Chap. I. p. 53. Of the first fruit of
prayer, to wit of meritt. Cha. II. p. 58. Of the second fruit of prayer which
is to obteining of the thing we pray for. Chap. III. p. 63. Of the third fruit
of prayer which is spiritual sweetness. Chap. IV. p. 70.
THE TRIRD PART.
Of the manner of prayer. Chap. I. p. 85. Un to what thing we ought cheifely to
attend when we pray. Chap. II. p. 87. How long our prayer ought to be. Chap.
III. p. 201. Whether prayer of the heart only be more profitable then that
which is made both with heart and speech. Cha. IV. p. 217.
OF PREMEDITAtion, before Prayer.
When you intend to offer the Sacrifice of prayer, and praises, to almighty
God, and prepare you to prayer.

First, recall your Senses, and gather together your wit res, and with an
humble, attentive, and devout mind, lift up your heart to almighty God:
Reuerontly standing upright, with your hands joined before your breast, and
lifted up.

Pause then a little while, and advisedly confider with your self wherefore
you come, whereabout you go, and what business you now take in hand.

Also, before whom you are present, the petitions you will ask, and the
offering you mean to make.

Remember you are now, before a most mighty and divine Majesty; The Creator
and Redeemer of yourselfe, and all Mankind, whom infinite number of Angels,
and all the Celestial multitude do continually adore and worship, with fear and
trembling.

And your self, a most wretched and unworthy creature, frail, unstable,
falling from him: dull, and unapt to call upon him. And yet his mercy is so
much, and his goodness so great, that he is ever, ready to hear, and
graciously to grant, your lawful requests, and to receive you when you come
unto him: and also to forgive you all your offenses, when you are heartelie
sorry and ask mercy for them.

Likewise, he is one that has, and does most bountefully bestow upon you, all
things necessary for body and soul: and has and does defend and keep,
feed and nourish you, and all creatures.

Then think, that it is before this divine Presence, before the which you
presume to enter, and to present your self: to entreat, beseech, and require
mercy, and forgiveness of sins, for your self and all others: and to offer
the sacrifice of Praise, and Thanksgiving unto him.

Therefore with all humility and reverence prostrate your self at the feet
of his mercy: and endeavor with devotion, to accomplish that you come for. But
before you begin your prayers, that you may the rather offer them with cleanes
of heart, and give thanks to God, not only for his benefits, but chiefly for
his goodness in himself, make it fully known to your heart, as true, that it
is uncertain whether you shall live to the end of your Prayers or not:
Endeavor therefore that they may be such, as if it should so happen before you
had ended the, that so, through the mercy of God, they may be acceptable unto
him, for the full forgiveness of your offenses, and the receiving you into his
grace and favor.

And that you may the more perfectly begin, continue, and end, all your
prayers, and other good actions, in the Name, and to the honor, and glory of
GOD, the most holy and blessed Trinity: and have in mind his great goodness
toward you, and give thanks for them: and also that the Passion of our Lord,
may take the more effect, the benefit of it may be imparted, the fruit
thereof inioyed: and in all spiritual practices, remembered; You may, if it
please you, begin your Prayers, in manner as follows. Meekely falling on your
knees, your heart and joined hands being elevated to God.

A TREATISE OF PRAYER, AND OF THE FRVITS AND manner of praying.
THE FIRST PART.
Hw we may alwaise pray. CHAPT. I.
FOR as much as that which Christ our Savior affirms in the gospel of
Saint Luke to wit thac, We ought alwayse to pray, concerns all Christians,
who sees not how much it does avayle every Christian to apply himself most
diligently to prayer, and in no wise to neglect so necessary and profitable a
thing, for any vain and hurtful plesures? wherefore that we may feel the
more sweetness in prayer. First, it will be proffitable to have at hand some
motieues, by which as with certain spurrs (so often as we grow could) we may
stir up our selves to prayer.

Secondly, it will not meanly help us, if we consider the excellent fruits and
commodity that many have obtained by prayer, for by that mea^s also was hall
easily stir up our selves to that exercise. And lastly it will proffitt much
to know the manner which every one ought chelfely to observe in praying: seeing
that in every work the manner of doing being known, is of no small moment to
perfect the work it self that we go about.

Of these three things therefore in order we purpose by Gods assistance to
speak, Thres principal points ^andlied in this treatise.
to wit. of the necessity, of the fruits, and of the manner of praying. But
because the foresaid words of our Savior move some scruple in many, it will
not be amiss if we first declare in what manner they may be understood.

First assuredly it is most true, u. 18.
which Christ our Savior said we ought alwayse to pray. For there is no moment
of time in which prayer is not necessary for us. Neuerthe less God almighty
is not so severe an exactor, as to oblidge us to continual prayer of the lips,
which certainly no man ever did or could observe. But because there never
passes any moment of time wherein we do not exceedingly stand in need of
his divine assistance, Therefore our great necessity enforces us, by
continual prayer alwaise to implore his aid. For who Knows not (if he
diligently consider) that if God should Withdraw his helping hand from us, we
should instantly then return into dust and ashes? neither is there any man,
who of himself can continue the least moment of time, for as holy Job says,
In his hand is the soul of every living thing. Job A simslitude.
For so it is with every one of us, as if one should hang by a rope in a
coffine over a deepepitt, for he doubtless stands in great need of his help
who holds the rope in his hand and keeps the other from faling in to the
pit. For so soon as he withdra weth his hand from the rope, he that before
was held up, does instantly fall healdlo^g in to the pit. Neither would it be
otherwise with every one of us, if God should not incessantly sustain us With
his hand. He holds the cord in his hand, least we insta^tly be brought to
nothing, to omit many other eminent dangers, which every moment hang over our
heads. Who therefore is so gross and blind, as not to consider, that there is
no time, yea no moment of time, wherein it is not necessary for us, to call on
God, and to implore his gracious help, and assistance. And this is the meaning
of those words, that we ought alwayse to pray.

But because according to this sense there is no man that does fulfill this
saying of our Savior by actual prayer, as they call it, that is, who does
alwayse every moment pray, therefore an other sense is to be found. out.
Wherefore this saying of Christ may be understood an other way, to wit, that
which we shall now declare.

One of the ancient Monks being demanded in what manner he did satisfy that
saying of Christ, The first way how we may alvvayse pray The (...) Euthstis
in the (...) holy fathers alphabeto 26. part. 12 litera 4.
we ought alwayse to pray, answered forthwith That after he had ended his daily
prayers, the rest of the time, according to the ability of his body, he spent
in manual labors, by which means it came to pass that he daily gaigned
something, whereby he notonly sustained himself, but also in some sort other
poor people, and those he said did pray for him, so often as the care he was
bound to take of his body, would not permit him to do it himfelse, whose
opinion is agreeable to holy Scripture which Says, Eccl. 19.
Hide thy alms in the bosom of the poor, and it shall pray for thee Lo here
how the Scripture confirms that our alms pray for us. If therefore any one
shall diligently employ himfelse in the works of mercy, if he defend the
fatherless and orphans, if he comfort poor widows being destitute of all
consolation, if he protect from injuries those that are violently oppressed.
And lastly if he administer help to those are in want, so that in the mean
time he neglects not, the times of prayer instituted by the Church, he also
shall fulfill the said words of Christ, for he alwayse either prays himself,
or has his alms praying for him, which will supply what is wanting of his
own prayers (weought alwaise to pray.)

In this sense also may the aforesaid saying of Christ we ought alwayse to
pray, The se^ co^dvv^y how vvem^y a way (...)
be understood that is we ought alwaise to live well and dowell, which, we may
do, cue^when we sleep. For whenever we sleep or wake, when we walk, or
sit, when we eat or drink, when we are molested or conforted; lastly
whatsoever we do or suffer, if they be referred truly to the glory and
honor of God, doubtless they belong to a good and upright life. Otherwise
Saint Paul would not have commanded the Corinthians that whatsoever they did
theyshoud do it to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10.
saying, whether ye eat or drink or what else ye do, do it te the glory
of God. And truly if God be moved by our words, to be been fieiall unto us,
questionless he is much more moved thereto by our good works, seeing that
works do supply the place of words. And therefore the divine benignity is
moved with our works, which we do with a desire to please his divine
Majesty, seeing they do express the force of our prayers, yea, and much more
forcibly, then do the words themselves. Whosoever therefore does refer to
the glory of God all that he does and suffers; prays every moment and
alwayse satisfies the affore said saying of Christ. For he that alwayse
directs all his actions to the glory of God may be said not unworthily
alwayse to pray. But although these words, we ought alwayse to pray, may be
understood according to this sense, yett because Christ makes a difference
betwixt prayer and works, and makes alms, prayer, and fasting as distinct
things, therefore we will now set down the third way how this saying may be
understood.

Saint Paul therefore admonishes the Thessalonia^s that they should
incessantly pray. The third way how we may alvvayse pray 1. These sal. 2. To.
1.1. These sal. 1.
Pray ye (says he) without intermission. A^nd in some other places of his
epistles he affirms that he was mindful (of some) in his prayers without
intermission. Besides in the acts of the Apostles it is said that whilst S.
Peeter was kept in prison Prayer was made by the Church without intermission to
God for him. Act. 12
By which words it does clearly appear that a true Christian in every work,
even when he sleeps, does alwayse pray: which cannot betrue, unless by
prayer, we understand the continual desire of the mind, Prayer a continual
desire of the mind A similitude.
which is alwayse flourishing, and moving in the heart: For even as one in
prison bound with iron fetters of great weight moved with the irksomeness of
the miseries and affliction which he suffers, does vehemently desire and
seek his liberty; and, if he shall conceive any hope of his delivery he
incessantly wishes and desires to be freed from that imprisonment: So
doubtless every Christian who is not ignorant, how vehemently he is incited to
sin by the flesh, the world, and the devil, and how many, and various kinds
of troubles he suffers in this vale of miseries, and to how many and how great
perils and dangers of this life he is exposed, is daily forced and compelled
every moment to desire the aid and assistance of gods divine grace. Whereby he
may at length freed from these evils fly up to the most clear sight of God,
and to the fruition of aeternall happiness. And this desire is oftentimes in
holy writ understood to be as a certain cry in the ears of God, Our Lord,
Psalm. 9.
says the Prophet David, has heard the cry of the poor. For the desire of
those who are troubled and afflicted does quickly come to the presence of God,
and makes a great cry in his ears. And because in the hearts of the godly
this desire does never cease, but is incessantly moved, and stirred, and
alwayse seeks and imploreth the divine assistance, even whether they are then
a wake or sleep, or eat or drink or what else so ever they do, they are
rightly said alwayse to pray and without intermission. Which moves S. Augustine
to say, Epist. 112. c. 9. ad Drobam.
Pray ye without intermission, what other thing does it mean, then desire
without intermission aeternel life? let us desire this of our Lord, and we
alwayse pray. Thus S. Augustine: without this desire noe muttering of words
though never so prolix can open the ears of his divine Majesty. But this
desire of it self if it be fervent, although there be no noise at all of
words, does most easily penetrate, and without any delay obteines a present
hearing, as we shall declare more plainly hereafter.

Whosoever therefore shall understand this saying of Christ according to this
sense, shall in my opinion rightly understand it, neither can we other ise
easily conceive any man alwayse to pray to God, and to spend both night and
day without intermissio^ in prayer: But by this desire which in the heart of
holy men is never extinguished God is alwayse and incessantly prayed unto, and
by it we knoke perpetually at the gates of his divine mercy for the obtaining
of his grace and assistance. Therefore it is most true which Christ said, Lu.
18.
we ought alwayse to pray and not to give over But not so that any set prayer
formed by words must alwayse be uttered by us either by our mouth or mind, but
that no moment of time do pass us where in we do not desire the aid of his
grace and everlasting happiness. But because we are to speak somewhat more
hereafter of this mattere. Therefore we will now produce some reasons, which
if we shall diligently observe they will both encourage us to shalke of sloth
and with more diligence and and facility stir us up to pray.

The first reason why God is to be prayed unto. CHAP. II.
THis ought first of all to move us, A similitude.
that prayer is like to a certain golden rope or chain let down from
heaven, by which we cndeavour to draw God to us whereas in deed we are more
truly drawn by him. For so it is as if one standing in a higher place and would
draw another from below he lets down some cord or line unto him, on which
he laying hold, and with all his forces drawing is at last elevated to the
topp. This rope or golden Chain holy S. Dionisius calls prayer, Cap. 3. de
diuinis nomibus.
which truly is let down to us from heaven, and by God himself fastened to
our hearts: for no man truly and heartily prays, if he be not inspired by God,
2. Cor. 3.
Seeing we are not of our selves, as Saint Paul says, Sufficient to think any
thing that is good, but our sufficiency is of God. This line therefore is let
down unto us, that we continuallic hanging at it may at last be lifted up to
heaven to the fruition of God. But let us lay open this matter yett more at
large. When one considers deeply on the one side the infinite goodness,
piety, and benignity of God, and on the other side his own poverty, want,
and miseric, then is he presently forced to seek after the aid, comfort and
presence of God his most benign Creator and Protector, as the kingly Prophet
Says, Psalm. 26.
I have sought after thy countenance, O Lord I will seek after thy
countenance. And when he beleives that he is truly present, then he exposes
and discovers his miseries and necessities, then he doubleth his desires,
then with many tears and sithes he imploreth the divine goodness, that he
would be graciouslic pleased to help him in his necessities, and not to
forsake him in these his afflictions, and to assist him with his helping grace,
by which he may in all things best please his divine Majesty. And when the
soul does this, what other thing does it but seem to be drawn up to God by
this line or cord of prayer? What else does it but strive to be sweetly bound
unto hits Creator? What does it, but labor to conioyne its understanding with
the incomprehensible light of his divine Majesty? What cls does it, but unite
its affections, with his unspeakable goodness? Lastly what other thing does
it, but elevates the mind above all things created, so that at last it is
made one spirit with God, fast bound unto him with this golden line or chain
of prayer. Behold now what kind of bond this prayer is. O line more then
golden! O chain above all jewels to be desired! O most sweet bond of love;
who would not most willingly be bound with this most soft, and silken cord? Or
lastly who does not desire from the bottom of his heart to repose himself in
the arms of so loving a Prince, so potent a King? Verily this only cogitation
if it were deeply considered, might suffice to inflame the most frozen heart,
and to stir it up to frequent this holy exercise of prayer: And the rather,
for that every one, how miserable a sinner so euerhe be, may, and ought without
all question to hope, that his divine Majesty though incomparably high and
superemine^t, yet nevertheless is so loving so sweeet, and so merciful, that
he does not disdeigne to incline his most sacred ears unto our prayers, so
that we have a purpose hereafter to resist sin. For almighty God is so
willing and propense to forgive our sins, and loves our souls so dearly,
that though he be the supreme Lord Paramount, and governor of the world, and
we nothing but unclean dirt and ashes, yet does he not contemn our misery,
nor keep in memory our old sins be they never so great; but presently being
attentine unto our grifes, and moved with our tears, grants our desires, and
pardons our offenses: and which is more, preuents us so with his grace, that
we are by him stirred up to pray before we begin to pray. O inestimable love
of God! O incomparable clemency! So deeply is God almighty in love with our
souls, that he does as it were study sweetly t'intice and allure us, and
endeavors by all means to draw us to meditate and contemplate the splendour
of his glory, to embrace the largepesse of his bounty, to taste of his pleasing
sweetness, and lastly to kiss the unspeakable delights of his mouth. O
miserable and unhappy men, who do not strive with all their forcesto be
drawn with this silken cord! But more miserable they, who do not follow so
sweet a draught, but of all, most miserable and unhappy are those, who being
so drawn do wittingly refuse, and spurn against this ineffable clemency of
almighty God. And this may suffice for the first reason or motive to prayer.

The second reason why God is to be prayed unto. CHAP. III.
But now let us come to the second reason which may edge us to this exercise of
prayer. It is most certain that man's chiefest good, is beatitude, which is
constituted, and ordained by God as the last end of man. To this end no man can
attain, but by fit means conducing thereunto. And these (among many others)
be two, which whosoever has shall never want any thing necessary for the
obteining of this happiness. These two are prayer and good works. In these
two as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Cornelius the Centurion was very
well exercised, and by them, did so please God, that though he were yet a
heathen or Ethnicke, it was said unto him by the mouth of an Angel, Thy
prayers and thy almesdeeds have ascended into remembrance in sight of God.
whosoever then shall exercise himself well in these two, that is, prayer and
good works, shall not be destitute of any thing that may help him to obtain
this end of his salvation.

But God will also further have us to humble our selves in the sight of his
divine Majesty, acknowledging our selves not to be able of our own forces to
do any thing worthy of his acceptance: but that a good life, that is, the life
of good works is to be obtained from him by prayer, and by this means to come
to our last end, which is aeternall happinese: By cause therefore no man can
come unto this end without the grace of good works, and man obteines not this
grace but by prayer; It follows that if we will escape aeternall misery, and
possess aeternal joy in heaven we must daily exercise our selves in prayer.

Let no man here object unto me that absurd and ridiculous reason of the fore
kmowledge of God, which cannot be frustrated or deceived: God, say they, in his
know ledge sees all things shall be before they come to pass. For example,
without all question he knows, whether I shall be saved or adjudged to
perpetual torments: and if he knweth me to be saved, I have no need to pray,
by cause without any prayer of mine I shall be saved, to wit, by virtue of his
foreknowledge, which cannot be deceived: But if he knows me to be damned, no
prayers of mine can help or avayle me, seeing Gods foreknowledge cannot be
frustrated. This very dilemma has indeed seduced many: But how deceit full it
is, we shall presently perceive, if we make a little try all, how small force it
has in other things: For example sake; Convenient exempes.
he that is sick of any dissease, by this reason shall take noe physic, for
God knows whether he shall live or die of this infirmity: But if he
foreknowes him to live, then he has no need of medicine at all, for without
all question he shall recover without it; for the divine foreknow lege cannot
be deceived: But if God foresees that he shall die of this disease, no phisike
can help him, for that he foreseeth shall be, and can by no means be avoided.
So by this reason you see, the Commodious art of phisike is quite taken away.
But let us try in another. The husband man may say, I will not plough my land,
for God fore sees whether it will bring forth fruit or no this next year: if
he foreseeth that it will bring forth fruit, it will do it without any labor:
If he know also it will not, my labor will be in vain. And thus you see all
husbandry is to delayed aside. And so will it fall out in other things if we
examine them. Thus is the weakness, and the wicked nesse of this former
discourse made evident: by cause by it neither the sick man shall take any
physic, nor the ploughman tille his land. Wherefore as the husband man can
expect no fruit from the earth, un less he shall plough and sow the same, nor
the sick man expect health, un less he shall use the art of physic, anh
obey the preceps of the physician. So no Christian can ever come unto aeternall
happiness, but by leading a godly life, which he cannot atteine unto but by
prayer. And we see by experience, that sick people would die, if they did not
use the art, and follow the council of their Doctor, and fe ilds without
plowing. And good seed vould bring forth no fruit: So can we neither ever
think or expect without prayer and good pious workesto obtain eternal joy,
and happiness. For although God almighty has ordained this eternal
beatitude for man's last end, yet he will not that we attain unto it without
the proportionable means which he has appointed for it. For unless a man
here begins a good life, let him never expect the glory which is inthe
other: and good life let no man look for, unless he beggeth it at the hands
of God by daily prayer. We must therefore begin with prayer, from whence
proceeds good life, by which at last, we are brought unto the heavenly glory,
which is the most clear vision of almihtie God, of which whilst we are
deprived, we must needs think our selves most miserable and unhappy men.

And this most manifestly appears, by the insatiable desire of our souls,
which never are quiet, but still laboring and endeavoring to find out some
thing that might satiate and fill us. And this we think to find, either in
having riches, or pleasures, or honors, or in all of them together; and yet it
will not be. From hence proceeds that their is never an end of desiring these
things, and for the obteining of these things all good order is broken, and a
general confusion of all things brought into the world. Yet nothing of all
these can satiate our desires, which are of so large an extent and capacity,
that they cannot be satisfide, but with the chiefest good which is God
himself. The contemplation therefore and fruition of this good, is above all
things to be desired, this only satisfies, this banisheth all longing. But
this cannot be obtained but by good life, nor good life without prayer; where
by it appears that whosoever desires to in joy this happiness, must cheifely
above all things be intent to this holy exercise of prayer. Thus much for the
second reason.

The third reason why God in to be prayed unto. CHAP. II.
IN this third place it will not a little stir us up, that Christ Jesus
himself has warned us with his own mouth to be sedulous in prayer: we ought
alwayse to pray. For who knows better how to instruct us in those things that
belong to our eternal salvation, then the son of Almighty God, in whom God
the father placed the treasures of his wisdom and knowledge, and who for that
purpose descended into this world, to show us the right way to our heavenly
country. Or who will endeavor with more efficacy to teach us the way, then
he, who for the love of us has vndergonne the most troublesome, most
ignominious, and most painful and contemptible death of the Cross

Neither has he only admonished us of the necessity of praying continually;
but he has likewise promised, that we shall obtain any thing we desire of him
in prayer saying: Ask, and ye shall receive, seek, and ye shall find, knock
and is shall be opened unto ye. This, Jesus Christ the son of God, who is
truth it self, has promissed with his own mouth. Let us therefore fly unto
the throne of his clemency, and let us there continually pray, for the grace
of good life and perseuera^ce in good works, nothing doubting but he will more
willingly and liberally grant our requests, then we know to beg or dema^d
them at his hands.

Therefore seeing he has taught us the necessity of prayer, and that we ought
alwayse to pray, it cannot be doubtful to any, but that above all things, it
is daily and houerly to be practissed; And especially of us Christians, who
wander in the miseries of this world exiled from the face of our heavenly
father, it is so necessary for us to obey this wholesome council of Christ,
that if any one shall determinately resolve with himself not to pray, he
sins mortally, And which is more, whosoever shall maliciously neglect to
pray, having time and opportunity, and cheifely; when he sees himself in
danger to fall into sin: such negligence may like wise be mortal, although
the negligence of its own nature be but a venial sin, greater or lesser
according to the greatness of the negligence.

But if we shall more diligently discuss the words of our Savior, the
necessity of prayer will yet more manifestly appear. The salvation certainly
of every Christian depends of God, whom we must daily implore for obtaining of
the same, and because this salvation of ours is in continual danger, and that
every one is bound to procure it with all the care and diligence he can, hence
is it that every moment, we are bound to pray to God for it, alwaise to lift up
our eyes to heaven, alwayse to lift up our hearts to God, seeing it is not to be
obtained by any other means then from him and by him.

Neither must we only pray for our own salvation, but also for the salvation
of our neighbors For as every one is bound to succor and releive him when he
sees him in corporal and temporal necessitye: so is he much more bound, when
heseeth him in any spiritual danger of his soul, to releive him. And at this
present time we have most need to pray, seeing the times be such, and so
dangerous, as they now be, sinners being so multiplied upon the earth, and
sin it self so daily increased as we see it is. Now adays sin is
applauded and commended as Justice, and good works reputed sins. Now to sim
is to do well, and contrary wise, to do well, to sin. Woe be unto us that
are borne in these miserable times! In which (with tears I speak) whosoever
indureth with the zeal and fear of God, beholds the manners and
conversation of the people, he will presently be moved to grief and tears.
This very consideration ought justly to move us, that being humbled and truly
sorry for our sins, we should by prayer lie continually knocking at the
Gates of Gods mercy and clemency, not only for our own safety, but also for
the recovery of our neighbors, whom we see in so miserable and extreme
danger of their souls, from whence they cannot arise, but by continual
prayer, and imploring of Gods divine assistance.

The fourth and last reason why God ought to be prayed unto. CHAP. V.
THe fourth and last reason may be gathered after this manner. There is noe
man, clothed with this mortal flesh, who has not sometimes finned, and highly
offended the Majesty of God, nor that has any warrant or security,
hereafter not to sin. And in this respect it is most necessary for us by
daily prayer, not only to seek, that he would graciously pardon and forgive
our former sins: But also that he would be pleased to prevent us with his
grace, lest we fall again into other sins, through which we may incur
eternal punishment.

And first there is no man whose soul has once been infected with sin, that
certainly knows, whether he be in the grace of God or not, unless it be
revealed unto him. Wherefore Solomon says in his book of Ecclesiastes There
be just, and wise men and their works be in the hands of God, and yet man
knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred, but all things are kept
uncertain unto the last, that is, all things are left to the last examine,
where nothing shall be hidden, not the least thought that has entered into
man's herat shall be concealed from the most strict judge.

But, although no man in this estate of life knows certeinty whether he be in
state of grace or not, yet by certain conjectures he may undoubtedly believe
it: and especially, when he knows not that his conscience is charged with any
mortal sin, of which he has not here to fore repented, or which he has
not discovered to his ghostly father, or does intend to discover at his first
opportunity: And if moreover he finds himself inclined to do and put in
execution, those things which belong to the honor of God, if he be delighted
to hear holy scriptures, to be often present at divine service, and be
resolute by Gods grace, so much as is in his power to abstain from all
contagion of sin. This man doubtless may belecue that he is in the state of
grace, but as I said before, no man can certainly know this, unless he be
specially illuminated from above. And for this cause it is necessary for all
men to co^teine themselves within the limitts and bounds of fear, and to be
perseuerantly knocking at the gates of gods mercy. To this fear does the holy
scripture persuade us saying Be not without fear of the forgiveness of thy
sins. And truly this fear will so much help and avayle us, that if the
grief before taken for our sins were not sufficient, Almighty god now
approving of this fear, and withal accepting of the prayer, which this fear
begets, it will satisfy Gods wroth, and obtain mercy and pardon of all his
sins before committed.

Moreover if we grant there be any man that knows he has full remission of
all his sins, and that he be wholly reconciled to God, and certainly in his
grace: yet may such an one very well doubt, whether he may not fall from this
so happy an estate; seeing that there is no man so confirmed in grace, but that
he may fall from it: wherefore S. Paul gives this council to the Romans:
Thoustandest by faith, To. 11.
be not Onerwise but fear as if he should say, if thorough faith any one be in
state of grace, let him not therefore presume of himself, but let him rather
fear, seeing he may so easily fall. No man can be secure in this world as S.
Paul likewise says to the Corinthians: He that thinks himself to stand, 2.
Cor. 10.
let him take heed he falls not. Wherefore it is most necessary for us to lift
up our eyes and hands to heaven, and with most humble and hearty prayers to
entreat of God, to grant us the grace of perseverance; least we fall from this
happy estate we are in by his grace: For we read of many; who have stood up
like pillars a long time in the Church of Christ, and have shined like as
burning lamps of sanctity, yet because they have not contained themselves
within the limitts of this humble fear, they have fallen headlong into the
bottomless pit of hell, not only to their own ruin and infamy but the
ruin of many others, which, here but that I fear to be tedious, I could
confirm by the authority of holy doctors, and indubitable histories of the
Church.

Now out of this we have here said, it appears to every man that we ought
alwayse to pray, as well for the obteining pardon of our sins, as also to
avoyde the imminent dangers we may so easily fall into. And thus having treated
of these four reasons, so much (I hope.) as is sufficient, I will now speak
something of the fruit of prayer which I promised to do in this second part.

THE SECOND, PART OF THE THREE CHIEF FRVITS of prayer.
CHAPT. I.
ALTHOUGH the a foresaid reasons may seem more then sufficient to stir up
men's minds unto prayer, yet not with standing there be many very slow and dull
to this exercise, because forsooth they do not taste that inward sweetness,
which many devout souls do oftentimes find in themselves. They would
willingly, they say, pray, if they could in joy that such inward comfort and
content, which others do. But withal they then do not consider, that prayer
must go before, and swetnesse and delight will come after. For as in the body
by long motion and agitation of it, heat comes and increases, even so by long
use and perseverance in prayer, begineth and increasseth that sweetness and
comfort in the soul, which is most pleasant and above all mesaure comfortable.
And although every one tastes not this sweetness in prayer; yet there be
other fruits which we reap by praying, which be of three sorts. The first is
the meritt it self, which God has proposed to give unto us for praying. The
second is the obteining of the thing we pray for. The third is the taste of that
wonderful sweetness, which we find in our selfs in the time of prayer. Which
three kind of fruits, are so different in themselves, that one may attain unto
the first without the other two. For one may by prayer meritt, yet not obtain
that which he prays for as saint Paul did, who says that, 2. Cor. 12.
He prayed to God three times that the sting of the flesh; with which he was
very much troubled might be taken from him. Yet he did not obtain what he
prayed for, but for all this, it is most certain he did not loose the meritt
of his prayer. And the two first may be obtained without the third, which
questionless daily happens unto many, who begging pardon of their sins, do
obtain it, and besides this, they are not frustrated of the meritt of prayer,
yet theyare not refreshed with that inward joy and spiritual sweetness. For
the Publican, which Christ speaks of in the ghospel, when he begged pardon of
his sins saying, God have mercy on me a sinner, Mart. 18.
obtained both the meritt of his prayer, and the forgiveness of his sins,
for it follows in the gospel, Ibid.
He went away justified into his own bowse. But we do not read that he
received any spiritual sweetness or delight in his soul. Whereby it is most
apparent that these three fruits are so different. that happen not all to every
one. But that we may more eleerely fee the excellency of each of them we will
treat of them in order apart, and first of the meritt of prayer.

Of the first fruit of Prayer that is of the meritt. CHAP. II.
We have before said that meritt is the first fruit of prayer, which we will
not have understood of any meritt, but of that only to which a reward in
heaven does correspond, and is due, which divines call essential. For it is
certain, Wicked man have some meritt of their prayers.
that there is no man, with how great sins socuer he be charged, that shall be
deprived of all meritt of his prayer: for he shall either be rewarded in this
world with some temporal reward, or at best his pains shall be somewhat
mittigated in the next, but in respect of such prayer, he shall never obtain
any the Jest portion of heavenly glory, for that is not obtained by any, but
those, whose prayer springs from the root of charity, that is, who are in
the state of grace when they pray.

Whosoever therefore desires not to be deprived of this meritt, must first
endeavor to have charity deeply planted and rooted in his heart: and so, not
only his prayer, but all his works shall be meritorious. And the greater that
the charity is, the more meritorius will the work be, whence I gather that
they meritt most, (...) prayer is most meritorious
who heartily pray for their enemies, because that kind of prayer proceeds
from the highest degree of charity. And therefore it is requisite for every
one that will enjoy the benefitt of his prayer, that he endeavor by all means
not to want charity, that is, that be be in the state of grace. In 105.
Which saint Chrysostom upon the gospel of saint John does affirm to be a
very easy thing, even for him who is laden with great sins. Only let him
heartily repent him of his finns, and resolve to lead a new life in Christ, to
get his grace. Which saying is confirmed by the Prophet Ezechiell, who from
the mouth of God almighty promises, Ezech. 33.
that In what hour soever a sinner shall repent, all his iniquities shall be
forgotten I will not says he remember all his iniquities: But sins are not
thought to be blotted out of the memory of God by any other way then by the
gift and infusion of grace and charity. By which means it comes to pass,
that a sinner who gives over sinning, that is, who is truly sorrowful for
his former life, and is become obedient to Christ, is esteemed to be in the
state of grace and charity. And for so much as the leaving of our former
sins, and changing our old life depends partly of our own free will, which
is free to every man, and life depends partly of the help of divine grace,
which is wanting to no man, that is not wanting to himself, it is not very
hard for a sinner in a short time to become a just man, so that he effectually
desires it, and have a great confidence in almighty God. Who so then goeing
about to pray, renewes his faith in Christ Jesus, by a new act, and detesteth
the impuritie of his former life, and resolves hereafter to abstain from
sin, and to do according to the decrees and ordinances of the Church,
without all question, such an one is in the state of grace and charity, and
shall not be frustrated of this fruit of his prayer, that is of such meritt to
which a reward in the kingdom of heaven belongs. And thus much of the first
fruit of prayer.

Of the second fruit Which is the obtaining of the thing We pray for. CHAP. III.
THe second fruit we said to be the obteining of the thing we ask in prayer.
This fruit whosoever will enjoy, it is not sufficient for him that he be in
charity, also he must stand firmly upon the foundation of profound humility,
^evo prayer may be impetratory.
so that from the bottom of his heart he must think himself most unworthy
that God should bestow upon him any grace or benefit, or inspire him with any
good at all. And yet let him not cease still to thank god for what he has
already received, attributing nothing to himself, if any thing be well done,
but referring all to God, what he has done good, and to himself all that is
evil. A similitude.
For so often as we do any thing well, we are in the hands of God, as the
mallett is in the hand of the carpenter, and as one should say as the carpenter
in working uses the mallet as an instrument, even so does almighty God use us
as his instruments, so often as we do any thing well. For whatsoever seems to
be well done by us, it is not we of our selves, but God that works in us.
wherefore as the mallet cannot boast it self against the carpenter, nor
ascribe unto it self, that it has framed this or that work (for the hammer
or mallet does nothing of it self, To. ^
but the carpenter that works with it as his instrument.) So likewise it is
not lawful for us to say against God, or to think, that we of our selves or
by our own forces only, have do^ne these good works, but by the assistance
of Gods grace, by which he moves us, and by us as by his instruments produces
good works. Wherefore we ought with all the humility we can to render thanks
unto God who has vouchsafed graciously to use us as his instruments, when (if
it had so pleased his goodness and benignity) he might have used others, and
perhapps with so much more fruit, by how much they should have better
cooperated with his grace, then we have done.

And when one by this consideration has humbled himself in the sight of his
divine Majesty; yet must he further diligently examine whether that which he
is about to pray for, be against his souls health or not, if it be, he must not
expect to obtain any such thing at the hands of God. For God, being of his
own nature most good, most bountiful, cannot grant unto his petitiones, that
which he knows to be pernicious, and hurtful unto him. And he knows long
before we demand it, whether it will damnifie or proffit us. Hence it is that
we do not presently obtain that which we ask for, be cause God sees it will
be a hinderance to our soul.

But there is yet a third thing required to the obteining of this fruit of
prayer, that is, We obtain not for others as for our selves
that it concerns our selves that we pray for: For although we be bound to
pray for our neighbors, yet are we not alwayse heard, praying for them,
especially for so much as apparteines to this fruit. For perchance either they
are not worthy to have that granted unto them that we pray for, or perhapps it
is not profitable for their souls health.

And in case we do not obtain the thing for which we pray; yet shall not our
prayer be in vain and frustrate of all reward: for he who prays for his
neighbor, and obteiyneth not for him, yet he meriteth for himself, My prayer
says the prophet, shall be turned into my own bosom: as if he had said, my
prayer when I pray for others, Psalm 34.
if it profits them not, yet shall it not want its reward, because I know it
will be turned to my good, the proffitt will redound to me, it will be turned
into my own bosom with advantage.

If therefore the prayer of any one be grounded upon this profound humility,
Three things requisite that o^ prayer be imperator
and for himself, and demanding nothing preiuditiall to his souls health; let
him proceed in Gods name whosoever he be, not doubting but that he shall
obtein what he prays for, not doubting I say, be cause saint James promises
saying let him ask in faith, nothing doubting and it shall be granted unto him.
Iac. 1.
And our lord also in the gospel says what socuer praying ye shall ask,
believe that ye shall receive, and it shall be done unto ye: Marc. 11.
And let this suffice concerning the second fruit of prayer and how we may
atteine unto it.

Of the third fruit of prayer which is spiritual sweetness CHAP. IIII.
THe third fruit of prayer we have said to be a certain Spiritual sweetness,
with which our soul is marvelously affected and deligheted in praying. Of this
fruit whosoever desires to taste and to be pertaker off, it is not sufficient
for him to have charity, and humility, and the other things above rehearsed:
but he must also have a vehement attention unto the prayer he has in hand, and
not to suffer his mind to wander abroad at all.

And although attention be most necessary to every one who desires to atteine
unto the two former fruits above here mentioned, Continual attetion necessary
(...).
that is meritt, and the gayning of the thing we pray for; yet nevertheless it
will suffice to the gaigning of them, if in the beginning of our prayer, the
mind be truly settled and attentive, so that we suffer it not willfullie
afterward to wander: for though after out of humane weakness and frayltie
one be some what distracted, or grow cold thorough some small negligence and
forgetfulness; he shall not yet loose the benefitt of his prayer, but by
virtue of his first inte^tion, gaigne both the meritt of his prayer and the
thing so prayed for, which may easily be made apparent by this example. If aman
has a mind to throw a stone to any distant place, A similitude
it is not necessary that the hand of him that cast eth the stone should still
be carried with the stone, but the first virtue or force, which the thrower
impressed into it, will be sufficient to convey it to the place intended. Even
so its with him that goes to pray to almighty God: it is sufficient for him,
if at the beginning he be very attentive, and have a desire and good will so
to continue unto the end. For though his mind be a little afterward carried
away, yet shall he not want either of the two former fruits.

But he that will enjoy this third fruit, to wit, be refreshed with the
consolation of this spiritual sweetness, it is not sufficient for him when he
begins first to pray, to be attentive and recollected, but he must persevere
so to the end, not suffering his mind to be distracted or carried away, but
still directing it, with all possible care, to him, to whom he prays.
Wherefore it is fitting for him who desires to taste this spiritual sweetness
in prayer, The way to atteine unto svveinesse in prayer.
before he begins his prayer to cast out of his mind all idle and vain
cogitatio^s, and diligently to prepare his mind, and with all the strength he
may, to direct all his intentions to almighty God, least thorough his
negligence in success of prayer, he be transported, and his intention lost by
distraction. Wherefore the Ancient endued with great virtue and sanctite of
life, so often as they went to pray, studied and endeavored by all means stir
to them selves up to devotion, some times Kneeling down, some times lying
prostrate on the earth, now with extended arms in form of a Cross, now
lifting their hands up to heaven, sometimes sitting solitary, musing and full
of thoughts, sweetly conferring and talking with God, and presently again
devoutly singing some psalm, canticle or himne. By these and many other
means, as seemed fittest for themselves they were accustomed wonderfully and
most efficatiously to stir up them selves so to devotion and contemplation,
so far that they often found in them selves, such an inexplicable and
delicate sweetness as no tongue is able to express. For indeed one only taste
of this sweetness, incomparably surpasses all worldly delight whatsoever, for
from it there grows such joy and comfort in the soul that exceedes all joy
and co^te^tme^t that ca^ be imagined. And no mervaile, for it proceeds from
the very fountain of all goodness, to which no worldly joy or delight may be
compared. For it is God himself, who very often by a special grace shows
himself present to those that devoutly contemplates him. By which it comes to
pass, that so soon as this most excellent goodness does relish in our spirit
or mind, forth with an admirable sweetness is diffused through our soul, so
much surpassing al humane cogitation, that mortal tongue is not able to
express, or understanding to apprehend it. But this sweetness is not usually
at all times nor by all persons perceived and tasted, but then only, when
almigtie God does see it will be most profitable unto us. For as the physician
does not alwayse give physic, A similieude.
nor so often as the patient desires it, but does some time defer it to a time
more fitting and commodious for his patient, and when it will do more good.
Even so does our most benign God with us. For he does oftentimes defer to
give us this spiritual consolation till a fit time, when he knows that the
gift of this sweetness will bring more proffitt, or be more convenient for
our souls good.

And this is the reason why many, Vv by we do not alvv ayse obtain his
sovvetnesse.
although they daily and heartily pray to God, that they may be refreshed with
this heavenly sweetness, obtain it not so soon as they desire, be cause God
as a skilful and learned physician, expects his own time and a fitter
opportunity. For peradventure he seethe now, that if he should grant our
desire, we would grow proud, or believe we can obtain his grace whenever we
please; and by our own forces and strength. Therefore does he in his divine
wisdom, defer the granting of our request, until he sees our heart more
humbled, and better confirmed in good purposes, and lastly more diligently
addicted to holy exercises, that so he may make us pertakers of more ample
favors of his divine sweetness and consolation.

In sum therefore whosoever desires to be pertaker of this sweetness must
first and above all have a most lowly and humble conceit of himfelfe, The
means by which this svvcetnesse is gotten.
of language, unless charity urges, necessity inforceth, or that some
commodity will probably redound, either to himself, or to his neighbor by
speaking. Moreover he must endeavor so much as in him lies, thoughts so much
as in him lies all vain and fruitless cogitations. Alas poor miserable
wretches that we are, that for the most part pesterr our thoughts and mind
(that most admirable creature of God) not only with such fruitless and
unprofitable thoughts, but with such as are most odious, and bring damnation to
our souls, whereas the memory of those things we spoke of before; were an
employment far more adua^tagious and profitable for us, far more pleasant,
and the most excellent study that mortal man can enterteine himself with.
For it is as it were a twinkling or a small glimps of Gods heavenly light, it
is a spark of our future happiness, it is a pledge or earnest penny of
eternal life. And if any man in this dying life may be termed happy and
blessed, it is only he who has his mind conversant in the memory of these
holy thoughts, it is he who wholly gives himself to prayer and contemplation.
But having as I hope, spoken sufficiently of the three fruits of prayer, I will
now at length come to treat of the manner of prayer.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE MANNER OF PRAYER.
CHAP. I.
IT will not be very hard for us to know which way of prayer is most
proffitable, if the three things we presently shall treat of be once rightly
understood. The first is, our prayer, whether to the words, or to the sense of
the words, or whither rather to him to whom we power forth our prayers. each
of them, that is, of attention, of prolixitie or length, and of pronuntiation.

To what thing we ought cheifely to attend when we pray. CHAP. II.
LEt us now examine whither the force of our intention is to be directed,
whether to the words, or to the sense, or rather to him whom we pray. And
first of all I affirm that if there be any man of such dexterity in praying,
that he can at one and the same time attend unto them all together, so that his
attention to the words, or to the sense of the words, diminishes nothing of
the attention of his mind to God: that way of prayer is most powerful. One
attention commony hinders another.
But because it cannot be, or very hardly, but that one of these attentions
must needs hinder the other, let us perticularly see which of the three is most
perfect. No man (who will diligently examine this business) can doubt, but the
attention which is derected unto God considered in it self is the most
perfect, and that most meritorious, that is, if it be not more remiss, then
that which is directed to the words, or the sense of the words before God. And
this I will not have understood, in those prayers only which we voluntarily say
and of our own accord, but in all others, even those to which we are bound,
either by wow, or by the constitutions of the Church.

There be many doubtless who have so weak and scrupulous consciences, that
for fear least they should overslipp any little word, or pass any syllable in
the divine office, they bend all their forces and strength of their mind to the
distinct pronuntiation of the words. And such I do verily believe do seldom
or never taste the sweetness of prayer, for which the ancient fathers first
ordained the divine office, which we call the canonical hours. Why the
canonical hours were enstituted.
For these ancient and holy men had this their prefixed end, and it was their
study and intention, that the minds of the Priests (who are the mediators
betwixt God and the people) should by these offices, be more stirred up to the
contemplation of God, and be more inflamed with his love. Wherefore if any one
shall be so far forth attentive, to express his words, that he does not come
unto the end and scope, which those holy fathers proposed unto them selves in
these divine offices, I ca^notapproue of such prayer as the best, or judge it
more fruitful or meritorious then the other.

But I would not here by, that those, who so hastily huddle over their
prayer, that they scarsely understand themselves, not considering either the
excellency of him to whom they pray, nor the sense of the words: I would not I
say, that by these my words such negligent people should pretend unto
themselves any the least defense of their sloth and negligence. For I do not
speak this with any intention to condemn them, Attention to the words
satisfiethe precept.
whose attentions are transported to the words, (because I doubt not but that
they satisfy the precept) but rather to persuade them to the other way of
prayer, which is more excellent and more proffitable.

But they who chiefly attend to the sense of the words, may sometimes perhapps
receive some little sweetness, and spiritual comfort in their souls: But
surely they do not receive that most excellent comfort and sweetness which
arises from the union and conjunction of our souls with God For it may
sometimes also happen, The sweetness which comes from the sense of the
words is far less the^ that comes by a thought upon God.
that by one pleasing sentence of holy scripture, being deeply ruminated, one
may atteine unto some small sparkle of this most excellent sweetness: but that
which proceeds out of the consideration of any part of scripture, is far more
weak, far more remiss, then that which proceeds from the fountain it
self of his divinity. For Gods holy writ though it proceeds from himself,
yett it is notwithstanding a creature, and what creature, or what created thing
soever possesses our minds, be it never so excellent, that thing is interposed
betwixt God and us, so that it is but a let unto our minds, that we cannot so
in wardly be united with God, and therefore deminisheth that admirable
sweetness which proceeds from that fountain it self wherefore although they
who attend only to the sense of the words perceive or find a little sweetness,
yet are they far short of that pure sweetness which those only taste, who
think of nothing but God himself and have nothing interposed betwixt God and
their minds, but are united wholly to him, which can never be, unless the mind
relinquish the cogitation of every imaginable thing or fantasy, and presents
nothing to it self but God only, for then are we most perfectly united and
immediately conjoined to our heave^ly Creator. To whom when we find our hearts
so to adhere, and be as it were firmly fixed, presently begins so pleasant
a taste of sweetness, as no man can express, but he only to whom it has
pleased almighty God to grant it.

But observe this, that that thought or cogitation which the mind forms or
shapeth to it self of God, must not be under any color or light or figure or
any other corporal likeness: for all these things are created and so not God,
whereas we seek the union and conjunction of our selves with God only, and not
with any other thing distinct from him.

If therefore one goes about to think of God himself, let him with his
understanding fly above all things created, How vvemay atteine to the
conceiving of God alone.
conceiueing in his mind a thing most high, most excellent, and by infinite
degrees surpassing all other things imaginable. This if he can do without the
apprehension of any light, color, figure or likeness, as I said before, then
has he apprehended God himself. In which affair if thou will continue and
diligently employ thy self, thou shall at last atteine to that unspeakable
sweet ness and withal obtain the three fould fruit of thy prayer.

But if in the beginning this way seem difficult to any one, The meditation of
the humanity of Christ leads to higher contemplation of God.
let him first exercise himself in thinking upon Jesus Christ, who is both
true God and true man; let him therefore fix the eye of his understanding upon
him as true God, calling to remembrance his holy Incarnation, birth, painful
labors and cruel death: Let him consider likewise his heavenly glory, where
with he now shines, sitting at the right hand of his father. Whosoever shall
diligently exercise himself in these or any other meditation of Christ. Or
more proportionable for him, shall easily from his most sacred humanity, mount
to the contemplation of the most unspeakable inscrutable divine Majesty of
God. For this is the necrest way that leads us to the taste of that most pure
and divine sweetness.

And if perchance he cannot yet atteine unto this inward comfort and
sweetness, almighty God withdrawing himself, either because as yet, he sees
it will but little proffitt him, or because he is not fervent enough, or
sufficiently attentive, considering the greatness and dignity of the thing he
desires, yet for all this he shall not loose the reward of his prayer.

The best therefore and most pure way of prayer is, The most perfect way of
prayer.
if one after he has most seriously recollected himself, and directed his
mind with all his force unto God himself, (who is verily there present) does
offer unto him from the bottom of his heart, and with a pure affection; the
prayers which he is about to say, whether he understand them or not, it is not
material, and shall so fix his mind upon God, that his imagination wa^ders
not: Such an one shall proffit more in the love of God (which is the end of
prayer) then if he were never so attentive to the words, or sense of them. For
this settling of his mind upon God, is for the most part accompanied with such
an elevation of heart that, the mind, having forgotten all earthly things, many
times knows not where it is, or what it does, as if a man were become a mere
stranger to himself; and the spirit is sometimes so greatly moved, that
unadvisedly it cries out, or does some other action, which immediately after a
man remembers not, because the spirit works so mightily in him, that he can
by no means suppress those actions in himself. And as the holy fathers (who
in this art were very expert and skillful) affirm, there is oftentimes so
great sweetness tasted in prayer, that it even redoundeth to the flesh, so
that the flesh is made pertaker of so great sweetness, and such as it never
tasted before. To which the Prophet David accords saying, My heart and flesh
have exulted in the living God, as if he should say, my heart through the
bounteous overflowing of my spirit, has received so wonderful a sweetness
from God, that my very flesh through delight of it is over come with joy, and
such, as I am not able to co^teine my self. This very exultation is as it were
a sparkle of eternal life, which we shall enjoy after the vniucrsall
resurection of our bodies, for then the glory of the soul shall so exceedingly
abou^d, that it shall flow into the body, and both soul and body with this
abundance shall be fully satisfied.

Out of what has here bee^ said before in this chapter it may easily be
gathered, that the chiefest attention to be used in prayer is to have
continually in our memory the presence of God, to whom we pray, and to fix
him immoueablie before the eyes of our heart: which to do, though in the
beginning of this exercise, it be some what difficult and trouble some, yet by
success of time and use of prayer, it will become more easy and more
pleasant: but to them cheifely, who are most inflamed with the spirit of
devotion and contemplation. Now let us pass to the next question

How long our prayer ought to be. CHAPT. III.
NOw in the second place we must inquire how long our prayer ought to be, for
being it may be longer or shorter as we please, therefore to know of what
length or how short it must be, belongs to the manner of prayer. I say
therefore, that although Jesus Christ admonishes us alwayse to pray: it is not
so to be understood (as we have declared in the first chapter) that we ought
alwayse actuallie to pray, for no man is able so to continue, our weakness
and frailty being such: that it will not permit us to be still intent either
to vocal or mental prayer, without any intermission: yet notwithstanding does
Christ admonish us rightly, for that we are in continual need of Gods aid
and assistance, which we must continually beg and entreat at his hands.

It has pleased therefore some grave Authors to give us this rule, that we
should so far prolong our prayer, A similitude
until we have atteined the end for which it was first instituted. For as the
physician applies no greater or stronger medecin to his patient, then will
serve to cure his disease, which is the end of the art of physic: Even so
must our prayer be, so long till we have atteined to the immediate end for
which it was instituted. But the first, and chiefest end of prayer is the
fervor of charity, which is the healh of our souls. It is fervor then of
charity that God requires of us, for he does despise the lukewarm, and in
the Apocalypse he preferrethe the key cold before him saying, I would thou were
hot or cold, Apoc. 9.
but by cause thou art luke-arme, I will begin to vomitt thee out of my
mouth, See here in how great hatred almighty God has those that are
lukewarm. Wherefore we must labor by all means possible to procure in our
selves this feruency of charity. For the obteining of which fervor, prayer is
of all things most necessary; which feruor so soon as we have obtained we are
exceedingly enabled, with great alacrity to undertake any work whatsoever we
think to be most grateful unto almighty God, and for which at last we shall
be rewarded with aeternal happiness. We see then that our chiefest labor in
prayer must be to inflame and set our hearts on fire, with this fervency of
charity, and then, as it were, to spinne out our prayer so long until we have
atteined unto this our end. But when through the wearinsse of our frail body
we find this heat or fervor in us to grow cold, then must we desist and pray
no longer, but presently apply our selves to some other works of virtue. For
if we shall suffer this fervor to be altogether ex tinguished in us, we do
not only not obtain our end intended in prayer, but also we give no small
occasion to induce the contrary. For so soon as this fervor by ouroverle^gth
of prayer shall wax cold or remiss, we are presently destitute and forsaken of
all inward comfort, whereby many times it comes to pass, that our minds are
wandering abroad, seeking some thing pleasing and delight full to our senses,
which does often introduce a dissolution most pernicious to our souls, and
draws us by little and little into many evils and inconveniences, which had not
happened, if we had risen from prayer before, and not have suffered that
burning fervor to have been utterly extinguished in us and therefore saint
Augustine commends certain Monks in Egypt, for that they used short prayer,
The brothers in Egypt, says he, Epist. 121. de ora^do Deum
are said to have often prayers but very short, and as it were iaculatoire.
Therefore doubtless they used often, that they might often renew this fervor;
and short, for no other cause, but that the fervor which they had gotten in
prayer, should not grow cold or remiss through length of prayer.

The chiefest care therefore of him that prays must be to nourish, and
maintain this fervor inkinled in his soul, and not to suffer it to die, nor
to desist from prayer, so long as it may be maintened or increased, vnlessesome
great weariness of the body, and so allwais by this end we ought to measure
the length or shortness of our prayer. For as the physician (having reguard to
the end of his art, which is the health of this body) tempers his medicine and
gives it to his patient, not in so great a quantity as he can, but in such as
is convenient, either for gaigning or conserving the health of his patient. So
he that prays must not prolong his prayer as long as he can, but so long as
it is convenient either for the getting or preserving of this fervor. And when
he finds himself through this union with God so gently inflamed, and sweetly
affected, let him then go in silence withsighes, and tears full of joy and
love, and accomplish the remainder of his devotions, according as the holy
Ghost shall inspire him. For I would council no man to give over his prayer,
so long as this fervor and heat indureth, unless there happens some thing
which may be more to the honor and glory of God, or of more necessity to him
that prays, or more profitable to our neighbor: But so soon as he finds
himself through the weakness, and weariness of his body to be come cold and
dull and dry, let him forthwith give over, and content himself ith what he
has already gaigned, and apply himself to some occasion or other, fit for
his state and calling, until some other opportunity. But if that he be
stirried up again by some new affection, let him by no means suffer it to
die; but at least with some short and iaculatorie prayer, let him offer it, and
himself up to God, and desire his clemency toward him. For seeing this
affection, as we may very well imagine proceeds and is stirred up in him by
the holy Ghost, he may in no wise refuse it without great ingratitude unto
almighty God. Wherefore all business laid aside (so far as necessity will
suffer) we must follow and cherish this motion, and not suffer it to perish,
and die in him by his negligence.

But here some may say unto me, how can he, Seculer persons may attend unto
prayer
possibly who is in this life so troubled with cares, so perplexed with
worldly occasions, and full of business, how can he attend so strictly to
prayer? Harken a little to Saint Chrysostom, and he will answer, Chrysostom l.
5. ho. 79. de orat.
He may and that very easily, may though he were in public court, or if he
were present before any tribunal, we have not, says the such need of ourspeech
as of our thoughts not of the lifting up of our hands as of our hearts If thou
have thy mind inflamed thou have the perfection of prayer: thus he. Thou may
pray therefore wheresoever thou art, though thou be in company, thou may
for a moment of time with draw thy self, Prou. 9
and by stealth offer to God some little prayer as the Scripture says stolen
waters are the sweeter. And truly prayers thus on the sudden, and by stealth,
as it were darted up to heaven, do oftentimes stir up our minds more
vigorously, and more ardently inflame our hearts, Iaculatorie prayers.
with that most excellent love of God, and are indeed (as they affirm whom
experience has taught) most acceptable to our heauently spouse Christ Jesus:
but if thou can by no means withdraw thy self from their sights with whom
thou do converse out of the respect thou bear to them; yet may thou in
their presence lift up thy heart to God, who, thou art sure, is present with
thee, and in a few words say unto him with the Prophet David, Intend unto my
aid, Psa. 37. Psa. 63.
O Lord God of my salvation! Or this, incline unto my aid o God. Then which
words Cassianus affirms, there can be none more powerful and efficacious. If
thou shall but in thy heart repeat these words, thy prayer shall pierce the
heavens, and thus much thou may do wheresoever thou be, Lib. 1. collat.
Patru^ collat. 10.
Wheresoever thou art, says S. Chrysostom, thou may erect thy altar, no
place can hinder thee from dedicating thy self to God, if thout were mending
they shoes or washing dishes or what else soever, thou may pray: it is
lawful for the servant what business soever he is about of his masters, to
pray. In the court, in the market place, in the midst of never so great a
multitude of people a man may pray. Saint Paul prayed in the prison, the
Prophet Hieremie in the dirt, Act. 16 Hier. 38. Ez each. 38. Daniel. 9. and 13.
Ionae 2 Lu. 23.
Ezechias against the wall, Daniell in the lions den, Jonas in the whales
belly, the theife on the Cross, and all these were heard praying in very few
words. All this out of Saint Chrysostom in several places.

Whosoever therefore shall exercise himlselfe from time to time after this
manner, that is, now praying, then doing some other good work, still employed
either to get this fervor of charity, or in increasing or nourishing the
same, never suffering it (so far as he is able) tho rough his negligence or
fault to be extinguished, or to grow cold, nor suffers the good motions and
inspirations of the holy Ghost to die in him without some fruit, he without all
doubt in short time shall come unto that vnspeakble tranquillity of mind, and to
such a pleasant joy in heart as incomparably surpasses all wordly solace and
contentment, all joy all laughing and meriment, all pleasure that here can be
affoorded or expected. And thus let us come to the third qustion.

Wether the prayer of the heart only is more aduantagious then that which is
made both with heart and speech
CHAP. IV.
IT remains now that we treat whether prayer of the heart only, or prayer
which is made with the heart and lips together be most proffitable unto him
that prays I do protest here, that it is not my intention, to affirm any
thing in derogation of vocal prayer, such as is either received by custom, or
ordained by the constitutions of the Church, or inflicted by way of penance,
or assumed by vow or any other promise whatsoever, by which a man has bound
himlselfe to vocal prayer. But my opinion is, that whosoever is free from
these bonds, and in possession of his absolute liberty, and desires to serve
God after the best purest and most pleasing way unto him: it is far more
proffitable for such an one to pray with his heart only, then with his tongue
and heart together: Because as Saint Augustine in a certain Epistle of his to
Proba, speaking of the fruit of prayer, affirms, saying The office, of
praying, is better performed by sithinge and mourning then by speech of lips,
Epist. 121.
better by weeping then speaking. Which if it be so, verily the prayer of the
heart, from whence the sorrow breaks, is much more availeable then the
words, which proceed from the lips. And rightly by cause as saint Cyprian
testifierh, De oratione pau lo post principium.
God is the hearer of the heart not of the voyec, he is not to be moved by
clamor or noise, who sees the inward thoughts of the mind. Wherefore a poor
Wretch who casts himself prostrate on the earth, with great humility
acknowledging himself to be a sinner, and laying open his miseries, pouring
forth the bottom of his heart before God, not uttering words, but pitiful
groans: this poor soul without all question shall soon obtain what he
requires at Gods hand. Which appears plainly to be true in Anna, the mother
of Samuel. For she being barren earnestly desired at the hands of God, that
he would give her a son, for which cause she often frequented the temple,
imploring his divine goodness by daily prayer, that he would be pleased to be
propitious, unto her in this her suit, yet did she not form any one word at
all, but prayed in heart only, as the Scripture says, She prayed in her heart
and novoyce was heard, for her lips only moved. Why do I use many words? By
this only prayer that is of her heart she obtained what she asked; for she
brought forth a son, whom she with so many tears and so much sorrow had
begged at the hands of God, and not with the noise of her lips and tongue. To
this also does saint Hierome agree explicating that of S. Mathewe, But thou
when thou prayest enter into thy chamber, Math. 6.
and having shutt the door pray to thy father. It seems to me, says he, we
are rather commanded to pray unto our Lord, Hier. in cap. 6.
with our thougts in our breast, then with our lips, as we read in the book
of Kings, that Anna did, her lips, says the Scripture were moved, and
hervoyce was not heard. Thus S. Hier. in this way of prayer vehemently moves
his divine Majesty; and powerfullie inclines him seedily to hear us.

Moreover the holy Ghost is our teacher and aduiser to this way of prayer as S.
Paul testifies, To. 8.
who says, what we should pray, as we ought we know not; but the spirit
himself asks for us with groanings in speakeable. As if he would say, we
know not after what manner to ask any thing, but the spirit of God inwardly
stirring up our hearts, makes us with unspeakable groanings to ask, what is
most fitting for our souls health.

Yet notwithstanding I do not deny, but that some devout person may begin
his prayer with what words he pleases, from his lips. But so soon as ever
he shall find himself a little enkindled, and as it were set on fire with that
sweet flame of the holy Ghost, then it will be fit for him to leave of vocal
prayer, and follow the leading of the divine spirit, and in silence to permit
himself to be wholly governed by it. For as I said a little above, the end which
we should prefix to our selves in our prayer, is cheifely the fervor of
charity, with which we begin to be possessed, and inflamed then by devout
prayer our minds are stirred up and clevated unto God on high. As soon
therefore as we find our selves to have atteined to this end, then must we
strive by all means to continue it in us: which to do, without all doubt we
have no better way, then to follow the leading of the holy ghost, whose conduct
far more advances our affair, then any words we can invent or bring forth.
Wherefore must we with all our might follow the instinct and motion of the
holy spirit, whether soever it shall lead us, neither need we from thence
forth utter any words of our own. Not unlike unto him, who after great labor
and long travail has passed the sea, A similitude.
and is arrived at his desired haven, then he forsakes the shipp that brought
him, and applies himself wholly to the end and purpose for which he came, and
is no more sollicitous for the poor vessayle that brought him thither: So also
he that by the help and use of vocal prayer, as by a shipp has atteined unto
the inward consolation of his soul, and to this fervor of charity in God,
must then make it his chiefest care and study, that this fervor by no means
grow cold, but then leaving of his vocal prayer, he must follow this holy
spirit, who has brought him to this fervor, wither soever it shall lead him:
then he must not use his own words: but whatsoever the holy Ghost shall suggest
unto his heart, that let him desire, not with words, but with burning sighs of
joy.

But that thou may more certeinely know that this manner of prayer to wit,
which is offered in spirit and mind, is more excellent then that which is
performed with speech and words, listen to that which Christ says in the
gospel, Ioa^. 4.
God is a spirit, and they that adore him, must adore him in spirit and
verity. Behold as God is a most spiritual thing, so does he require a
sacrifice most spiritual, therefore the prayer offered to him in spirit and
mind is more acceptable then that, which is offered with the gross
pronountiation of words, which cannot be formed vithout corporal air. And let
it not trouble thee that it is said in saint John, adorare to, adore and not,
orare to pray, for the one of these cannot be done without the other, for
when God is prayed unto, then is he truly adored, and when he is adored, then
is he also prayed unto. God then requires, you see, to be adored in spirit and
mind, of the most spiritual and elevated minds, for such as these he seeks
after, as S. John says to adore him. Wherefore I fear not to say, that
spiritual men, who have carefully exercised themselves in this manner of
prayer, and have had their hearts alwayse lifted up to God, and have tasted of
the sweetness of this fervor, (I fcare not I say to affirm) that they have
much more profited by this prayer of the heart, then if they had repeated
innumerable psalms and prayers, as very many do, overburthening their minds,
and by that means so excluding themselves from the end of their prayer, that
they never taste any spiritual sweetness at all.

And without all question, the desire of running over such a multitude of
prayers, does oftentimes hinder and divert Gods holy visitation from their
hearts, which otherwise he would be very ready to give them. Forlikeas the
sun sends forth the beams of light to every place, so is almighty God most
ready to power into every one of us this bounteous sweetness, if the passages
into our minds be not with our multitude of words, as with certain thike and
condensed clouds, hindered and blockt up; whereas we should be intent to
nothing at all but God, and that with all our desires, and minds, if we will be
pertakers of this sweetness. But such persons attend not to God, but to the
quick pronouncing of a great many words, neither do they consider the
presence of his divine Majesty, but with how great celeritie, and speed they
can run over such a number of psalms, and prayers, with which study and
desire, they do so busy and ouerwhelme their minds, as not one dropp, of
this sweetness can fall upon them: and yet they persuade themselves that they
please God most, insomuch that they cannot satisfy rheir consciences, until
they have prayed their stinted number of deuotio^s. And if by chance any part
of them (I do not mean of such as are commanded by the Church, but which they
have undertaken of their own accord to say) be left vnsayd; alas poor souls,
how great a scruple do they form in their consciences? How miserably do
they torture their minds? Not marking that saint Hierome says, Citet by
Gratian in cap. no^mediocriter de consecratione did. 5.
The saying or repeating of five psalms with purity of heart, and spiritual
joy, is better then the repeating of the whole psalter, with a troubled and
distracted mind. And it is much more to be wondered at, that they will not mark
what Christ says in the gospel admonishing them that pray, When ye are
praying, speak not much: Mat. 6
yet must you not think, that Christ is displeased with long prayer seeing it
is read of himself that He was long in prayer, Luc. 6.
but that we should not trust in the multitude of our prayers, and especially
the affection of the mind being not present, nor that we should think him to
be more moved with the multitude of words, then the affection of the heart. But
contrary, he is more moved with one only true affectionate and inward lifting
up of the mind, then with all the prayers we can say, void of affection.
Whereupon saint Augustine says, Epist. 121. ad
It is one thing to speak much, it is an other to be well affected. Proba cap.
10
He speaks much to God that sure thinks he can move his clemency by a long
and a numerous company of words, by which God is not moved at all; but with
the sincere affections of the soul. For the clamor or noise of the tougne
makes a very dull sound in his ears, and the vehement burning of the
affection moves him instantly, because God is more delighted with our
affections then voices, and them most that are accompanied with sighs and
tears. For this manner of praying does as it were overcome God, who otherwise
is invincible, and this doubtless is better performed and offered to God in
spirit and mind, then with any words formed with the mouth. For the spirit so
soon as it is moved and a little set on fire, executes its office with far
more celeritie, then the motion of the lips, or the corporal forming of words
is able to do. By which that is made apparent, which we have so long
discoursed of, to wit that the prayer of the mind and spirit only is more
powerful with God, and more to be esteemed and practiced by us. For the motion
and agitation of the lips is slower, and the corporal weight of the tongue
pronouncing the words is less apt for the purpose. And not only this, but the
now opening now shutting of the mouth is more laborious, then that it can
assist the spirit or mind in any thing, especially it being once inflamed and
set on fire by this divine love. For then it is carried with so great celeritie
and swiftness, that neither the lips, mouth, or tongue are able to follow it,
and if they do follow, they help it in nothing, but are rather trouble some
and full of molestation.

I could wish therefore that who are delighted in prayer, and willingly spend
their time in it, and cheifely such as have both time and leisure enough to
employ therein, I could wish, I say, they would not so vnproffitably burden
themselves, with so great a multitude of vocal prayers; but that time (vhich
they spend in them) to so little profitt, they would spend in setting their
affections on fire toward God, that so at last they may atteine to some taste
of that unspeakable sweetness, which God questionless will power upon their
souls. which will easily be brought to pass, if that they do worthily
prepare themselves, and proceed to the manner we have before set down. That
is, first, that they offer themselves in all humility to God, then diligently
perform their prayers with a true and just attention of mind; and lastly do
their best endeavor to finish their prayers with all attention of heart. They
may also begin their devotions with some vocal prayer, such as they have
heretofore been accustomed to be inflamed with; but then finding themselves
thus inflamed, sweetly affected, and drawn by almighty God, in Gods name
leaving off their vocal prayer, let them with tears and sighs follow the
tract of the holy ghost, whither soever it shall lead them, then begging
insta^tly at the hands of almighty God whatsoever the holy spirit shall inspire
them, but cheifely that it would please, his divine Majesty not to forsake
them, but that he would graciously grant them what in his divine knowledge and
wisdom, he sees most necessary for their souls health. And if they
proceed according to this manner, they shall not only grow and become more
acceptable to God, but shall also daily profitt more and more in fervor of
charity, and become like unto those most heavenly and angelical spiritts,
which daily behold and contemplate the face of God. And why should they not
(though here lying upon earth and covered with this corruptible flesh) be said
to be like Angels? Seeing they pray as the blesed Angels do, that is in
spirit, seeing also they taste the same sweetness which the blessed Angels do,
and seeing lastly they do here on earth find in themselves a pledge or earnest
penny of their future happiness, which these blessed Angels do now enjoy? In
so much that there is nothing wanting to them but the beatificall vision of
Gods glory, which so soon as they have shaken of this veil of mortal flesh
they shall enjoy in heaven.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, by reason of these vacant pages, I thought good in respect this
little Armor of S. Ephraem, does something conduce to the present Discourse to
add it as a postscript for thy further instruction.

THE ARMOVR OF S. EPHRAEM.
HE who resolves to fight courageously for Christ Jesus, must possess
himself of this armor, with which being guarded, he may both resist his
adversary the devil, and be more pleasing in the sight of God our Savior.
What this Panoplie or armor is listen (my brother) and I will tell thee. For
thy breastplate or doublett take faith, but as a grain of mustard seed,
believing in the consubstantiall and individual Trinity: How fayt bis
compared to a grain of runstard seed.
For the grain of mustard seed is very light and round, having neither crack
nor corner: but (as I said before) is altogether round, which being pounded or
bruised has in it a mervailous great heat. The Prince of the Apostolical
order S. Peter, when he confessed Christ Jesus to be son of the living God,
he received the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, Matt. 16.
and obtained power over all heavenly and earthly things this harness or
armor (dear brother) challenge to thy self, that thou for may receive
grace from God for whosoever has but so much perfect faith and charity shall
without question promerit grace from God. Which our Lord insinuating said.

If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, say to this montaine, remove
from hence thither and it shall remove. The prefit and come^dations of faith.
Do you not see that faith promeritts grace? Unto it is given the spirit of
understanding, truly a most singular gift for when one belecveth, then also he
understands: It is given him to understand, that he should not judge his
neighbor: then is given to him the speech of wisdom, then the grace of
curing, for he does cure the weak in faith, and brings to right, those that
are falen: for one and the same spirit works all these things. But there be
many who have faith, but are destitute of works: But that is no faith, for it
is dead: for faith without works is dead. Iac. 2.25.
He that has faith and works theworkes of faith: he has faith burning as
the mustard seed. Possess thou this my brother, and be sound and firm in
faith: and fervent to put in execution the preceps of our Savior, that thou
may deserve to hear that voice of his. Welfare thee good and faithful
fervant, enter into the joy of thy Lord. Matt. 25.
Our Lord calls him good for his works, faithful for his faith. Take the
helmet hope of the future good, which neither eye has seen, care has heard,
nor has entered into the heart of man, upon which the Angels desire to look.
For this hope is the most powerful consolation of the soul, Hope the helmet.
amongst the thorns of her afflictions and molestations, and the memory
thereof will replenish thee with joy. To this being intent the holy Martyrs of
Christ amidst their various and most horrible torments, a midst bales of iron,
suffered all, most readily and willingly, being strengh thened with this most
eminent virtue of hope. Moses prefixing before his eyes the reward of this
hope, refused to be called the son of the Queen, esteming and preferring it
before all threasures of Egypt wherefore he made rather choice to be afflicted
with the people of God then to have any temporal fruition of sin Place this
hope my brother daily before thine eyes, that affection to it may not permit
thee to esteem any whit of temporal and corruptible things, and not only
this, but that it may make thee more prompt, and ready to advance thy self to
any good work. For thy girdle girt thy self with perfect charity to God and
thy neighbor, Charity the girdle.
and this will make thee run forward without any impediment at all. For if he
who is girt with his girdle, does so easily pass with the burden he
undertakes, with how much more facility shall he who is girt with this divine
charity overcome all things? For charity suffers all things, bears with all
things, charity is the fullness of the law. Saint Paul being possessed of this
charity, said, who is weak and I am not weak? Who is scandalized and I am
not burned? Have thou seen the pity and compassion of charity? O blessed
saint Paul, why art thou so afflicted for me? Shall thou suffer torments for
me? Thou have once consummated thy course, thou have kept thy faith, and there
is a crown of justice laid up for thee, what would thou have more? Why
do thou afflict thy self? And why should est thou become weak for me? Alas
says he it is charitle that urges me. Have thou now seen the height and
eminencye of charity? He who through charity had fulfilled the law, being yet
covered with his mortal and corruptible flesh, deserved to be rapt up to the
third heaven, and to hear such words, as are not lawful for man to speak. Now
forthy shoes take unto thee humility; Numilitie the shoe.
for as the shoe is continually spurned and trodd upon: even so he that is
replenished with humility, studyeth to be trodden on by all men. Therefore thou
(o my brother) furnish thy self with this virtue of humility, for it is truly
a shoe, not corporal, but spiritual, and it shall preserve thee that thou
shall not strike they foot against the stone. For Christ is the stone, and
humility shall so preserve thee, that thou offendest not Christ. The Prophet
David abounded in humility, Psalm. 90.
when he said: I am a worm, and not a man. Do thou see this royal
humility of this King and Prophet? Psalm. 21.
He alwayse saw our Lord before him, because he was in his sight keeping him,
that he should not be moved that is, not fall in to sin. Humility most grare
full to God.
By this thou see (most dear brother) how highly allmighty God loves
humility, who is alwayse near at hand to him, that is endued with it, and all
wayse looks upon him. For it is written. Psalm. 112. Psalm. 10.
He who dwells on high, respects the humble, and again his eyes looks
upon the poor. But my dear brother when thou hear this word poor; do not
apprehend one that wants worldly fortune, For many Kings have highly pleased
God, Vvhois truly poor. Mat. 5.
and many beggars have perished. But poor here, is poor in spirit: according
to these words: Blessed are the poor in spirit because theirs is the Kingdom
of heaven: 1. Pet. 2.
So dearly beloved, humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, Matt. 18.
that he may exalt thee in the Kingdom of heaven, which our Savior has
promisedvnto the humble. For thy Targett or Buckler, arm thy self with the
sign of the Cross, The Cross che buckier.
signing therewith all thy body and thy heart, and not only with thy hand, but
even with thy very mind, all thy studies and end eauours, thy entrance into any
place, and thy going forth, thy sitting down also and thy rising up, thy bed,
and whatsoever thou do, sign it first in the name of the father and of the
son and of the holy Ghost: for this is a most strong armor or defense, and
none can ever hurt thee, if thou be signed with it. For if one that carries
the protection of an earthly King, noe man dares affront him, how much more
ought we not to fear, bearing the protection of our heavenly Emperor? Use
therefore (dear brother) these arms in all thy actions they are preualent
against the enemy; yea against the sword, which is bitter and malevolent
anger. For this two - edged sword killeh in a moment it strikes, Anger the svv
ord of the enemy.
as it is written a moment of wrath, is his ruin. Eccl. 1.
Therefore my dear brother never neglect to sign thy self, and thou shall
break the netts the devil lays to ensnare thee, as it is written, in the
way that I walked in they have laid a net for me. Psalm. 139.
Be therefore daily signed with the Cross, and noe evil will come near thee.

For thy bow lift up thy hands in prayer as it is written. Prayer the bow.
And thou have made my arms as a bow of steel. For verily the hands of him
who prays in Knowledge are as a bow of steel against his enemies, or as an
arrow directly and forciblie shot by the bowbender. For if in prayer you
suffer your mind to wander: you will be just as he that holds a bow in his
hand, but cannot direct his arrow against his adversary, shooting it at
Random and without ad vice. Yet sometimes it strikes some fear in thy
enemy, when he sees thee bend thy bow, though the arrowe come not so near
him, but a distance of: So I say my brethren, when one prays with devotion,
and suffers not his thoughts to be wandering abroad, but understands to whom he
prays, that this such prayer tends to God himself, then is the enemy most
vehemently contristated, as being peirced through the heart with a sharp dart.
For how much more the soul profits in grace, so much further of does he
fly, Psalm. 34.
as the dust before the face of the wind, for the Angel of God does persecute
him; fee in what thing he wounds him thus, 1. Cor. 14.
because he prays in devotion and know ledge, and he is more strengthened,
because he restrayneth his thoughts and suffers them not to wander abroad. And
thou O my brother power forth thy prayers in knowledge But if whilst thou
prayest thy mind be distracted, either by the wandering of thy eye, or the
catching of thy ear, or evagation of thy thoughts, or by any other cause, know
this to be his working: yet make not to much have to end thy prayer, but rebuke
thy self, and recollect thy spiritts, and then again pray in know ledge that
thou may know for whom thou prayest unto God, and for what thou prayest;
and use not many and superfluous words. For it is the work of the devil to
scatter our thoughts upon many impertinent things, and he does not willingly
suffer us to persist in the intention we first made. For he knows full well,
that if a man perseuereth, he that made him will hear him, not with standing
he has committed innumerable sins. wherefore he suggesteth many idle and
superfluous words and thoughts, that the mind being repulsed from her first
intention, may wander through various distractions and our first intention of
prayer be diuerted to some other thing. wherefore my brother, We mustaske of
God what is most necessary for us.
demand of god, what urges thee most and for those things thou have most need
of Remember those two blind men crying after him: Have mercy upon us (son of
David) what said our lord unto them? Mat. 9.20. Marc 10. Lu. 18.
but, what will you that I do unto you? And they according to the grief and
affection of their heart, requested that their eyes might be opened. Did they
ask any other thing, of which they stood in very great need? Did they say,
give us a garment to cover us, for we are very poor? Noe certes, but they
asked God, that, of which they stood most in need. Mat. 15 Mar. 7.
Behold the woman of Canaan crying and saying unto him: lord have mercy upon me
for my daughter is sore vexed with a devil, and said nothing else, but uttered
the grief and affection of her heart: in fine all that ever came to our Lord
and Savior, what did they but lay open before him the afflictions and grief
of their hearts? Did not also that woman, which was troubled with the bloody
flux, come unto him, and desired him to stopp it? who I pray you goeing to the
physician or chirurgian, Mat. 9. Mar. 5. Luc. 8. Esa. 6.
does not forth with open the very bottom of his disease or wound? Do thou
also my dear brother, offer unto him the grief of thy soul, behold him with
thy spiritual and intellectual eyes of faith, sitting upon a most high and
elevated throne, and troops of Angels and Archa^gells assisting round about
him, and casting thy self before the sight of his goodness, power forth thy
prayers before him, first confessing thy sins, then in humility and devotion,
urging thy necessities unto him, and the sorrows of thy heart, until he shall
in his goodness and clemency have mercy upon the, saying, o faithful soul,
be it unto thee as thou desire. But withalle take this council, my brother,
if he shall delay, and not forthwith grant thy petition, yet desist not to cry
unto him. Remember the Cananaean, and imitate her perseverance, for she
suffered short delay, and had not her petition so quickly granted, in so much
that the Disciples came unto our Lord and intreted in her behalf, and said,
Dismiss her for she cries after us. Let us by example learn to persist in
prayer, if we do not spee dily obtain what we ask. And our Savior says
which of you having a friend, and he shall come to him by night and say, Friend
lend me three loaves, because my friend is come unto me, and I have none to put
before him, and he answers from with in, and says, good friend, do not
trouble me, my doors are shutt, and my children are in bed with me, I cannot
rise to give them thee: and he still knocks on, I say unto you, that although
he does not rise and give him as his friend, yet for to avoid his importunity,
he will give him so many as he has need of. And I say unto you, ask and it
shall be given unto you, as likewise it is said in the psalm, Expecting I have
expected our Lord, Psalm. 39.
and he has attended unto me, and has heard my prayers. Wherefore my brother,
grow not in thy prayer slack and dull, but expect, request, knock hard, and
thou shall have, so much as thou have need of. Listen unto me dear brother,
and embrace my council. If thou ask any thing at Gods hands, do not
request it presently, and prefix him not a time when thou would have it, but
leave it wholly to him and to his divine will. As for example, thou art many
times vexed and perplexed with evil unclean thoughts, at which thou art much
afflicted, and thou prayest God that he would free thee from this conflict,
yet, my brother, it is many times expedient for thee to be thus tried. Look
upon that most excellent pillar of the Apostles, how for his profit and
advantage the sting of the flesh the very Angel of Satan, 1. Cor. 12.
was given him, which beat him and boxed him least he should grow proud. 1.
Cor. 12.
If then he which was of so excellent and great meritts, was thus exercised,
least he should grow proud; how much more need have we poor weak ones who
still think our selves some thing to be thus beaten and cuffed, that we grow
not insolent and proud in heart. Gal. 6.
And if again any other tribulation fall upon thee, do not in thy prayer
limitt a time when he shall precisely free thee from it; for it is many times
expedient that thou suffer this also. For it happens many times when thou
prayest, that thou do not so (...) know what is good for thy souls health;
as Israel suffered. For Israel did eat and was filled, Deuteronomy. 32.
and my beloved kicked back, he grew fatt, he waxed over lusty, he grew
proud and forsook God his maker. If thou again prayest to obtain any thing
do not desire it to be immediately granted thee, For it falls out many times
that thou being a man, think this thing expedient for thee, when indeed it
is not: But if forsaking thine own will, thou resign thy self to the will of
God, and according to that, go on, thou art secure. For he who knew all things
before they were and are, governs and disposes all according to his own
benignity and pleasure. For we know not whether that we ask at Gods hands be
expedient for us or not, saying that many, when they have obtained what they
have asked of God, afterward have been very sorry, and have oftentimes fallen
into great defects and evils, because they did not diligently search, whether
that which they desired was agreeable to the will of God; but thinking it so,
have been deluded by the devil, and under the shape and pretext of virtue and
justice have been seduced and cast into many dangers, and such petitions are
many times waited one by grief and repentance whilst every one follows
thedesire and concupiscence of his own heart. Harken unto the Apostle, saying,
For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: and again All things are
lawful for me, Romans 8. 1. Cor. 9.10. Ibid.
but all things are not expedient for me. All things are lawful for me, but
all things do not edify; he only knows, what is expedient for us, and what
does edify us. And this I do wish should beleft and referred to his will, not
that I prohibit thee to ask whatsoever thou desire from him, for I rather
pray thee and admonish thee, that thou should ask all things from him from
the least to the greatest; but that when thou do pray and lay thy heart open
before him, thou should say. But let not my own will, but thine be done;
if what I ask be expedient do as thou know: for so the scripture advises
us saying. Reveal unto our Lord thyway, and hope in him, and he will do it.
Behold our Lord Jesus Christ praying in our flesh, which he assumed, and
saying: Father if it be possible, let this chalice part from me, but not as I
will, but as thou will. Wherefore (dear brother) if thou do ask any thing
of God, A short prayer for the obteyning of things necessary.
persist, in thy petition, saying: Lord if it be thy will I shall obtain what
I demand of thee; do thou permit it to prosper, and be effected, but if it be
not thy will and pleasure permit it not O my God, to come to pass. I humbly
beseech thee not to deliver me to my own concupiscence, for thou know my
folly, but preserve me under the shadow of thy protection, as thou best
know, and govern me, and direct me, O my God, for thy own mercyes sake.
But if thou do pray against any tribulation or unclean thoughts say with
the Prophett. Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastise me in thy wrath:
Lord have mercy upon me for I am weak, but look, upon me O Lord, and see that
I am earth and dust and ashes, and can bear nothing. Deliver me not O Lord to
my sins, for then I shall be like unto those that descend into the lake: But
forgetting my wickedness give glory to thy own name, And do not remember I
beseech thee my sins, but thy own mercyes toward me, and hearken unto my
prayer: And if it be possible let this tribulation pass from me; but not as
I will O Lord, but as thou please, Only strengthen my soul and defend me,
that I may bear it patiently, and find grace before thee in this world and in
the next. And cast thy thoughts upon him and he will do what is fit for thee.
For know this that he being good and full of benignity, wills all things,
that are for our souls health, for he, the good shepherd laid down his
soul, for all us his sheep. To him beglory world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

