A CHRISTIANS PREPARATION TO THE WORTHY Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

Nunquam satis dicitur,
quod nunquam satis discitur.


LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes, for Tho. Thorp. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT High and Illustrious Lady, the Lady FRAVNCIS, Duchess of
Leonox, Countess of Richmond, etc.
Most excellent Lady.
THe special grace your Grace did me, when not long since, you were pleased
to Discourse of the Blessed Sacrament, has emboldened me (having ever
sithence studied how to show my self thankful) to inuit your Ladyship to
the reading of this my Discourse (A Christians preparation to the worthy
Receiving of the Lords Supper) which I most humbly present, in hope of good
acceptance, at least of pardon, as coming from

Your Graces most devoted daily Beadsman. Theoph. Landauensis.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader: when this small Tractate was first written by the Reverend
Author, it was intended only for the private use of a Noble Friend of his;
and not for public Cognizance. But the Copy thereof being communicated to
certain High and Honorable Personages, They were very earnest with Him, to
have it committed to the Press His Medestie holding it unworthy any Estimation
at all, was very loath to venture it to the common Destiny of Books, Censure.
Which when I (being one whom he vouchsafes to descend so low as to call
Friend) did understand, I made bold to entreat the perusing of it: and
afterward, having by incessant importunity, expugned His too much
bashfulnesse, I extorted from him, at the last, a Permission to publish it. For
howbeit I knew that diverse Learned and Godly Divines had written upon the same
Subject, and that eating too much Manna, has made the world sick of a
Surfeit; yet I was persuaded, that some of the Meaner sort of people might
reap some ghostly comfort and Instruction by This, as well as Others of
highest Rank had done before. And further, considering with my self his
Majesty's late gracious, wise, and godly Directions to the Clergy, touching
Catechizing; I thought that this small Treatise agreeing and consenting with
those Directions, and treating of one Branch of the Catechism, might prove
not altogether vn-vsefull to any. Much I will not say in Commendation of it:
but thus much I may; and thou also wilt (if neither Ignorance do blind, nor
Prejudice hood-winke the eye of thy Judgment) boldly and truly affirm; That
it sauoreth not either of the Superstition of the One, or Bastard and
phantasticke Novelty of the Other Abberration in Religion: but speaks the
same Old and Orthodox Doctrine (though not in the same Syllables) that is
comprised in the Articles, the Homilies and Catechism of the Church of
England. And those are our Rule to direct all our Instructions by, in this
kind. Thus wishing thee as much ghostly Benefit by it, as the Author did to
that Religious and Noble Personage, whose Pious desire did first set him on
work to Compose it, I rest

Thine, and the Authors Friend in Christ Jesus. (...).

(...) not Life to All. For to some it is Death and Destruction. For, He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks ^r. 11. 29.
his own damnation.

It Is very strange, that so Contrary effects, (as Life and Death) should spring
out of one and the self same Cause. Does a Fountain send out at James 3. 11.
one place bitter water and sweet, says St. James? That may not be granted.
And yet the same Sacrament of Christ his blessed Body and Blood, Mors est
malis, vita Bonis, as Aquinas In Hymno.
speaks; It is Death to the wicked and unworthy, and Life to the godly and
worthy Receiver. But, Certainly, these two Contrary effects do not Naturally
proceed from the Sacrament it self: but the One, (viz. Death) is caused by It,
no otherwise then accidentally, and improperly. For the Sacrament it self was
ordained by Christ, to be an Instrument of spiritual Life; and no cause of
Death or Damnation at all. But we have a common saying in the Schools, That
Omnis causa agit secundum dispositionem Subiecti; Every cause does work
according as the Subject, (which it is to work upon) is fitted and disposed.
Therefore Experience shows, that one and the same Heat of the same Sun,
does Harden the Clay, and melt, or mollify the Wax. The same meat, does
nourish and strengthen an heathfull and sound body; which, if it be eaten by
persons of sick and corrupted stomachs, does but increase their Disease, and
degenerate into the malignant humor of the sickness it self. So, howsoever
the Sacrament of the Lords body does augment grace in the prepared heart of a
poenitent Receiver: yet the impenitent and obstinate sinner, by partaking of
that holy mystery, becomes more sick in Soul, and more crazed in Conscience,
then before. That happens to him in Soul, which is reported to have befalne
Sabellicus lib. 8.
Henry the Emperor in his body; Cui in hostia consecrata venenum attulit
interitum, Who was poisoned by receiving the consecrated Host. The Arc of the
Covenant received into the house of Obed Edom (for the space of three months)
brought great benefits, and much happiness with it. For the Lord blesse^ Obed.
Edom, and all his household. 2 Samuel 6. 10.
Yet for all that, the Philistims had the same Arc amongst them, for a much
longer time; and they were so far from reaping any benefit or benediction by
it, that the Lord powered his curses and plagues upon them, for deteining it.
The reason of which different effects, was the Difference and Dissimilitude of
the Lodging or Room into which the Arc was received. Obed-Edom entertained it
with all humble reverence, and pious devotion of a sanctified heart: The
Philistims received it so indeuoutly and irreverently, that they forbear not to
place it by their Idol Dagon. So this 1 Samuel 5. 2.
heavenly Sacrament becomes Death to the bad, and Life to the good: by reason
of the diverse Disposition, and different preparation of those persons which are
partakers of it. Some *like Obed-Edom) prepare their Souls before hand, to
receive it with Faith, Penitence, Humility, and Reverence: Others (like the
Philistims) make no such reckoning of it, but receive it hand over head, into
an impenitent, an unsanctified, and an unprepared heart; an heart wedded to
wickedness, and do place it among their dear and darling sins; which they
dote upon, and adore no less, then if they were their Idols. That therefore we
may know How to receive this food of our souls in such manner, as it may bring
Life, and Grace, and Salvation to us, the Apostle sets us down the way, in
his first Epistle to the Corinths, the 11. Chapter, at the 28. verse. Let a man
therefore examine himself, etc.

Which words of the blessed Apostle contain a Double charge: First, that we
try before we eat; and secondly, that we eat after trial.

Before we do Communicate, the Apostle requires Trial of our selves: and
then, after Trial and Examination, he commands us to communicate. And so he
encounters with two sorts of men; whereof the One eats of this Bread, and Tries
not* and those offend against the first part. The Other try themselves; but
do not eat of this Bread: and these fail against the second. The first
enioyneth a Preparation, the second a Participation.

In the first, we may consider two things:

1. Persons Examining, 1. Every man. Examined: himself.
2. Parts. Manner of examination.
Matter

1. The person that is to Examine, is (...), which Erasmus and Beza render
Quisque, Boet. Leitur.
every Man. This duty then is laid upon every one, be he subject, or
sovereign Priest, or of the people. Which observation ouer-turneth the
Implicit Faith of the Romish Church. For every Layman and woman ought to
turn Confessor, and Examiner, and to be endued with sufficient knowledge for
this heavenly Business. He must look not only through the Spectacles of the
Priest, but also see with his own Eyes, and be able to Try himself.

2. The person that Every man is bound to try and examine, is Himself: that
is, his own person, not the persons of other men: for a man to set up his
Consistory in the Conscences of others, is Pharisaical pride and presumption.
We must not be busy Bishops in other men's Diocesses, but 1 Pet. 4. 15. 1
These. 4. 11.
meddle with our own business. We must not break our neighbors head with the
Pharisee; (God I thank thee, I am not like other men, etc. nor like this
Publican) but smite our own breasts, with the Publican; and say, O God be
merciful to me a sinner. Saint Augustine complained of men in his time, that
they were Curiosi ad cognoscendum vita^ alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam:
and Reverend Hooker says of men in our Time, That their Virtue is nothing
else, but gladly to hear the reproof of others vices. And herein they are not
unfitly resembled to Tailors and Barbers; whereof the one does Measure, and the
other does Trim all others, except themselves. But our Savior Christ would not
have us to trouble our selves about the Mote in our Brothers Eye, but rather to
Math. 7.
pull out the beam that is in our own eye. And Saint Paul, in this place,
charge us not to pry into the lives of others, but to try and examine our
own selves.

Leaving therefore the persons Examining and Examined; we come to the Parts of
Examination; and they are Two: One, concerning the Manner; and the other
concerning the Matter of our Examination.

The Manner of our Examination consists in these two: Namely, that it be
made, first Uprightly; secondly, Necessarily.

First, it is required, that in examining our consciences, we deal uprightly,
faithfully, and sincerely with God. For so much is employed in the word ((...))
Examine: which commands a diligent and narrow search, and an earnest and exact
enquiry; such as Lapidaries and Goldsmiths use, to find out True Metal from
Counterfeit. The fraudulencie of man's heart is unsearchable by any on earth,
save by the Spirit and Conscience of a man's own self. We our selves ^or. 2.
11.
therefore are to call our selves to examination before our own Consciences,
which will either accuse us, or excuse us, Rom 2. 15.
in the things that we have done. If our Heart, or Conscience do condemn us,
God is greater then our heart, and knows all things; but if our heart
condemn us not, then 1 John 3. 21. 22.
have we boldness toward God. We are therefore to examine our selves with a
sincere Conscience, not seeking to dissemble or excuse any manner of sin, be
it never so dear unto us; Least, in so doing, we do rather provoke the Lord
to anger, then appease his wrath. One says, that Conscientia est scientia cum
scientia; Scientia nostra cum Scientia Dei congruens: a Knowledge in us
agreeing with another Knowledge which is in God. In which regard, some have
compared the Conscience to a Tally. Bakers and Brewers (and such Tradesmen as
use to deliver their commodities to their Customers upon Tale) are wont to
cleave a stick in Two, and to give to their Customers the one side of it,
keeping the other to themselves; and ever, as they deliver out their wares,
they make a certain number of Marks and Nickes upon both parts of their
Tallies, to keep even reckonings: So that if either go about to deceive
other, they need but to draw out Their side of the Tally, and That will soon
discover the Truth. Every action which we do, be it good or badd, is marked and
nickt upon the Tally of our Conscience, and Gods Science: if we have labored
to deface or scrape out any thing that has been marked on our side of the
Tally; God needs but to draw out that which is marked on his side, and That
will soon convince us of falsehood. For God is greater then our heart: And
therefore it stands us in hand to deal Truly, and uprightly with him.

Secondly, examination must be made, not only Uprightly, but also Necessarily:
and This we may gather out of the word (Therefore.) Whosoever shall eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord. Therefore let a man examine, etc.

Trial of our selves then is necessary, both in respect of the duty enjoined,
and of the Danger if we neglect that duty.

In respect of our duty: For Christ in his first Institution, used a
commanding. Term: Do This. Do this in remembrance of Me. So that it is
Luke 22. 19.
not in our choice to Do it, or not to do it. If any be not fit, he must
endeavor to make him self fit: and the way to make him fit, is Examination.
Let a man therefore examine himself, etc.

Secondly, Trial is necessary in regard of the Danger, if we receive the Lords
Body unworthily.

1. The danger is in respect of the sin: verse 27. He is guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord.

2. The punishment for sin.

Which punishment is twofold: General: verse 29. He eats and drinks his
own damnation.

Particular, verse 30. For this cause many are weak, and sick, and die.

From the Manner of our examination, Id. Ibid.
we proceed to the Matters, concerning which every Communicant must be Tried,
and they are summarily Two, viz. Repentance, and Faith. These two are like
Hippocrates his Twins: they go together hand in hand: For there is no True
repentance without a lively faith; nor a lively faith without true Repentance.

We attain to Repentance, by the sight and knowledge of our Sins. Our
sins are discovered, and made known unto us by the Law of God. Every sin
is as a spot or stain upon the Soul; and the Law of God is a Looking-glass
of the Soul, which shows every spot and wrinckle. It is behoouefull Iam. 1.
21.
then for every one to set this Glass before him, Sacra Scriptura, quasi
speculum quoddam, mentis oc^lis obiicitur: ibi pulchra nostra in Christo
prospicimus, ibi foeda nostra in nobis cernimus. Bernard in moralib.
and according to it, to examine the beauty or deformity of his Soul. The
sum of this Law of God is comprised in the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments.
Which Commandments are divided into Two Tables. The First, containing the
duties which we owe unto God: The Second, the duties which we owe unto our
neighbor. The First, commands all manner of Holiness, that we owe to God:
the second commands Righteousness to our Neighbor.

The Commandments contained in the first Table are four. The first whereof is
this.

1. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

The Duties commanded in these words, are principally seven.

1. The acknowledging of the true God, as he has revealed himself in his
Word.

2. To fear him more the^ all.

3. To love him above all creatures in heaven and earth.

4. To put all our Confidence and trust in him.

5. To humble our selves before him.

6. To be patient, and content with what he is pleased to send, or lay upon us.

7. To Hope in him only.

Sins forbidden in this commandment are:

1. Ignorance of the true God, false opinions touching the Essence, Col. 3. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 5. Philip. 3. 8.
and will of God, Superstition, Idolatry, Trusting in Creatures.

2. Carnal security, and contempt of God.

3. Hating of God, or a counterfeit love of him: all inordinate love of ones
self, or of other creatures.

4. Hypocritical trust in God; staggering, and diffidence in the goodness and
power of God: Confidence in the help of man.

5. Pride, Arrogance, Counterfeit humility.

6. Impatience, or murmuring against God.

7. Desperation, and Presumption.

2. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, to bewe down to it, to
worship it.

The Duty commanded, is,

To give unto God all outward religious worship of the Body, as in the first
Commandment, we are enjoined to Honor him in our heart above all.

The maine sins forbidden are.

1. To adore with the Body, (in a religious manner) any Image Rom 1. 23. Exodus
3^. 1. Sam. ^. ^.
made with man's hands, whether it be of Saint or Angel, or any creature.

2. To devise any bodily worship of God, which he has Coloss. ^. 18
not revealed, and commanded, either plainly, or by deduction and implicitly.

3. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

The Duties commanded are:

1. Due honor and reverence to the Name of God. Psalm. 50. 15. Joel 2. 12. John
16. 23. Heb. 1. 6. Psalm. 147. 7. Mat. 10. 13.
2. Innocation and Prayer. 3. Thanksgiving. 4. Confession, and publication of
Gods praises. 5. The glorifying of his name Psalm. 34. 4.
6. Swearing lawfully by the Deuteronomy 6. 13. and 10. 20.
name of God.
The Sins forbidden are:

1 Want of Reverence to the Name of God; neglect of Prayer, Innocation,
Thanksgiving, Confession, Praise, and Glorifying of God.

2 All Railing, Banning, Cursing, Blasphemies, Maledictions, Imprecations,
wherein the name of God is used and profaned.

3 All for swearing, false swearing, Leuit. 19. 12. Math. ^. 34. Psalm. 15. 3.
Iam. 5. 12
light and common swearing: all foolish calling of God to witness, all rash
vows.

4 All Enchantments, Witchcrafts, Leuit. 29. 6. Deuteronomy. 1^ 1^.
Sooth sayings, Diuinations, Exorcisings, and other Magical Superstitions,
which are 1 Samuel 2^. 7.
made by Wizards out of the Scripture for the most part.

5 All wiles, deceits, cousenages Iere 14. 15. Ephesians. ^. ^.
and lies, broached under pretense of the Name and Word of God.

4. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall keep holy the Sabbath day.

Duties commanded are.

1 A religious worshipping Psalm. 92. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
of God in public, in the great Congregation, which is nothing else but our
doing of Service to God in Common Prayer and Heb. 10. 25.
Thanksgiving in the Church.

2 An attentive hearing and Acts 13. 4^. 1 Cor. 14. 26.
meditating of Gods works, and his word preached.

3 A frequent use of the blessed 1 Cor. 11. 20. Acts 20. 7.
Sacraments.

4 Deeds of piety to the maintenance 1 Cor. 16. 1. Galat. 6. 6.
of the Ministers of Christ, and Almesdeeds to the Poor.

5 Charitable offices to our Neighbors, in comforting the afflicted, visiting
the sick, etc.

6 A squaring of our own Titus 2. 10. Romans 2. 24.
lives and manners according to right Christianity.

Sins forbidden are.

1 Absenting our selves wilfully from the Church, upon Sundays and other
Holidays: or (being present) not to regard the Service that we ought to
tender there to God in public; but to come only to hear a Sermon, which is
but an Inferior end of coming to Church upon Holy days, wherein God does
rather serve us, then we Psalm 92. Heb. 10. ^5.
serve God.

2 Contemning of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, or any kind of Abuse
of the same.

3 Neglecting to hear or read the Scriptures, intermission of Prayers, deeds
of piety, Mercy, and Charity.

4 Intermedling with common, profane, and ordinary affairs on those days.

5 Bibbings, feastings, Reuellings, Dancings, and Sportings, to the hinderance
of our devotions, and service of God.

So much for the first Table. The second Table respects our Neighbor: and it
contains six Commandments; whereof the first, commands us to do our
Neighbor all the good we can: the other charge us to do him no manner of
hurt.
5. COMMANDMENT.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

This Commandment teaches the duties of Superiors to their Inferiors: and of
all Inferiors to their Superiors.

The Duties of Superiors to their Inferiors are.

First, to embrace them with a Fatherly affection.

Secondly, as much, as in us lies, to provide for their maintenance and
education.

Thirdly, to defend them from wrong and violence.

Fourthly, to instruct them Ephe. 6. 4.
in the fear and nurture of the Lord.

Fifthly, to give good example unto them by our own religious and honest
carriage.

Sixthly, to chastise and correct them for their offenses.

The Duties of Inferiors to Superiors are:

First, to show all siliall love unto them.

Secondly, to honor them inwardly, in Heart, by a reverent estimation of them;
and outwardly, in word and gesture, by bowing to them, and speaking submissely
and humbly to them.

Thirdly, to yield all willing obedience to their commands, so long as they are
not cross to Gods Commandments.

Fourthly, to imitate their virtuous life and religious conversation.

Fifthly, in word and deed to express our Thankfulness unto them.

Sixthly to wink at their imperfections and to bear with their infirmities.

The Sins forbidden both parties are:

First, want of natural affection, and all impiety toward any, to whom we
owe love and reverence.

Secondly, Every Neglect of duty, or an hypocritical fayning of the same.

Thirdly, Too much Indulgence, or ouer-fondnesse.

Fourthly, Contempt, Scorn, Stubburnnes.

Fifthly, Ingratitude.

Sixthly, Too much rigor, severity, roughness, or harshnesse, of behavior.

Seventhly, Lightness, Immodestie, Boasting.

6 COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not kill.

The Sins here forbidden are:

First, all manner of hurt or Exodus 21. 24. Number. 25. 7.
violence done to the person of our neighbor. Secondly, Anger, Hatred, Mat. 5.
2^. 1 Ios. 3. 15. Gal. ^, 2^. Rom 1. 29. Phil. 2. 14. 16. 13. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 24.
Mat. 5. 22. Romans 1. 30. Gal. 5. 15. Rom 1^. 14.
Euill-will, Ranckor, desire of Revenge. Thirdly, Waywardness, Inhumanity,
Wrathful looks. Fourthly, Raising, Ill words Insulting, Prouocations to
anger. Fifthly, Treachery, Cruelty.
The Duties commanded are:

First, Humanity, and an unfeigned love of our Neighbor.

Secondly, Benevolence, or well-wishing to his person from a compassionate
heart.

Thirdly, Meekness, and long suffering, patiently bearing and willingly
forgiving injuries.

Fourthly, Affability, Gentleness, and all kind of Courteous behavior.

7 COMMANDEMEMT.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.

The Sins forbidden are:

First, all Lustings and Longings Mat. 5. 28.
in the heart after the carnal company of our Neighbor.

Secondly, Immodesty, the 1 Pet. 2. 14. Prou. 7. 13. Esaias 3.
wanton Eye, the Whorish forehead, Mincing gate, Garish attire.

3 Loue-songs, filthy and bawdy Col. 3. 8. Ephe. 4. 29
talking.

4 All manner of uncleanness, Romans 1. 32.
whether it be with a single person, or with a married person, and how else
soever.

The Duties commanded, are:

1 Chastity of Body and mind, Ores, easta, legas, ieiunes, otia vites: Si
seruare voles corpora casta Deo.
whether it be in the state of Virginity, Marriage, or Widdowhood.

2 Modesty, adorning our thoughts, words, deeds, gesture, countenance, attire,
gate, conversation.

3 Moderation, and Temperance in meat, drink, sleep, etc.

8. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not Steal.

Sins forbidden are.

1 The inward greediness of the heart, longing after wealth, howsoever to be
gotten; Avarice, coveting other men's riches.

2 All Fraud, guile, deceit, Leuit. 19. 11. Amos 8. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 25. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 6.
tricks, quirkes, all impostures in bargains, and contracts, and selling of
counterfeit wares.

3 Usury, and Extortion, or Mich. 3. Ex. 22. Pro. 22. Ezech. 18.
Oppression.

4 Theft, Robbery, Sacrilege, Couzning of the Country or Thom. 2. 2. q. 66.
Job 24. 9.
Commonweal, etc.

5 Idleness. Ezech. 16.


6 Nigardise and Profusion.

The Duties commanded are:

1 Iustitia commutatiua, Just Prou. 5. 16. Romans 12. 13.
and upright dealing, in getting, in buying, and selling.

2 Care to save our Neighbor from Damage: Diligence in doing the works of
our Calling.

3 Liberality. Hebr. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 17.


4 Frugalitie.

9. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not bear false witness.

Sins forbidden are. Exodus 233. Psalm. 101. Job 29. Leuit. 19. 15.


1 All manner of Lying, and false testimonies. 2 Prattling, habling,
scurrilitie, 1 Cor. 6. 1^. 1 Cor. 5. 11.
slaundering, defaming, and backbiting. 3 Sinister suspicion, rash and Mat. 15.
19. 1 Cor. 13. 4.
wrongful judging of our neighbor.
Duties commanded are.

1 Sincere and plain meaning and speaking. Psalm. 15. ^.


2 Taciturnitie, grave speech, and a Moderate use of the 1 Pet. 3. ^^. Ios. ^.
14.
tongue.

3 Bearing of a Good Opinion of our Neighbor, and judging all things to the
best.

10. COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not covet.

The former Commandments do forbid the Thoughts and desires of the heart, as
well as the outward Act and Practice. For God is a Spirit, and therefore must
be worshipped in the Spirit. But the former Commandments did condemn settled
thought to do mischief: But this condemns even the very first inclination
and motion to sin, though a man do ne-neuer consent, but snubb it in the
Romans 7. 7.
beginning.

The neglect of doing what we are commanded, is a Sin of Omission.

The doing of that which we are forbidden, is a Sin of Commission.

If therefore we shall examine the face of our Souls, by this Looking-glass
of Gods law, we shall find it strangely deformed with spots and staynes: nay,
much defaced with byles, ulcers, and wounds; which cannot choose but work in
our hearts a great grief and sorrow: especially, if we consider first the
party against whom every sin (which the Law charge us withal) is either
immediately or mediatly committed: And secondly, if we shall duly consider what
punishment we make our selves liable unto by every sin, whether it be of
Commission, or omission.

First, the party dishonored and offended by our sins is the most mighty
God, who made our bodies and souls, to the end, that we with them, might (not
dishonor him by breaking his law) but do him all service and honor. In him
we must consider these three things specially: first, his Wisdom and
Knowledge: secondly, his Justice: thirdly, his Power.

1 His Wisdom is such, that no thing, no action, or cogitation that passes
from us, is hidden from it: Thou spiest out all my ways, says Job. And David
says, Thou know all my Psalm. 139. 2.
thoughts long before they do arise.

2 His Justice is so strickt and severe, that (without full satisfaction) it
will not suffer one Sin to escape unpunished. The wicked Angels sinned but once;
and yet for that one sin, he has reserved them in everlasting chains under
darkness, to Jude ver. 6.
the judgment of the great day.

3 His Power is infinite. The King, by his power, may for Treason, or other
crimes cause a man's body to be tortured, tormented, and destroyed: but God can
cast body and soul into hell fire: and all the Kings on earth, and Angels in
heaven are not able to fetch them back again. In the very act of thy sin,
he is of power to destroy both thy body and soul in a moment, and to snatch
thee away, so that there shall be none to deliver thee. Psalm 50. last.


Then in the second place, do but consider what punishment we are to expect
for every sin; that is, eternal death and destruction of body and soul in
hell fire. The wages of Sin is Romans 6. last.
death: a thousand sins, a thousand deaths. And surely (me thinks) we
cannot choose but have sorrow. Sorrow of Attrition at the least, if not sorrow
of Contrition. Sorrow of attrition is when we grieve for fear of punishment.
Sorrow of Contrition, is when we grieve for sin, as it is sin, that is, as it
is a dishonoring of God: the latter is the better sorrow of the two. And yet
the sorrow of Attrition is not to be discommended, or refused; because it is a
means to bring us to the true godly sorrow, or sorrow of Contrition. Whereby
we do sorrow for nothing so much, as for that by our sins we have lost the
favor of God, and comfort of his Spirit.

And this godly sorrow, will work in us repentance, not to be 2 Cor. 7. 10.
repented of.

Some men, in this case of repentance, are much mistaken: For generally, the
world imagines, that Repentance is no thing else but a godly sorrow for sin,
and a turning or converting from Sin to God. But S. Paul had studied the case
thoroughly, and He teaches us otherwise. viz. That Repentance is a great deal
different from godly sorrow: for godly sorrow (says he) causes Repentance so
that Repentance is an effect or fruit of godly sorrow; and godly sorrow is the
cause of repentance: so that Sorrow and Repentance are not the same. For Nihil
est causa suiipsius. Nothing is cause of it self.

Secondly, some take it to be no more but Conversion; that is, a leaving off to
sin, and a turning to God. But Conversion is an Antecedent of Repentance, and
Repentance is a consequent of Conversion, as the Prophet Jeremy teaches.
Surely, after that I converted, Ierem. 31. 19.
then I repented. So that Conversion goes before Repentance, and Repentance
follows after Conversion.

Saint Paul tells us, that Repentance is another manner of matter; and consists
of seven parts: An Inuentory whereof he delivers unto us: For, behold this
godly sorrow, what great 2 Cor 7. 11.
carfulness it has wrought in you? yea, what Apology, or defense? yea, what
indignation? yea, what fear? yea, what earnest desire? yea, what emulation?
yea, what revenge, or punishment?

These are the seven parts of the body of true Repentance; and acording to
these seven, we are to examine our Consciences. For true repentance requires
the whole man; that is, the understanding part, the Affections, and the Body.

1 The understanding part must show it self in Carfulness, and Apology. 2
The Affections are to be exercised in Indignation, Fear, Desire, and
Emulation. 3. The Body, in Revenge, or Punishment.

First then, to make our Repentance sound, it is required that we be careful
to avoid sins to come, and to do with diligence, the works that God commands
us.

This is the first part of the Body of Repentance, and it pertaines to the
Superior part of the Soul, the Understanding, and is a part of Providence.

2 The second Act of Repentance which belongs to the understanding part, is
Apology, or Defense. Where the Apostles meaning is not, that any man should
make an Apology, for his sins (for he that hides or excuses his sins shall
not prosper, says Solomon,) but that every good Christian should be able to
make a just Apology for the Truth and Sincerity of his godly sorrow for his
sins.

2 The upper part of the Soul (1. the understanding) is charged with those two
actions. But the lower part of the Soul (in matter of repentance) is charged
with four Affections, viz. 1. Indignation; 2. Fear; 3 Desire; 4. Emulation.

1 Indignation, has respect to Sins past. 2. Fear, is in regard of Sins to
come. 3. Desire, has an Eye to good things. 4. Emulation, has a reference to
good Persons.

3 Indignation has the first place; because it is an Affection of Anger, most
properly belonging to Repentance. Carfulness is a part of Providence. But
Repentance, propperly, is a part of Justice vindicatiue, and to vindicatiue
Justice, no affection so agreeable, as Anger and Indignation.

We are then to conceive Anger against our selves for our sins; and every
Anger will not serve the turn: but it must be an high kind of Anger,
Indignation. Now indignation presupposes an indignity done. By our sins we
offer indignity to God, and to our own Souls; and therefore we are to
conceive great indignation against our selves for committing such indignities
against so good and so great a Majesty.

4 The fourth part of our Repentance must be an holy Fear (in regard of the
Time to come) to fall into any sin.

5 The fifth is an earnest Desire to please God in all things, and to do every
good duty which he commands in his Law.

6 The sixth is an holy emulation of Gods persons: in striving to match them in
graces and virtues; and if it be possible, to ouer-match them.

7 The seventh thing required, is Revenge or Punishment: which is the very
perfection and complement of Repentance: without which Revenge, non agitur sed
fingitur poenitentia, our repentance is no repentance, but hypocrisy.

The only way to escape the Judgment of God in another world, is to sit in
judgment against our selves in this world, to give sentence against our selves
for our offenses: so Saint Paul teaches. If we 1 Cor. 11. 31.
would judge our selves we should not be judged of the Lord. But after judging
of our selves, and giving sentence against our selves, we must straight
proceed to execution, and punishing of our selves for our sins: for so we shall
escape Eternal punishment in another world. For Non erit gemina afflictio as
the Prophet Nahum speaks, God will not punish twice for the same offense. So
that to We must join Revenge of our selves, with Judging of our selves. 1
Cor. 11. 31.
Indicare we must necessarily join Vindicare, and so take vengeance of our
selves for our 2 Cor. 7. 11.
sins here, that we may escape the eternal vengeance of God in Hellfire.

Now the Fathers, grounding themselves upon the Scriptures, have distinguished
sins into these three kinds, viz. Spiritual, Carnal, and worldly. Sins of the
Soul, Sins of the Flesh, Sins of the World. And there is in Scripture a
several punishment set down, for every several kind of these Sins.

1 The Soul has two parts, Superior, and Inferior.

Superior Sins perteining to this, are Pride, contempt of God, etc.

2 Sins of the Inferior Irascible part, are wrath, desire of revenge for
wrongs done.

2 Lusting after vanities.

The Soul, is a fliting thing, never at rest; but ever rouing abroad through a
thousand desires: the way to punish it, is to call it home, and to force it to
settle upon some unpleasing object: as to call to remembrance Esaias 38.
the years of our life fore past in Amaritudine animae: to tie it, to think
upon Death, and Judgment, and Hell, which will soon pull down the pride of
it. The Irascible part, we must punish, by studying to be quiet and patient, to
put up wrongs, and be ready to forgive. The Lusting part is to be punished, by
setting our affections and Desires on good things, or things that are above.

2 Sins of the flesh, are, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Gluttony, ease,
sleep, etc. For these, Saint Paul says, Castigo corpus, I beat down my
body, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
and bring it in subjection. The Body desires to fare well in meats and
drinks: This we must punish by fasting, either From all sustenance, as David.
2. Sam. 12. 17. Exodus 10. 6.
a toto; or if that we cannot do, yet From such a quantity, and but only
gustare. Acts 10. 13.
a tanto: If that our health will not permit that, yet to fast, From such kind
of meats, as Dan. 10. 3.
a tali, from dainties, and incentiues to sin. The Body desires Ease, to lie
soft and richly, in beds of Down, and Iuory. This we must punish 1 Samuel 12.
with David, by lying hard, as upon the bare ground, etc. The Body desires
Sleep in excess: This must be punished with watching: or if we be not able
to watch all night, yet as Christ says to Peter, We Mat. 26. 40.
must force our selves to watch one hour with Christ: and that hour is to be
spent in holy Meditations, in Prayer, and Devotion to God. 2. The Flesh
desires to enjoy a beautiful person: This must be punished by making a
Covenant with our eyes, not to think upon Job 37. 1.
a woman.

3 Worldly Sins, are Covetousness, Ambition, Thirst after the outward
commodities of the World. And these must be punished by the Purse: First, by
making restitution of whatsoever we have gotten contrary to the law of God.
Secondly, by being bountiful in deeds of Piety, to the Priests of God, and the
Ministers of the Gospel. Thirdly, in being liberal in deeds of mercy to the
poor members of Christ.

Now because every one is not of Judgment to know the right Quantum of all
these ingredients to repentance; how much he must take of each: therefore he
is to resort to some understanding Priest; who is to prescribe how much, or how
little will serve the turn; for so the people did in the Old Testament, and
Saint Paul takes upon him to do it in the New: for he prescribes a Sufficit
to the incestuous Corinthian. 2 Cor. 2. 6.


But here we are to take heed of a Common error, which possesses the most men
of these times: For many are persuaded, that Repentance may be performed in a
moment of time. But they are grossly deceived: for all these seven forenamed
duties cannot be done in a moment, but require some good space of time.
Therefore God says, Dedi illi tempus ad poenitendum, I gave her a space and
time to repent in. And as Apoc. 2. 21.
there must be a space to exercise the grace of Repentance in; so there must
be a certain place assigned to it: for every place is not fit for this
exercise. And therefore the Prophet Zachary would have us to separate Zachar^.
our selves from company, when we go about to set our selves in the state of
Repentance. And Saint Peter did put it in practice in his own person; for he
went out from company first, and then wept bitterly. Math. 26. ^^.
And he delivers the same in doctrine. The Lord would have no man to perish,
but 2. Peter 3. ^.
would have men ((...)) to separate themselves to repentance.

I have stayed the longer upon this point; because as there is no salvation
without Repentance; so there can be no profitable access to the Lords Table
without it. But the Law is not only a Looking-glass, but also our
Schoolmaster to bring Galat. 3. 24.
us to Christ, to the Gospel.

Therefore I proceed now to the Second matter, concerning which we are to make
our Examination, and that is Faith, and it consists of two things; Knowledge,
and Application.

Touching Knowledge; every Knowledge.
Communicant is bound to know three general points of Christian Religion.

These, (as also the Sum of all, which Christians are bound to believe) are
contained in the Creed; which consists of three general parts. The first
part whereof concerns God the Father; the second, God the Son; the third,
God the Holy Ghost.

The Maine part of the Creed Of Christ.
is that which concerns Jesus Christ. Wherein I am taught to believe with my
heart, That Jesus Christ is very God, begotten of the Father from all
eternity, before all worlds; and the same Christ is True Man, borne of Mary
the Virgin: This God-man, and Man God, is my Lord, who (when I was utterly
perished and damned) redeemed me from Death, and from the power of Satan; not
with Gold or Silver; but with his own holy and precious Blood, and by his
undeserved Death and Passion: that I might be His own, and might live in his
Kingdom, and serve Him without servile fear, in perpetual holiness, and
righteousness of life; even as he rose from the dead, and now lives and
reigns for ever. I believe that there is no Salvation but by him only; no
fruition of God, but through him. He purchased Salvation and Redemption, not
for me only, but for the 1 John 2. 2.
whole world.

But the Benefit of Redemption Of the Sacrament.
is an universal benefit, and belongs to all Mankind; yet all mankind are
not partakers of it. None do (ordinarily) partake of it, but such as have it
passed unto them under Seal. The Seals which God uses to apply unto me in
particular, that which Christ wrought for all the world in general, are the
Two Sacraments: Baptism, and the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. And
here comes in the necessity of Faith, concerning the Sacraments: for they are
both of them, Sacramenta Fi^^i, Sacraments of Faith: so called by the Fathers;
because the Mysteries in them contained, are not to be judged by our Senses,
nor discussed by Reason, but to be apprehended and received by Faith only.

In Both the Sacraments, there be two things to be considered: there is an
earthly Thing which we see and feel with our outward Senses; and there is an
heavenly and spiritual thing or grace, which we cannot see, but by Faith.
Both these parts are inseparably united, and cannot be separated one from
another. He that is rightly fitted for the receiving of the Sacrament, does
receive both these parts together, namely, the earthly with the heavenly, and
the heavenly with the earthly, which are so inseparably conjoined by God (in a
Sacramental union) that he that goes about to separate them, must needs run
himself upon a curse.

But as we are not to divide and disioyne one part from an other, so we must
take heed, that we do not confound them one with another, but keep them
distinct. As for example. We know that in the Person of our Savior Christ
there are two several Natures, viz. the Godhead, and the Manhood. The Nature
of Man, is not the Nature of God; nor is the Nature of God, the Nature of Man.
The one is not turned into the other; neither are they blended and mingled one
Nature with the other; but both remain distinct in the same person: yet are
they so indissolubly united by personal union) that Death was not able to
sunder or separate them. For howsoever (at the death of Christ) his Soul was
separated from his Body, and his Body sundered from his Soul; yet even when
he lay in the grave, both the parts of his Humane Nature, Body and Soul, were
as nearly united to his Godhead, as they were at his Birth, or are now in
heaven.

So (to restrain my speech to the Communion) There are two distinct and
several things in the Sacrament, an Earthly; as Bread and Wine: and an
Heavenly; sc. the Body and Blood of Christ. The Body of Christ is not turned
into the Bread, neither is Bread turned into the body of Christ. Nor is the one
blended or mingled with the other; but both remain distinct in the same
Sacrament: yet (though they be in themselves distinct) they are so inseperably
conjoined together (by Sacramental and mystical union) that he that does
receive the one rightly, does also necessarily receive the other.

And as by virtue of the Personal union of the two natures in Christ, it
comes to pass that there is a Communication of properties; by reason whereof
that which properly belongs to one Nature, is attributed to the other; as God
is said to be Borne, and to dye: and the Son of Man is said to be in Heaven,
when he was on Earth. God is John 3. 13.
(by reason hereof) said to be Man; and Man to be God, and that really, and
truly.

So, by virtue of the Sacramental union, that is betwixt the hallowed Bread,
and the Body of Christ in the Sacrament: the Bread is truly called the Body of
Christ, and the Body of Christ the Bread.

The Fruit of this Sacrament, is the participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ. There is no one sentence, of holy Scripture which says that we
cannot, by this Sacrament, be made partakers of Christ his Body and Blood,
except they be first materially contained in the consecrated Elements of Bread
and Wine; or the Bread and Wine be substantially changed, the one into the
Body, the other into the Blood of Christ. This is my body, This is my Blood;
are words of Promise: we do believe that God is faithful and true of his
word, and does perform what he does promise; Albeit we do not understand the
manner how: nor dare prescribe unto him the manner, which way he shall make it
his Body to us, either by Transubstantiating or Consubstantiating it, or else
we will not believe him.

Still remember, that it is a Sacrament of Faith, and Faith has relation to a
word of promise. The word of promise is: this is my Body. This word I believe
to be true, because God spoke it, who cannot possibly lie. This promise I know
certainly that God will perform, (in making it his Body to me) because God
is faithful in performing his promise. I confess I do not know which way, or
after what manner he will, or does perform it: because he has not showed me.

If I knew the manner how God did make it his Body, then the Sacrament were to
me as matter rather of Reason and Knowledge, then a Mystery of Faith and
belief: I believe that Christ was conceived in the womb of Mary, a pure
Virgin, which never knew Man: but if you ask me the manner how? I confess, I
know not: and if I knew the manner how; then that Article of Christ's
Conception, were to me rather a matter of Knowledge, then an Article of Faith.

Moreover, seeing these words (This is my Body) are words of Promise: and
seeing that both Protestants, and Lutherans, and Papists do all agree, that
by the Sacrament, Christ does really and truly perform in us his promise;
what does it profit us to know whether he does it by Consubstantiation, or
Transubstantiation, or some other way, best known to himself? which is a
thing which can no ways either further us, or hinder us, howsoever it stand.

Therefore I advise you to follow the counsel of a most judicious, and
excellent Divine, Master Hooker, who wills Eccl. Polit. Lib. 5.
you to take that wherein all sides (both Protestants, and Papists, and
Lutherans) do agree and consent: and then consider by it self, what cause
there is, why the rest in question should not rather be rejected as
superfluous, then urged as necessary. It is on all sides confessed.

First, that the Sacrament is a True and Real participation of Christ, who
thereby imparteth not only Totum sui, but Totum se, Himself wholly, even his
whole entire person, as a Mystical head unto every Soul that receives him:
and that every such Receiver does incorporate or unite himself to Christ, as a
Mystical member of him: yea, and as a fellow member of all true Christian
Souls living on earth, or triumphing in heaven.

Secondly, it is also agreed on; That to whom the Person of Christ is thus
communicated, to them he gives (by the same Sacrament) his holy Spirit, to
sanctify them, as it sanctifies him which is their head.

Thirdly, it is likewise confessed; that what Merit, Force, Virtue or Efficacy,
there is in the Sanctified Body and Blood of Christ, we do freely, fully, and
wholly receive it by this Sacrament.

Fourthly, all sides say, that the effect thereof in us, is a real
Transmutation of our Souls from sin to righteousness; from Death and
corruption, to Immortality and Life.

Fifthly, all sides confess, that because the Sacrament (I mean the Bread and
Wine) being, of it self, but a corruptible and Earthly Creature, must needs be
thought an unlikely instrument, to work so admirable effects in Man; we
therefore are to rest our selves upon Gods Omnipotency, upon the strength of
his glorious and irresistable power, who is able and will bring to pass, that
the Bread and the Cup which he gives us, shall be really and truly that thing
which he promises.

This is agreed on all sides; and tbis is as much as is necessary to be known
and believed touching our receiving of Christ, in the Sacrament, to the comfort
of our Souls.

The second thing to be considered in Faith, is Application. Therefore every
Communicant must not only know, but apply that in particular to himself,
which he believes in general: as that Christ's Body was crucified for him,
and his Blood shed for him. Saint Paul teaches it by his own example, I live,
says he, Galat. 2. 20.
by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and has given himself
for me. And this Application cannot be better performed, then in Eating this
Bread, and drinking this Cup: for so often as we eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup* we 1. Cor. 11. 26.
do Commemorate the Lords Death. Every Communion is as it were, a new
Crucifixion of Christ. Christ was crucified at Jerusalem: but Saint Paul tells
the Galatians, that he was crucified among them. Not that Gal. 3. 1.
he suffered death in Galatia; but because of the Communion: which is a
Commemoration and Representation of the Death and Passion of Christ.

Therefore when I kneel at the Lords Table (to the end that I more
effectually apply Christ to mine own Soul) I am to set my self as it were at
the very foot of Christ his cross, and to consider Him hanging there, enduring
the unknown wrath and curse of God, and shedding his most precious blood for
me, and for my sins. That I was the cause, why He was wounded, rent, torn,
and most shamefully used; That my sins murdered the glorious and innocent
Son of God; that he suffered nothing for his own sake, but all for mine:
that he sustained his Fathers wrath, to turn that wrath away from me; and to
make God and me friends: that he was content to be made a Curse to save me
from the curse, and make me blessed: that he suffered shame, to save me from
shame, and crown me with glory, etc.

And there (at the Communion Table) am I so to collect and gather up my
straggling thoughts, that (shutting out of my mind all other cogitations) I am
so to settle my self, as if None were there present, but God the Father, and
God the Son, and I my self. God the Father, who is the person offended: I,
who am the offender; and Christ, who hangs on the Cross, as my Pawn and
Surety, to pay my Debt; suffering all that which is due unto me.

And if I ask the reason, why God gave his Son to do and suffer all this
for my sake, or why the Son of God would suffer it? I shall find none, but the
great and infinite love to me, who deserved no love at all; but rather all
hatred and vengeance from them.

It was in God his incomprehensible love, that caused him to give his Son to
me, and for me. God so loved the John 3. 16.
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. This love of Gods, is a Sic
without any Sicut; beyond all comparison: nothing that ever was, or shall be,
may stand in comparison with it. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son. It is as much (says Saint Augustine) as if some mighty
Monarch, who had but one only Son, should have in his Kingdom a miserable
poor Subject, fallen into a desperate disease, that were not curable by any
means in the world, but by washing himself in a Bath made of the blood of the
young Prince: And the King should so far tender the health of that poor
Snake, that (having but one Son, and him the Hope of his posterity, and
Heir of his Kingdom) he should cause all his veins to be opened, and all
his blood, even to the very last drop, to be emptied out of his Sons body, to
the loss of his life; and all this, to save the life of a mean fellow, of no
parts, or deserts at all. Such (says Saint Augustine) was the love of our
heavenly Father toward me, the meanest of his subjects; he gave the life and
blood of his only dear Son, to cure and heal me a miserable wretch, that
otherwise had never been cured.

A fine and elegant Comparison it is; but yet it comes short of Gods love.
For the life of a Prince, (though it be of a very high price, in so much that
the people say to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of (...).
us;) yet the life of the Son of God, is more worth then the lives of a
thousand millions of Princes. Besides, the poorest man, nay the poorest gnat,
in regard of the greatest Prince on the earth, is not so mean and poor; as
the greatest Prince that ever was, is in comparison of Gods only begotten
Son. So that no love may be compared to this love of God, in giving his
Son for me: except it be the love of the Son who gave himself for me, and
to me.

God so loved me, that in respect of me, he seemed not to love his Son:
the Son so loved me, that in respect of me, he seemed not to love himself,
but gave away his own life to save my life.

His death to me, is the death of mine High Priest; by it I am restored to my
forfeited inheritance in the heavenly Canaan. Numb. 35. 28.
His life and blood to me, is the life and blood of the Pelican in the
wilderness; who diggeth her own breast, and sheddeth Psalm. 102.
her blood upon her young that are stung with Serpents, to restore them to their
health, though it be with loss both of her blood and life. His blood is to
me, not only the blood of Remission of sins, in forgiving; but in giving
unto me, that which I could never have purchased; it is Sanguis Testamenti, the
Blood of the Testament; whereby Christ (as in his Will and Testament) does
give and bequeath unto me a Legacy or Heaven. His blood is the blood of Gods
own Son, the Heir of all things in heaven and earth. I do eat his flesh,
and drink his blood, and by that am made (having the Blood royal within me)
one of the blood royal, and Son and Heir of God, and ioynt-heire with Jesus
Christ.

Beneficium postulat officium: Every benefit does challenge a duty at mine
hands. And what shall I render to the Lord for all these his benefits? Surely,
says David, I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord; that is, Psalm. 116.
give him thanks and praise, saying, O my God, thou art good and true! O my
soul, thou art blessed and happy! And for this cause, this Sacrament of the
Communion is called Eucharistia: because it is a Praise and Thanksgiving to
God, for the unspeakable benefits which we receive at his hands, in and by
the Sacrament.

But we must not give him thanks and praise with the mouth only; but to show
that our hearts are truly thankful unto him, we must study and endeavor to
render love for love: for that is all that he requires at our hands; Love.

It is recorded by Xenophon, Lib. 13. Poet. Cyr.
that that potent and puissant King of the Persians, Cyrus (having taken
Tygranes, King of the Armenians captive in war, and led him and his Queen
prisoners to his own Court) did upon a day bid them to his own Table; and in a
sport and merriment, asked of Tygranes, How much he would bestow to ransom his
Queen? He presently made answer, If I had that kingdom which thou have won
from me by the Sword, I would willingly part with that to redeem her; and, if
that were not enough, I would spend my life, and power out my blood for her.
Cyrus, being strangely taken with the consideration of such excessive measure
of coniugal love, yearned in compassion toward them, and restored them not
only to their liberty, but also to their kingdom. When Tygranes was at home
in his own Court, he thus bespake his wife the Queen: Lady, what do you
think of King Cyrus? Is not he a most unmatchable and Heroical King? Is not
he only worthy to wear the style and title of a King? The wise Lady
presently made answer: Sir, I wot not what you say; neither can I remember what
King Cyrus did say or do, whereby I might take notice of his wisdom and
prudence: for all the while that I (with your self) remained a captive in
Persia, I never cast mine eyes upon any one, but upon him that was resolved to
set me at liberty, with the loss and expense of his own blood.

Behold here, a Lesson taught you from this virtuous Queen: She acknowledged
her self to be indebted to her husband Tygranes, for that he was purposed to
spend his own blood for her ransom, that (for the vehemence of love and
affection toward him) she could not endure to look upon any other in all the
Court of Persia, no, not upon King Cyrus himself.

How much then (dear Christians* are you indebted to your King and Spouse,
seeing that he has not only purposed to redeem and ransom you with his own
dearest blood; but has powered it forth indeed, even unto the last drop,
having for your sake, suffered so much shame, so many sorrows, so many
torments, to free and ransom you from a most cruel thraldom, not of the
Persian, but of Satan; and restored you to the free possession, and just right
of a Celestial kingdom? Can you then look upon any, can you find in your
hearts to bestow one thought upon any in the whole court of this world, save
only upon your crucified Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? Cast all your
thoughts, all your looks, all your love upon him; Videte and palpate, gustate,
and videte: behold him and feel him, taste and consider him: recognize his love
to you, and return him love again; for if any man love not the Lord Jesus,
let him be Anathema Maran-atha. 1. Cor. 16. 22.


Now this our Love cannot better be expressed, then by a joyful acknowledgement
of those wonderful benefits which we receive from Christ, when we do worthily
Commnicate: and a dutiful obedience to his commandments. John 14. ver. 15.
21. 24.
The later hereof, is (in part) touched before: therefore I will in a word or
two, touch upon the former, which is the spiritual and corporal joy, wherewith
we should be filled at the time of our Receiving.

For the time of Receiving is not a time of moody and melancholy passion, but a
time of mirth and joy in the Lord. It is Sacrum conuiuium; At a banquet A Holy
Banquet.
men ought to be very merry. Our duty then it is to Rejoice; only we are to
take heed, that we do not rejoice in sin, which is against the Lord: but
Rejoice in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord Philip. 4. 4.
always; and again I say Rejoice. The Holy ghost by the Apostle does not only
permit and give leave to us to make merry and rejoice, but does also exhort us
unto it. And not only to rejoice, but to rejoice again. He would have our
hearts ravished with a double joy. One for the Soul, and another for the Body;
but both in the Lord. So that, not only our Souls should be joyful in the
Lord, and rejoice in his salvation, but also our very Bones should say, Lord,
who is like unto thee? So that the bones which Psalm. 51. 8.
God has broken may rejoice. Psalm. 35. 9. 10.


And certainly we have great reason to rejoice in God for his goodness to us.
For at the Communion (by the hands of his Minister) he does pass unto you
under Seal, his own body and blood; nay, his Whole-selfe, and whatsoever
benefit he wrought for man's salvation: as the Remission and pardon of all your
sins; the Redemption and deliverance of all your souls and bodies from
eternal punishment in Hell; Perfect Friendship, and Reconciliation with God;
and an undoubted right and title to the kingdom of Heaven, with all the joys
and blessedness thereof.

1 You would rejoice and be glad at the heart, if (being indebted but a matter
of twenty, or an hundred thousand pounds, (and not knowing which way to pay it,
or any farthing of it) you could find one so kind, and bountiful, as would pay
it all for you: and not ask one farthing back, but only your true Love, and
hearty Thankfulness. Beloved, we are all in debt. Our sins are Debts to
God: Math. 18. 24.
and they are of so high a nature, that all the thousands and millions in the
world are not able to satisfy God for one of them; and every one of us are in
for millions of thousands Christ comes, and brings a Quietus est, discharging
us freely of every one of those debts, and passes it under seal in the
Sacrament; and have we not far greater cause to rejoice for this, then for
the other? For his blood, is the 1 Cor. 11. 25.
blood of Remission of sins.

2. If any of you had offended the Law in any heinous manner, and for that
(being legally adjudged to death) had the Halter about his neck, upon the
Gallows, being ready to be turned off the Ladder; would it not glad his heart,
to see one come from the King, with his Pardon under Seal, procured by the
Prince to acquit him from death? Verily all of us (besides the actual breaches
of Gods Law committed by our selves) were non prius nati, quam damnati, as
Saint Bernard says; No sooner borne, then condemned, and under the Sentence of
death. The halter was about our necks, and we ready to be turned off the
Ladder; there was but a puff of air, a small blast of breath in our nostrils,
betwixt us and Hellfire, betwixt our temporary life, and endless tormenting
death. The Minister comes to us (at the Sacrament) with a Pardon from the King
of Heaven, procured by the death of the Prince of our Salvation, Jesus Christ,
sealed with his precious blood: and have not we iuster cause, think you, to
rejoice for our deliverance from Hell, then the Malefactor has for his
deliverance from Tyburne?

3 If our Sovereign Lord the King were justly fallen into hatred and enmity
against any of us, and should bend himself and the strength of all his
Subjects, to be revenged on Him for his rebellions; what a pitiful taking
would that party be in? how glad would he be of any that would procure, and
could assure him of the Kings favor, and perfect reconciliation unto him? And
were not all of us by Nature, Filij irae? Ephesians. 2. 3.
and by daily multiplication of rebellions against God, professed enemies to
God, and God enemy to us? Our Savior by his death, wrought our Peace and
atonement, our perfect reconciliation with God. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled Romans 5. 10.
to God by the death of his Son. And, to assure our souls of this our peace
and reconciliation with God, Christ by his Minister, in the Sacrament of his
Body and Blood, does pass it under Seal to every particular worthy
Communicant.

4. If, being not borne to any foot of land, his Majesty should bestow upon
any of you a whole Shire to be yours for ever; I know that person would think
himself an happy man. But behold, the King of Heaven does assure every
worthy Communicant, not of a Shire, but of a most spacious, ample, and glorious
Kingdom, to be possessed and enjoyed, not for the Ever of Time in this life,
but for the Ever and Ever of eternity: And have we not good cause to be
merry and joyful then? God is True and faithful of his word and promise: and
we know that He by the Sacrament does make every true penitent Believer as
sure of his eternal Kingdom; as any Prince (if he survive) can be sure to
inherit his Fathers Crown. For by it, we are all made Heirs of God, and
Ioynt-heires with Romans 8. 17. Heb. 1. 2.
Jesus Christ, who is the Heir of all the world.

So that, as I said, we have all just cause of mirth and joy: and would to
God, we could all be so truly merry and joyful as we should be, both in
Body, and in Soul; that not only our Souls may be joyful in the Lord, and
rejoice in his salvation; Psalm. 35. 9. 10.
but that all our Bones may say, Lord, who is like unto thee? Let us therefore,
whenever we receive this Sacrament, be merry a Gods Name: Let us leap,
rejoice, and exult for our Redemption and Salvation wrought by Christ: but let
us not rejoice in Surfeiting and Drunkenness, nor in Chambering and
wantonness, nor in painted Pride and haughtiness. For this is not to rejoice
in the Lord, but against the Lord; this is not to be merry in Gods Name, but
in the Devils name.

And for all these benefits whereby both our Bodies and Souls may thus justly
be ravished with Joy, the Lord our God exacteth no great matter at our hands,
but that which we may pay without any Trouble or Damage to our selves; and
that is (as I said before) our Love to God for his own sake, Love to our
Neighbors, for Gods sake. we are to wish every of them all good, and to
perform it unto them to the uttermost of our power: helping them in their
necessities, and forgiving them the wrongs they have done us, Even as God for
Christ his sake forgave us. For they are all flesh of Christ Ephesians. 5.
his flesh, and bone of Christ his bone: and whatsoever we do to any of
these, (because they are the mystical members of Jesus Christ) whether it be
good or bad, Math. 25. 45.
Christ accounts as done to himself.

FINIS.

