DISEASES of the SOVLE: A DISCOVRSE

DIVINE, MORAL, AND PHYSICAL.

BY Tho. Adams.

SEN. Desinit esse remedio locus, vbi quae fuerunt Vitia, Mores sunt.



LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse.

1616.

TO THE TRVLY Judicious, and worthily eminent in his Profession, Mr. WILLIAM
RANDOLPH, Doctor of Physic.
Worthy Sir,
IT will seem strange to those, that better know my unworthiness then your
merits, that I should administer Physic to a Physician. But my Apology is
just; conuincing rather them of ignorance, then my self of presumption. It is
not a Potion, I send, but a Prescript in paper; which the foolish Patient did
eat up, when he read in it written, Take this. Neither do I send it, to direct
you, but that you should rectify it. So the poor Painter sent Appelles a
Picture, to mend it, not to commend it. That which tastes of Philosophy in it,
is but so much of those axioms and rudiments, as I gathered in the University
in a short time, and have had much opportunity to lose since. Somewhat is
chym'd out of experience; wherein I may say, Necessit as was ingenii largitor:
as Pliny writes of the Raven; who laboring of thirst, and spying a vessel
with some little water in it, but so deep as she could not reach, filled the
vessel with stones; till the heavier matter sinking downwards, raised up the
lighter to her easy apprehension. My own ill health forced me to look into
that poor Cisterne of knowledge, which I had: and finding it almost dry, I
assayed by some new contemplations, to raise it up to experience; which now,
behold, runs over, and (without diminution to it self) is communicatiuely
dispersed to others. Only do you use it, as I desire you should my self: if
it be in health, conserve it: if foul purge it. For my own part, I am
content, that no happy meditation of mine should be vt Curia Martis Athenis;
or like some precious mystery, which a Practitioner will get money by, whiles
he lives; but suffer none else to use, when he is dead: for he resolves, it
shall die with him. It is more Moral, then Physical; and yet the greater part
Theological. wherein I have most satisfied my own conscience, in aiming at
that punctual Center, and blessed Scope, whither all endeavors should look;
the straitening our warped Affections, and directing the Soul to heaven. And
in this passage, (you must pardon me) I fear not to say your memory at least,
if not your understanding, may hereby be helped. My Medicines are not very
bitter; but nothing at all sweet to a sensual palate: learning from Saluian;
that Quae petulantium auribus placent, aegrotantium animis non prosunt. For my
soul, I prescribe to others that, which I desire ever to take my self; such
saving Recipe's, as Gods holy Writ has directed me. For my Body, though I
would not have it lamed by my own neglect, that it might lean upon the staff
of Physic; having not so much health to spare, as might allow some unthrifty
expense of it on surfets: yet when it is sick, I desire no other Phisician
then your self. Perhaps a great number of men are of my mind, and frequent are
the knocks at your Study-dore: but I am sure that all those desires are not
enflamed with that light of knowledge, which I have of your sufficiency,
through much private conference. Rudeness or prolixitie do ill in an Epistle,
and worse when both together; and may perhaps please a man's self, and none
else. I have done, when I have (yet once again) chaleng'd your promised
Judicial of vrines: which if you make public, you shall have the like
addition to my singular thanks. Till a good gale of opportunity waft my self
over to your Sudbury, I have sent you this Messenger of that love and service,
shall ever be ready to attend you; desiring that, as it has found the way to
you, you would give it your Pass to the World; and (if it grow poor with
contempt) your Legacy of approbation. Wingraue in Buck. May vlt.

Your Worships in all just references of love, THO. ADAMS.

TO THE READER.
THE Title of this Book requires some Apology. There is a bookelately
conceived in Scotland, and born in England, which both promises in the
Frontispice, and demonstrates in the Module, the method and matter here
proposed. Whereof I cannot speak, having only cursorily perused some page or
two of it, but not of the worthiness. Because that has the prioritie of the
time, and transcen. dencie in quantity of mine, I have reason to fear, that
this will be thought but the spawne of that: or an Epitome: or at best, that it
is begot out of imitation. Herein I must seriously propose, and engage my
credit to the truth thereof: that this was committed to the Stationers hands,
perused and allowed by authority: yea, and with full time to have been
printed, and perhaps an impression sold, before that of Master John Abrenethys
came out. What dilemma's were in the Booksellers head, or what reasons for
such slacknesse and reservation, are to me as mystical, as his profession.
Neither do I plead thus out of any affected singularity, as if I were too
good to imitate so worthy a man: but only to have punctually and plainly
delivered the truth hereof: leaving it to thy censure, and us all to the grace
of God.

T. A.

A General Table of all the particular Diseases, contained in this Book.
Page
THe Induction. 1 The Method. 2 Disease 1. Of Headache and Braine-sicknesse. 3
Disease 2. Of Inconstancy, a kind of staggers. 7 Disease 3. Of Madness and
Anger. 12 Disease 4. Of Envy, a consumption. 17 Disease 5. Of Idleness, the
Lethargy. 20 Disease 6. Of the Dropsy and Covetousness. 23 Disease 7. Of
Usurie, and Caninus appetitus, or the doggelike appetite. 27 Disease 8. Of
Pride. 33 Disease 9. Of the Palsy and timorous suspicion. 35 Disease 10. Of
Immoderate Thirst, and Ambition. 39 Disease 11. Of inflammation of the reins,
or lustfulnesse. 44 Disease 12. Of the rotien Fever, or Hypocrisy. 48 Disease
13. Of Flux and Prodigality. 52 Disease 14. Of the Iaundeys and Profaneness.
55 Disease 15. Of Apoplexy and Security. 57 Disease 16. Of windiness in the
stomach, and vainglory. 60 Disease 17. Of the Itch or the Busie-body. 63
Disease 18. Of stinking breath and flattery. 67 Disease 19. Of short windiness
and weariness of doing well. 70
THE SOVLES Sickness: A DISCOVRSE DIvine, Moral, and Physical.
The Induction.
THE Sickness of this World is Epidemicall, and has with the invisible poison
of a general pestilence infected it to the heart. For Uice in manners, as
Heresy in doctrine, distilleth insensible contagion into the fountain of
Life; and dum Bellar. in praes. Tom. 1. Controu.
vnum interficit, centum alios inficit, in killing one, banes many. Whether ex
daemonis iniuria, vel ex hominis incuria, from the Devils malice, or man's
securenesse, Iniquity is grown from a mist to a Mystery, Ignorance to
Arrogance, nescience to negligence, 2. These. 2. 7.
simple imprudence to politic impudence, and I know not how, too much light
has made men blind. At first they knew not when they sinned, now they would
know to justify their sins: they defend that, wherein they offend, and buy
Sickness with as great expense of time, wit, money, as the anguished Atheist
would health.

Sickenesses in men's Souls are bred like diseases in natural, or corruptions
in civil bodies; with so insensible a progress, that they are not discerned,
till they be almost desperate: as the frantic endures not bonds, nor the
Lethargicall noise: or as it was once said of the Romans, that they could
neither endure an ill Emperor, nor obey a good one: so we may say of our
selves (no less then Liuy of that State) Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia Decad.
lib. 1.
far possumus: we can better brook our maladies, then our remedies. There
is, say Physicians, no perfect Health in this world; and man, when he is at
best, enioyes but a neutrality. But the Physicians of the Soul complain
further: That we are all as an unclean thing, Esaias. 64. 6.
and all our righteousness are as filthy rags, etc. and in many James 3. 2.
things we sin all. We may say with the Prophet, not so much for our
punishments, as our sins, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
From the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundnes in it; but
wounds Esaias 1. 5. 6.
and bruises and putrefying sores.

The Method.
TO pursue this Argument, I would willingly dispose the tenor of my speech
into this method, 1. to describe the disease, 2. to ascribe the signs, 3. to
prescribe the remedy. And whereas Physicians begin their medicinal
institutions or instructions at the Head, as the most noble part of the body;
the principal seat of the wits, the beginning of all the organicall senses,
and the proper house and habitation of the animal virtue; (though Philosophy
attributes that supereminent dignity to the Heart) and I (for metaphors sake)
without contention suffer my self to be led after their rule; behold, I apply
to the Head first: which if I could cure, it would more easily discern the
infirmities of the descending parts. In the Head and other corporal parts
there are many diseases, which I will not contend to find out; desiring only
to say (not all, but) enough. I will borrow so Non ego cuncta meis amplecti
versibus opto.
much Timber out of Galens wood, as shall serve me for a scaffold to build up
my Moral discourse.

Headache and Brain sickness. Disease. 1.
Headache is diverse, say Phisicians, according to the causes; proceeding some
of cold, some of hot; of dryness, of moisture, of blood, of choler, of
phlegm, windynesse, drunkenness, of an offending stomach. There is an
Headache called the Migram, Hemicrania, possessing lightly one side of the
Head, and distinguished by a seame that runs along in the skull. There is a
disease in the Soul not unlike this, and they that labor of it, are called
Braine-sicke men. They may have some pretty understanding in part of their
heads, but the other part is strangely sick of crochets, singularities, and
toyish inventions; wherein because they frolic themselves, they think all
the world fools that admire them not. They are ever troubling themselves with
unnecessary thoughtfulness of long or short, white or black, round or square;
confounding their wits with Geometrical dimensions, and studying of Measure out
of measure. A square cap on another man's head, puts their head out of square,
and they turn their brains into dry wool, with storming against a garment of
linen. New Albutij to moote the reasons, why if a Cap fell down, it brake; if
a Sponge, it brake not; why Eagles fly, and not Elephants. There be such
students in the Schools of Rome; what shall be done with an Ass, if he get into
the Church to the Font uncovered, and drink the water of Baptism: upon the
strange hazard of a Clarks negligence, and an Asses thirst entering the Church,
which are uncertain, they make themselves Asses in certain. Or if a hungry
Mouse filch the Body of our Lord, etc. Brave wits to invent Mouse-traps. These
curiosities in humane, but much more in divine things, prove men braine-sicke.

Cause.
THe Cause of the Migram, is the ascending of many vaporous humors, hot or
cold, by the veins or arteries. The Cause of this spiritual Migram, or
braine-sicknesse, is the unkindly concurrence of ignorance, arrogance and
affectation, like foggy mistes and clouds, obscuring and smothering the true
light of their sober judgments; and bearing their affections like a violent
wind, upon one only point of the Compass, newfangled Opinion. Like the
Giants son, they must have six toes on a foot: they hate, not to be
observed, and had rather be notorious, then not notable. Opinion, is a foot
too much, which spoils the Uerse. New Physic may be better then old, so
may new Philosophy; our studies, observation, and experience perfecting theirs:
beginning, not at the Gamoth, as they did, but as it were at the Ela: but
hardly new Divinity; not that an ancient error should be brought out against
a new truth. A new truth? nay, an old newly come to light: for Error cannot
wage Antiquity with Truth. His desire is to be cross to regularity; and should
he be enioined a Hatte, a Cappe would extremely please him: were he confined to
extemporall and enthusiasticall labors, he would commend premeditation and
study; which now he abhorres, because they are put on him. He is unwise in
being so bitter against Ceremonies: for therein he is palpably against
himself, himself being nothing else but Ceremony. He loves not the beaten
path; and because every fool (says he) enters at the gate, he will climb
over the wall, whiles the door of the Church stands open, he contends to John
10. 1.
creep through the window. The Brain-sicke are no less then drunk with
Opinion; and that so strangely, that sleep which helps other drunkards, does
them no good. Their ambitious singularity is often so violent, that if it be
not restrained, it grows to a kind of frenzy, and so the Migram turns into
the Staggers. Herein, because we will not credit their Positions, nor receive
their Crochets in our set Music, they reele into the lowe-Countries.

Signs and Symptoms.
Physicions say of the Migram-affected, that in the violent fit of the passion,
they can abide: 1. No noise or loud speech: 2. Not clear light: 3. Not to
drink Wine: 4. Nor almost to move at all, etc. Our Braine-sicke Nouelist is
described by such tokens.

1. Loud speech he loves not, except from his own lips. All noise is
tedious to him, but his own: and that is most tedious to the company. He
loves to hear himself talk out of measure. He wonders, that the senses of
all his hearers do not get up into their ears, to watch and catch his
mysteries with attention and silence; when as yet himself is more Non-resident
from his theme, then a discontinuer is from his charge.

2. The clear light he cannot endure, for his brain is too light already. He
presumes, that his head contains more knowledge then ten Bishops; and
wonders that the Church was so ouerseene, as to forget him, when offices were
disposing, or places a dealing; and because he can get none, railes at all for
Antichristian. He is the only wise man, if he might teach all men to judge him,
as he judges himself: and no star should shine in our Orb, without
borrowing some of his light. He offers to reform that man, that would inform
him; and presumes of so much light, that if himself were set, our world would
be left without a Sun.

3. Wine he hates, specially when it is powered into his wounds: (as the Fathers
interpret the Samaritans wine to the wounded man, to cleanse and purge him.)
Reproof and he are utter enemies; no man is good enough to chide him:
wholesome counsel, which is indeed Wine to a weak soul, he accounts Vinegar;
nothing so pleases him as his own Lees. Opinion has brewed him ill, and he
is like water scared out of the wits.

4. He must not be moved, nor removed from what he holds: his will is like
the Persian law, unalterable. You may move him to choler, not to knowledge: his
brain is turned, like a Bell rung too deep, and cannot be fetched back
again. His own affectation is his pully, that can move him; no engine else
stirs him. A man may like him at first, as one that never heard music does
the Tinkers note on his kettle; but after a while, they are both alike tedious.
There is no help for his auditour, by by any excuses to shift him off; if he
have not the patience to endure an impertinent discourse, he must venture the
censure of his manners, and run away. His discourse is so full of parentheses,
as if he were troubled with the rhume, and could not spette. He is ever tying
hard knots, and untying them, as if no body had hired him, and therefore he
must find himself work. If he light on the sacred Writ, he conceitedly
allegorizes on the plainest subject, and makes the Scripture no more like it
self, then Michols Image in the bed upon a pillow of Goats hair, was like
David. He carries bread at his back and feeds upon stones. Like a full fed
Dog, he leaves the soft meat to lie gnawing upon bones: that we may say of
him, this man has a strong wit, as we say, that dog has good teeth.

Curation.
THe way to cure the Migram is diverse, according to the cause; either by
cutting a vein, purging, revulsiue or local remedies. But the sanation of
this Brainsicke malady is very difficult: insomuch, that Solomon says, There
is more hope of a fool, then of one wise in his own conceit. For he imagines
the whole world to be sick, and himself only sound. I might prescribe him the
opening of a vein which feeds this disease, that is, affectation: the itching
blood of singularity let out, would much ease him. Or a good purge of humility
to take him down a little, because he stands so high in his own imagination:
and full vessels, to prevent their bursting must have timely vent. Or a little
opium of sequestring him from business, and confining him that he might take
some sleep; for his brains want rest. Or a little Euphorbium of sound
admonition and fit reproof dropped into his ear warm. Some Euphrasia or
Eyebright would do well. Unctions, if lenifying, will do no good, nor any of
the former, I doubt; except a strong pill of Discipline go with them. The
speciallest remedy is Discipline, as the Father said, when he heard his son
complain of his head; my head, my head, commanded a servant; Carry 2. King 4.
19.
him to his Mother: so for these men so troubled with the Headache, deliver
them to their mother, let the Church censure them.

Inconstancy, a kind of staggers. Disease. 2.
THere is a Disease in the Soul called Inconstancy, not unfitly shadowed to
us by a bodily infirmity, possessing the superior part of man, vertigo, a
swimming in the head, a giddiness, or the Staggers. The disease in the body is
described to be an astonishing and dusking of the eyes and spirits, that the
Patient thinks all that he sees to turn round, and is suddenly compassed
with darkness. The parallel to it in the Soul, is Inconstancy, a motion without
rule, a various aspect, a diuersifying intention. The Inconstant man is like a
Pour contrell; if he should change his apparel so fast as his thought, how
often in a day would he shift himself? He would be a Proteus too, and vary
kinds. The reflection of every news melts him, whereof he is as soon glutted.
As he is a Noune, he is only adjective, depending on every nouel persuasion:
as a Verb, he knows only the Present Tense. To day he goes to the Key to be
shipped for Rome, but before the Tide come, his tide is turned. One party
think him theirs, the adverse theirs: he is with both, with neither, not an
hour with himself. Because the Birds and Beasts be at controversy, he will
be a Batte, and get him both wings and teeth. He would come to heaven, but for
his halting: two opinions (like two Watermen) almost pull him a-pieces, when he
resolves to put his judgment into a Boat, and go somewhither; presently he
steps back, and goes with neither. It is a wonder, if his affections, being
but a little lukewarm water, do not make his religion stomack-sicke.
Indifferency is his ballast, and Opinion his sail: he resolves, not to
resolve. He knows not what he should hold; he knows not what he does hold.
He opens his mind to receive motions, as one opens his palm to take a handful
of water; he has very much, if he could hold it. He is sure to dye, but not
what religion to dye in; he demurres like a posed Lawyer, as if delay could
remove some impediments. He is drunk when he rises, and reeles in a morning
fasting. He knows not whether he should say his Pater noster in Latin, or
English; and so leaves it and his prayers vnsayd. He makes himself ready for
an appointed feast; by the way he hears of a Sermon, he turns thitherward,
yet betwixt the Church gate, and Church door, he thinks of business and
retires home again. In a controuerted point he holds with the last reasoner
he either heard or read, the next diuerts him; and his opinion dwells with him,
perhaps so long as the teacher of it is in his sight. He will rather take
dross for gold, then try it in the furnace. He receives many judgments,
retains none, embracing so many faiths, that he is little better then an
Infidel.

Causes.
THey give a double cause of this disease in the body; either the
distemperature and evil affectednesse of the brain; or an offense given to it
from the mouth of the stomach: vapors, gross and tough humors, or windy
exhalations, either lodging in the brain, or sent thither from the stomach,
turning about the animal spirits: hence the brain staggers with giddiness.
This spiritual Inconstancy arises from like causes. If it be in religion, it
proceeds from cloudy imaginations, fancies, fictions, and forced dreams, which
keep the mind from a sober and peaceful consideratenesse. Multitude of
opinions, like foggy vapors, mist the intellectual faculty, and like
reuerberated blastes whirle about the spirits. He sees some Ceremonial
deuisions in our Church, and therefore dares not steadfastly embrace that truth,
which both parts without contention teach and observe. So leaves the blessing
of his mother, because he beholds his brethren quarrelling: whiles he sees the
unreconcilable opposition of Rome and us, which he fondly labors to atone, he
forsakes both, and will now be a Church alone. Thus his breast is full of secret
combats, contradictions, affirmations, negatiues, and whiles he refuses to
join with others, he is divided in himself: And yet will rather search
excuses for his vnstayednesse, then ground for his rest. He lothes Manna after
two days feeding, and is almost weary of the Sun for perpetual shining. If
the Temple pauements be ever worn with his visitant feet, he will run
far to a new Teacher: and rather then be bound to his own parish, he will
turn Recusant. He will admire a new Preacher, till a quarter of the sand is
out; but if the Church doors be not locked up, he cannot stay out the hour:
what he promises to a Collection to day, he forgets, or at least denies the
next morning. His best dwelling would be his confined chamber, where his
irresolution might trouble nothing, but his pillow. In humane matters, the
cause of his variableness is not varied, but the object. He is transformable
to all qualities, a temperd lump of wax to receive any form, yet no
impression sticks long upon him. he holds it the quickness of his wit, to be
voluble.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe signs of this disease in the body, are a mist and darkness, coming
upon every light occasion. If he see a wheel turning round, or a
whirle-poole, or any such circular motion, he is affected with giddiness. The
Symptoms of the Spiritual Staggers are semblable. He turns with those that
turn, and is his neighbors Chameleon. He hates staidness as an earthen
dullness. He prosecutes a business without fear or wit; and rejecting the
patience to consult, falls upon it with a peremptory heat: but like water once
hot, is soonest frozen, and instantly he must shift his time and his place;
neither is he so weary of every place, as cuery place is weary of him. He
affects an object with dotage, and as superstitiously courts, as an Idolator
his gilded block: but it is a wonder, if his passionate love out-liue the age
of a wonder, 9. days. He respects in all things novelty above goodness; and
the child of his own brains, within a week he is ready to judge a Bastard.
He salutes his wits after some invented toy, as a Seruing-man kisseth his
hand, when instantly on another plots arising, he kickes the former out of
doors. He pulls down this day what he builded the other, now disliking the
site, now the fashion, and sets men on work to his own undoing. He is in his
own house, as his thoughts in his own brain, transient guests: like a
Haggard, you know not where to take him. He hunts well for a gird, but is soon
at a loss. If he gives any profession a winters entertainment, yet he is
whether for a penny the next Spring. He is full of business at Church, a
stranger at home, a Skeptic abroad, an obseruer in the street, every where a
fool. To conclude, their own unfaithfulness making the Inconstant thus sick,
there is an accession of the Lords plague; he adds dotage as a punishment of
wilful dotage. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the Esaias 19. 14.
midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a
drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

Cure.
FOr the curing of this bodily infirmity, many remedies are prescribed:
odoriferous smells in weakness, the opening of a vein in better strength,
cupping glasses applied to the hinder part of the head, with scarification,
gargarismes and sternutatory things, together with setting the feet in hot
bathes, etc. To cure this Spiritual Staggers, let the Patient be purged with
Repentance for his former unsettledness: let him take an ounce of Faith to
firm his brains; let his repose be on the Scriptures, and thence fetch
decision of all doubts; let a skillful Physician order him, a good Minister.
Let him stop his ears to rumors, and fix his eyes on Heaven, to be kept
from distracting objects. Let him keep the continual diet of Prayer, for the
Spirit of illumination; and thus he may be recovered.

Madness and Anger. Disease 3.
THe next disease I would describe, is Phrenzy or Madness. Now though
Physicians do clearly distinguish betwixt these two, Phrenzy and Madness;
calling Phrenzy an inflammation of the brain without a Fever; or an
impostumation Galen.
bred and engendered in the pellicles of the brain, or pia matter: and Mania or
Madness, an infection of the former cell of the head, without a Fever: the one
abusing the imagination, the other rauishing the memory; I list not to dispute
or determine. That which serves my intention, is to confer either of these
passions, with a Spiritual disease of like nature, Anger. Irafuror breuis. It
is a madness, I am sure, I am not sure how short. I do not ask for men
passionlesse, this is hominem de homine tollere. Give them leave to be men, not
mad men. Iraoptimo loco donum Dei: and magna est ars, irasciverbis
praemeditatis, Ierem.
and tempore opportuno. Anger in the best sense is the gift of God, and it is
no small art, to express anger with premeditated terms, and on seasonable
occasion. God placed Anger amongst the affections ingraffed in nature, gave it
a seat, fitted it with instruments, ministered it matter whence it might
proceed, provided humors whereby it is nourished. It is to the Soul as a
nerve to the body. The Philosopher calls it the Whetstone to fortitude, a spur
intended to set forward Virtue. This is simply rather a propassion, then a
passion.

But there is a vicious, impetuous, frantic anger, earnest for private and
personal grudges; not like a medicine to clear the eye, but to put it out.
This pernicious disease of the Soul has degrees. 1. It is inhumane; Tigers
devour not Tigers, this rages against kind and kindred. 2. Impious; it rages
often against God; as that Pope upon a field lost against the Frenchmen: Sic
esto nunc Gallicus. So, turn French now, etc. 3. Mad; for it often rages
against unreasonable creatures, as Balaam striking his Ass; how much is such a
man more irrational and bestiall, then the Beast he malignes? 4. It is more
then mad, striking at insensible things: as Xerxes wrote a defying letter to
Athos a Thracian mountain. Mischievous Athos, lifted up to heaven, make thy
quarries passable to my travel, or I will cut thee down, and cast thee into
the sea. But his revenge was neither understood, feared, nor felt. So the
Affricans being infested with a North wind, that covered their corn fields
with sand from a mountain, levied an army of men to fight with that wind; but
were all buried under the sand. So Darius, because a River had drowned him a
white Horse, vowed to cut it into so many Channels, that a woman with child
might go over drie-shoo'd. We have some so madly impatient with a storm, wind
etc. which might answer them, as Rabshaceh told the Jews: Am I Esaias 36, 10.
come hither without the Lord? it is he that sent me. This anger is imediatly
directed against God: the heart speaks Atheism, only in other words. 5. It is
unnatural, for it Insanit: cum aliena nequit, sua pectora rodit.
maligneth a man's self. It is full of consternation and amazement, and never
uses violence, without torment to it self. It thinks to offer wrong, and
indeed suffers it.

Ipsa sibi est hostis vesania, seque furendo-Interimit. As the frantic or
drunkard do that, intoxicate, which sober, they would quake to think of; so
these irefull, direful men (or rather beasts) dare in their fits play with
Serpents, mingle poisons, act massacres, whereat their awaked souls shudder.

The higher the person in who^ this phrenzy raigns, the Basil. In potestate
nihil nisi potestatem respicere.
greater the fault. The Master-Bee has no sting, the rest have: the greater
power, the less passion. It is a Statetyrannie, in authority to mind nothing
but authority. Posse and nolle, nobile. It is noble to may and will not. When a
railing wretch followed a Heathen Prince with obloquies all day, and home to
his doors at night, he requited him with commanding his servant to light him
home to his house with a torch. Damascen makes three degrees of anger; Bilem,
Iracundiam, Infensionem: Choler, Wrath, heavy Displeasure. Some have added a
fourth.

1. The first has a beginning and motion, but presently cease; we call this
Choler. Like fire in stubble, soon kindled, and soon out. These are like
gunpowder, to which you no sooner give fire, but they are in your face. They
say, these hot men are the best natured; but I say then, the best are naught.
These are stung with a nettle, and allayd with a docke.

2. The second is not so soon conceived, but takes deeper hold in the
memory. This fire is neither easily kindled, nor easily put out: like fire in
Iron, which hardly taking, long abides. These men are like green logges,
which once set on combustion, continue burning day and night too.

3 The third entertain this fire suddenly, and retain it perpetually, not
desisting without revenge. These are like fire, which bewrays not it self
without the ruin and waste of that matter wherein it has caught: this worst.

4 The fourth is a moderate Anger, not soon incensed, but quickly appeased:
and this is the best, because likest to the disposition of God, who is
merciful and gracious, Psalm. 103. 8.
slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, ready to forgive.

Causes.
Frenzy is caused by abundant blood, or choler occupying the brains or the
filmes thereof: the more adust this choler is, the more pernicious the madness.
The cause of anger, is the giving to Passion the dominion over Reason. Seneca
says, Causa iracundiae opinio iniuriae est: the cause of anger is the conceit
of injury. Such a man gets up on De ira lib. 1. cap. 22.
the wild Jade his choler, and spurs him on, having no bridle of moderation
to hold him back. His conversation is so full of choleric fits, as a book
of tedious parentheses, that they mar the sense of his life. He is like an
egg in rosting, hopeful to be good meat, but it grows too hot on a sudden,
and flies in your face not without a great noise. Anger is able to turn
Dametas into Hercules furens, teaching him that is strong to fight, him that is
not Ira forti producit lacertes, imbelli linguam.
to talk: whilst the lightning of his rage lasts, he thunders out a
challenge, but after a little calm meditation, sounds a retreat. He menaceth
the throtes of his enemies, though they be many, and swears loud he will be
their Priest, he means Executioner. But if you compare his threatenings and
his after-actions, you would say of them, as that wise man sheering his hogs:
Here is a great deal of cry, but a little wool. His enemies are worse feared
then hurt, if so they be in personal presence, as he is in sober judgment a
little out of the way.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Frenzy is easily seen, and needs not to be described by signs.
Physicians give many, I will say no more but this. If the madness proceed from
blood, they are perpetually laughing; if of choler, they rage so furiously,
that bands only can restrain them from doing violence. The Symptoms of this
spiritual madness, rash and furious anger, are many, visible and actual.

1. Swelling of mind so high and so full, that there is no room for any good
motion to dwell by it. Iratumor me^tis, and makes a man like the Spider-poyson'd
toade. In this raging fit, Reason, Modesty, Peace, Humanity, etc. run from
him, as servants from their mad master, or Mise from a Barn on fire. 2.
Contumely without any distinguishing respect of friend, fo^e, aliant, familiar,
reuiles any, fratremque, patremque. 3. Violence of hands, savage and monstrous
behavior: Like the troubled Sea, when it Esaias. 57. 20.
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt: fuming and foming, like a
muddy channel: a distorted countenance, Sen. de. ira. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
sparkling eye, foul language, hasty hands. If the angry man, and the drunkard
had a glass presented them, how hardly could they be brought again to love
their own faces!

Cure.
TO cure this Bedlam passion, (leaving the other to deeper judgments in that
profession) both nature and Grace have given rules. Natural reason; that an
angry man should not undertake any action or speech, till he had recited the
Greek Alphabet; as a pause to cool the heat of choler. That angry men should
sing to their passions, as Nurses to their Babes (...) haste not, cry not.
Maximum remedium est irae, mora. The best remedy for Anger is delay. What a man
does in anger, Sen. de ira. Lib. 1. Cap. 28.
he lightly repents in cold blood.

That we should keep our corrupt nature from provoking objects, as a man that
has Gunpowder in his house, keeps it safe from fire. That we should conster
all things in the best sense: a good disposition makes a good exposition, where
palpablenesse does not euince the contrary. That suspicion is a pair of
bellows to this mad fire. That Jealousy and selfe-guiltinesse are the angry
man's Eues-dropper and Intelligencer. That the Earth suffers us living to plow
furrows on her back, and dead, opens her bowels to receive us: a dead earth
conuincing a living earths impatience. Scripture. That anger rests in the
bosom of fools. That the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness
of God. That unadvised anger is culpable of judgment. Let him take some herb
of Grace, an ounce of Patience, as much of Consideration how often he gives God
just cause to be angry with him; and no less of meditating how God has a hand
in Shimeies railing, that David may not be angry: mix all these together with
faithful confidence, that God will dispose all wrongs to thy good; hereof be
made a pill to purge choler. To conclude, let reason ever be our Judge, though
passion sometimes be our sollicitour. Parit ira furorem;
Turpia verba furor, verbis ex turpibus exit
Ira, ex hac oritur vulnus de vulnere lethum.
Wrath kindles fury, fury sparks foul words,
Those let out wounds and death with flaming swords.


Envy a consumption. Disease. 4.
Envy fitly succeeds anger, for it is nothing else but inueterate wrath. The
other was a frantic fit, and this is a consumption; a languishing disease in
the body, the beginning of dissolution, a broching of the vessel, not to be
stopped till all the liquor of life is run out: what the other tabe is in the
body, I list not to define, by reason that this spiritual sickness is a
consumption of the flesh also, and a pining away of the spirits: now since they
both have relation to the body, their comparison would be confusion. Envy is
the consumption I singularly deal withal, which though I cannot cure, I will
hopefully minister to.

Cause.
THe cause of Envy, is others prosperity; or rather an evil eye shot upon it.
The angry man has not himself, the envious must have no neighbor. He battens
at the maligneds misery; and if such a man rises, he falls as if he were
Planet-strucke. I know not whether he could endure to be in Paradise with a
superior. He hates to be happy with any company. Envy sits in a man's eyes,
and wheresoever through those windows it spies a blessing, it is sickness and
death unto it. Inuidus petat a Jove priuari vno oculo, vt auarus quod priuetur
ambobus. The envious man would have happily one of his eyes put out, as the
covetous should lose both. A Physician being asked what was the best help to
the perspicuity of the eyes, affirmed, Envy: for that like a perspectiue glass
would make good things appear great things. Fertilior seges est alienis semper
in agris;
Uicinumque pecus grandius vber habet. Ovid.



He is even quarrelling with God, that his neighbors field bears better
corn, and thinks himself poor, if a near dweller be richer. He will
dispraise Gods greatest blessings, if they fall besides himself: and grow
sullen (so far as he dares) with the Prince, that shall promote a better
deseruer. There is no law perfect, if he was not at the making it. He
undertakes a great work, and when he cannot accomplish it, he will give
leave to none other. No man shall have that glory, which he aspired and
missed. An Aesops dog in the manger; because he can eat no hay himself, he
will starve the horse. Poison is life to a Serpent, death to a man: and that
which is life to a man, his humidity and spettle, they say is death to a
Serpent: the rancorous sustenance which a malicious man lives of, is the misery
and mischief to a good man; and a good man's prosperous felicity is the
malicious man's death. God has in justice appointed it to be a plague to it
self. Among all mischiefs it is furnished with one profitable quality; the
owner of it takes most hurt. Carpitque, and carpitur vna: suppliciumque suum
est. -- vt Aetna seipsum,

Sic se non alios, inuidus igne coquit.

The envious is a man of the worst diet, and like a strange Cook, shows
himself; nay, and conceates pleasure in pining: so that his body, at last,
has just cause to sue his soul on an action of dilapidations. He finds fault
with all things, that himself has not done. He wakes, whiles his enemy takes
rest. Parum est, si ipse sit foelix, nisi alter fuerit infoelix. His affections
are like lightning, which commonly Feriunt summos fulgura montes.
scorch the highest places. He creepes like a Canker to the fairest flowers. By
putting in a superfluous syllable, he has corrupted one of the best words,
turning amorem into amarorem, love into bitterness. A Philosopher seeing a
malicious man dejected, asked him, whether some evil had happened to himself,
or some good to his neighbor.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs of this disease are given by the Poet. -- videt intus edentem
Vipereas carnes, vitiorum alimenta suorum. Met. 2.

Pallor in ore sedet, macies in corpore toto;
Nunquam recta acies; liuent rubigine dentes:
Pectora fell virent, lingua est suffusa veneno.


A pale face without blood, and a lean body without any juice in it, squint
eyes, black teeth, a heart full of gall, a tongue tipp'd with poison. Amazednes
makes the face pale, grief drinks up the blood, looking on men's prosperity
makes the eyes squint, and cursing, the teeth black. It were well for him on
earth, that he should dwell alone. It is pity he should come into heaven;
for to see one star excel another in glory, would put him again out of his
wits. I wonder, when he is in hell, whether he would not still desire
superiority in anguish, and to sit in the chair, though he receive the more
torments. The envious man is so cross to God, that he is sure of punishment:
he has in present one like to the nature of his offense. For his sin,
whereas GOD brings good out of evil, he brings evil out of good. For his
punishment, whereas even evil things work together to the good of the good,
even good things work together to his evil. All the happiness lights on him
that is envied; for it goes well with him, with whom the malicious thinks it
goes too well.

Cure.
HIs Cure is hard, even as with a tabe in the body: too much Physic makes him
worse. Crosses are fitly called Gods physic; whereby if God will cure him,
he must minister them to those he hates. Strange! that one man should be
healed, by giving physic to another. Two simples may do him good, if he could
be won to take them: a scruple of content, and a dram of charity. If these
be given him, (well stirred) in a potion of repentant tears, he may be brought
to wish himself well, and others no harm, and so be recovered.

Idleness, the Lethargy. Disease 5.
Idleness in the soul is a dangerous disease as the Lethargy in the body.
The very name of Lethargy speaks the nature: for it is compounded of (...)
forgetfulness, and (...) slothful; and so consequently is defined to be a dull
oblivion. The Idle man is a piece of base heavy earth, molded with muddy and
standing water. He lies in bed the former half of the day, devising excuses
to prevent the afternoones labor. He cannot endure to do any thing by
himself, that may be done by Attorney. He forestalls persuasion inducing him
to any work, by forecasting the unprofitableness: he holds business man's
cruellest enemy, and a monstrous deuourer of time. His body is so swollen with
lazy humors, that he moves like a tun upon two pottle pots. He is tempted
to couetice, for no other reason, but to be able to keep servants; whom he
will rather trust, then step out to ouersee. Neither summer nor winter escape
the blame of his laziness: in the one it is too hot, in the other too cold to
work. Summer has days too long, winter nights too cold; he must needs
help the one with a nap at noone, the other with a good fire. He was very fit
to be a Monk: spare him an early mass, and he will accept it: yet howsoever,
he will rather venture the censure, then forsake a lazy calling.

Cause.
THe Cause of the Lethargy is abundant phlegm, overmuch cooling the brain,
and thereby provoking sleep; which putrified in the brain, causes a fever. The
cause of Idleness is indulgence to the flesh, a forgetfulness of the end of
our creation, a wilful digression from man: for the lazy wretch is a dormouse
in an humane husk. To man motion is natural, the ioints and eyes are made to
move; and the mind is never asleep, as if it were set to watch the body: Sleep
is the image of death, says the Poet: and therefore the Church-sleeper is a
dead corpse, set in his pew like a coffin, as if the Preacher were to make his
funeral Sermon. He sings out harvest like the Grasshopper; therefore may at
Christmas dance for and without his dinner. He rises at noone to breakefast,
which he falls to unwashed, and remoues not out of his chair without a sleep.
Whilst he sleeps, the enemy ouersowes the field of his heart with tares. He
is a patient subject for the devil to work on, a cushion for him to sit on,
and take his ease: his misery is, that his damnation sleeps not. His bed is
his haven, his heaven, and sound sleep his deity. The standing water stinkes
with putrefaction: Du Bart.

And virtue has no virtue, but in action.


If he be detained up late, he lies down in his clothes, to save two labors:
nothing shall make him bustle up in the night, but the house fired about his
ears; which escaping, he lies down in the yard, and lets it burn. He should
gather moss, for he is no rolling stone. In this he is a good friend to his
Country, he desires no innovation: he would scarce shift ground ten leagues,
though from a cottage to a Manor. He is so loath to leave the tap-house in
winter, that when all leave him, he makes bold with the chimney corner for his
Parlour. If ever (in a ^^gne) he lights upon a humor to business, it is to
game, to cheat, to drink drunk, to steal, etc. and falls from doing naught
to do naughtily; so mending the matter, as you have heard in the fable, The
devil mended his dames leg; when he should have put it in joint, he brake it
quite apieces.

Signs and Symptoms.
Symptoms of the Lethargy are a great pulse, beating seldom, as if it were
full of water; a continual pronenesse to sleep, that they are scarcely
compelled to answer a question. You may know a lethargicall Idle man, by a
neglected beard, vnkemb'd hair, and vnwash'd face, foul linen, clothes
vnbrushed, a nasty hand smelling of the sheet, an eye opening when the ear
receives your voice, and presently shut again; as if both the organs were
stiff with excretions. He has a blown cheek, a drawling tongue, a leaden
foot, a brazen nose: he gapes and gaspes so often, that sometimes he keeps
his mouth open still, as if he had forgotten to shut it.

Cure.
TO cure the Lethargicke, there are required many intentions; not without
frictions, scarifications, sharp odours, and bloodletting, etc. To cure the
Idle, it should more properly belong to Surgery then Physic; for there is no
medicine like a good whip, to let out his lazy blood; and a good diet of daily
labor, which some skillful Bedle must see him take; put him into the bath at
Bridewell, to take away the numnesse of his joints, and scowre off his rust,
and so he may be recovered. Fac been, fac tua, fac aliquid, fac vtile semper:
Corrumpunt mores otia praua bonos.


The Dropsy and Covetousness, Causes. Disease. 6.
PHysicians say, that the Dropsy is an error in the digestive virtue in the
liver, bred of the abundance of salt and waterish phlegm, with the ouer-feeding
of raw and moist meats. It is distinguished into three sorts, Ascites,
Tympanites, and Anasarca, or Hyposarca. Ascites is, when between the filme
called Peritonaeum (which is the Caul that couers the Entrails) much watery
humor is gathered. Tympanites arises from windiness and flatuous causes
gathered into the foresaid places. Hyposarca is, when the humors are so
dispersed through the whole body, that all the flesh appears moist and spungy.
Our spiritual Dropsy covetousness, is a disease bred in the soul, through
defect of faith and understanding. It properly resides in the inferior powers
of the soul, the affections; but arises from the errors of the superior
intellectual faculty; neither conceiving aright of Gods all-sufficient help,
nor of the worlds all-deficient weakness.

Signs.
THe corporal Dropsy is easily known by heaviness, swelling, puffing up,
immoderate desire of drink, etc. The spiritual likewise (though it leanes the
carcass) lards the conscience; at least swells and puffes it up: and as if some
hellish inflammation had scorched the affection, it thirsts for Aurum potabile
without measure. The Covetous man is of Renodaeus his opinion, that argentum
plurimum valet ad cordis palpitationem, silver is good against the
heart-panting. The Wise man calls it a disease, an- evil disease, and almost
Eccles. 6. 2.
incurable. The Covetous has drunk the blood of oppression, wrong from the
veins of the poor: and behold, like an vndigestible receipt, it wambles in
hisstomack; he shall not feel quietness in his belly. This is an epidemiall
sickness. Aurum omnes, victa iam pietate, colunt.
Religion gives riches, and riches forgets religion.
Religio dat opes, paupertas Religionem:
Diuitiae veniunt, Religioque fugit.


Thus do our affections wheel about with an unconstant motion. Poverty makes
us Religious, Religion rich, and riches irreligious. For as, Pauperis est
rogare, so it should be Diuitis erogare. Seneca wittily and truly, Habes
pecuniam? vel teipsum vel pecuniam habeas vilem necesse est. Have thou money?
either thou must esteem thy money vile, or be vile thy self. The Covetous man
is like a two-legd Hog: whiles he lives, he is ever rooting in the earth, and
never does good, till he is dead; like a vermin, of no use till uncased.
Himself is a Monster, his life a riddle: his face (and his heart) is prone to
the ground; his delight is to vex himself. It is a question whether he takes
more care to get damnation, or to keep Curans quasi corvrens. Auarus quasi
auidus aeris.
it; and so is either a Laban or a Nabal, two infamous churls in the old
Testament, spelling one another name backward. He keeps his god under lock
and key, and sometimes for the better safety, in his unclean vault. He is very
eloquently powerful amongst his poor neighbors; who for awful fear listen
to Pluto, as if he were Plato. He preuails very far when he deals with some
officers; as a Pharisee with Christ's Steward, Tantum dabo, tantus valor in
quatuor syllabis: so powerful are two words. He preuailes like a sorcerer,
except he light upon a Peter: Thou and thy money be damned together. His heart
is like the East Indian ground, Acts 8.
where all the mines be so barren, that it bears neither grass, herb,
plant, nor tree. The lightness of his purse gives him a heavy heart, which yet
filled, does fill him with more cares. His medicine is his malady: he would
quench his avarice with money, and this inflames it, as oil feeds the lamp,
and some harish drinks increase thirst. His proctour in the law, and protector
against the law, is his money. His Alchymie is excellent, he can project much
silver, and waste none in smoke. His Rhetoric is how to keep him out of the
Subsidy. His Logic is to prooueheauen in his chest. His Mathematics, Omnia
suo commodo, non honestate mensurare, to measure the goodness of any thing by
his own profit. His Arithmaticke is in Addition and Multiplication, much in
Substraction, nothing in Division. His Physic is to minister gold to his eye,
though he starve his body. His Music is Sol, re, me, fa: Sola res me facit;
that which makes me, makes me merry. Divinity he has none: Idolatry enough to
his money: Sculptura is his Scriptura, and he has so many Gods as images of
coin. He is an il harvest man, for he is all at the rake, nothing at the
pitchfork. The devil is a slave to God, the world to the devil, the covetous
man to the world; he is a slave to the devils slave; so that his servant is
like to have a good office. He foolishly buries his soul in his chest of
silver, when his body must be buried in the mould of corruption. When the
Fisher offers to catch him with the Net of the Gospel, he strikes into the
mudde of Avarice, and will not be taken. The Dropsy of his (...) does
Senectute iuuenescere. Cicero calls it 1. Tim. 6. 10 De Senect.
an absurd thing, Quo minus viae restat, eo plus viatici quaerere. He sels his
best grain, and feeds himself on moldy crusts: he returns from plough, if
he remember that his cupboord was left unlocked. If once in a Reign he inuites
his neighbors to dinner, he whiles the times with frivolous discourses, to
hinder feeding; sets away the best dish, affirming it will be better cold:
observes how much each guest eats, and when they are risen and gone, falls
to himself, what for anger and hunger, with a sharp appetite. If he smells of
Gentility, you shall have at the nether end of his board a great Pasty uncut
up, for it is filled with bare bones; somewhat for show, but most to keep the
nether mess from eating. He has sworn to die in debt to his belly. He
deducts from a servants wages the price of a halter, which he cut to save his
master, when he had hung himself at the fall of the market. He lends nothing,
nor returns borrowed, unless it be sent for; which if he cannot deny, he will
delay in hope to have it forgotten. To excuse his base and sordid apparel,
he commends the thriftinesse of king Henry, how cheap his clothes were. His
fist is like the Prentices earthen box, which receives all, but lets out
nothing til it be broken. He is in more danger to be sand-blinde, then a
Goldsmith. Therefore some call him anidum, a non videndo. He must rise in the
night with a candle to see his corn, though he stumble in the So did a
wretched cornehoorder. Prodigus non habebit, sed auarus non habet.
straw and fire his barn. He has a lease of his wits, during the continuance
of his riches: if any crossestarts away them he is mad instantly. He would flay
an Ass for his skin, and like Hermocrates dying, bequeath his own goods to
himself. His case is worse then the prodigals: for the Prodigal shall have
nothing hereafter, but the Covetous has nothing in present.

Cure.
FOr his cure much might be prescribed; specially as they give in the
corporal Dropsy, purge the humor that feeds it. When the Covetous has
gotten much, and yet thirsts, a vomit of confiscation would do well, and set
him to get more. It was a good moral instruction that fell from that shame of
Philosophy Epicurus, the course to make a man rirh, is not to increase his
weath, but to restrain Si quem diuitem efficere voles, non est quod opes
augeas, sed tollas cupiditatem.
his covetous desires. The Apostles counsel is to fly it, and all occasions,
occupations that may beget or nourish it. Remember, says a Schooleman, that
though homo be de terra, and exterra, yet non ad terram, nec propter terram.
Man is on the Ephesians. 5. Lomb. Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 10.
earth, of the earth, but not for the earth, etc. I have read of one John
Patriark of Alexandria, asparing and strait-handed man, that being earnest at
his prayers, there appeared to him a Uirgin with a crown or garland of Olive
leaves: he desiring to know her name, she called her self Mercy: requiring
her intent, she requested him to marry her, promising him much prosperity on
that condition. He did so, and found himself still the richer for his
merciful deeds. She may offer her self long enough in these days ere she be
taken. Mercy may live a maid, for no man will marry her. Valerius Maximus
speaks of one Gilianus, a famous Roman, that besides hospitality to
strangers, paid the taxes of many poor, rewarded deserts vnsued to, bought out
the servitude of captives, and sent them home free: how few such like can an
English Historiographer write of? I would we had such a Gilianus amongst us, so
it were not from Rome. Well then, let the Covetous remember his end, and the
end of his riches, how certain, how uncertain they are! And intend his
couertice to a better object. Quis alius noster est finis, quam peruenire ad
regnum cuius nullus est Aug de ciuit. lib. 22. cap. 30.
finis? What else should be our end, save to come to the kingdom that has no
end! His cure is set down by God: I leave the receate with him. They that will
be rich, fall into 1. Tim. 6. 9. 10. 11. 17.
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction. For the love of money is the root of all
evil, etc. But thou, O man of God, fly these things, and follow after
righteousness, etc. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, etc. but that they be rich in good
works, etc. The place is powerful; let the Covetous read, observe, obey,
repent, believe, and be saved.

Usury, and Caninus appetitus, or the dog-like appetite. Disease 7.
NExt to the Dropsy of Couetice, I would place the immoderate hunger of
Usurie; for as the one drinks, so the other feeds to satisfy; and the former
is not more thirsty after his cupping, then the latter is hungry after his
devouring. Some have compared Usurie to the Gout, (by reason of that diseases
incidency to Usurers) which is an unnatural humor flowing to the extreme
parts. It is either Arthritis, an articular disease, which we call a
ioyntsickenesse: or Podagra, a pain inuading the joint of the great toe, or
the heel, or some inferior parts of the foot: this like a strong charm
binds a man to his chair. Musculus says, that Divines shall reform Usury,
when Physicians have cured the Gout: the sin and the disease are both
incurable. And that will one day rack the conscience, as this the sinews.
Herein the merely Covetous and the Usurer differ: the Covetous to be rich,
would undergo any labor, the Usurer would be rich, yet undergo no labor;
therefore like the gout-wrung, desires to sit still. I have thought fitter to
compare it with the dog-like appetite; which cannot refrain from devouring meat
without measure; which the stomach not able to bear, they fall to vomiting
like Dogs: hence again hunger is excited to more meat, and much meat
prouokes spewing: so that their whole life is nothing else but a vicissitude of
devouring and vomiting.

Causes.
IT is caused through cold distemper of the stomach, or through vicious and
sharp humors, which gnaw and suck the mouth of it: or through unmeasurable
dissipation of the whole body, which lightly follows the weakness of the
retentiue virtue. This animal hunger is raised partly from the coldness of the
heart, for there is no charity to warm it; partly from corrupt affections,
which like vicious humors gnaw and suck the conscience dry of all viuiditie,
whether of grace or humanity; partly through the weak retention of any good
instruction, whether from the Scriptures of God, or writings of sobermen.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe corporal disease is easily perceived, by insatiate feeding, which yet
ministers almost no virtue to the body, but it is rather made lean, and wasted
therewith; the skin is rarefied, the body made fluid and apt to much egestion,
etc. An Usurer is known by his very looks often, by his speeches commonly, by
his actions ever. He has a lean cheek, a meagre body, as if he were fed
at the devils allowance. His eyes are almost sunk to the backeside of his head
with admiration of money. His ears are set to tell the clock; his whole
carkase a mere Anatomy. Some Usurers have fatter carkases, and can find in
their hearts to lard their flesh, but a common meagernesse is upon all their
consciences. Foenus pecuniae, funus animae. Some spinne Usurie into such fine
threeds of distinction, that they take away all the names whereby it offends:
and because R. is a dogged letter, and they conceive a toothlesse practice,
Interest, Usury, and all terms with R. in them shall be put out: and the
Usurer shall be called only, one that lives upon his moneies. All his reaches
are at riches: his wit works like a Mole, to dig Moral. par. 2.
himself through the earth into hell. Plutarch writes strangely of Hares,
eodem tempore and parere, and alere, and alios concipere foetus; at one time to
bring forth, nourish and to conceive. Your Usurer makes his money truly do al
these Populus me si bulat at mih plaudo ipse domi. Hor.
at once. He drownes the noise of the peoples curses, with the music of his
money; as the Italians in a great thunder, ring their bells, and shoot off
their Cannons, by an artificial noise of their own, to dead the natural of
broken clouds. His practice mockes Philosophy, Quodex nihilo nihil fit, and
teaches of nothing to get something. He is a rank Whore-master with his
mistress Pecunia, and lives upon the lechery of metals. He does that office
for the Devil on earth, that his spirits do in hell, whip and torment poor
souls. His blows are without fense; except men (as Strepsiades desired) could
pluck the Moon out of the skies, his month and day will come.

Nature has set a pitch or term in all inferior things, when they shall
cease to increase. Old cattle breed no longer; doted trees deny fruit: the
tired earth becomes barren: only the Usurers money, the longer it breeds, the
lustier; and a hundred pounds put out twenty years since, is a great great
Grandmother of two or three hundred children: pretty striplings, able to beget
their mother again in a short time. Each man to heaven his hands for blessing
reares;
Only the Usurer needs not say his prayers.
Blow the Wind East or West, plenty or dearth,
Sickness or health, sit on the face of earth,
He cares not: Time will bring his money in:
Each day augments his treasure and his sin.
Be the day red or black in Calender,
Common, or holy fits the Usurer.
He starues his carcass; and true money's slave,
Goes with full chests, and thin cheeks to his grave.


He has not his gold so fast, as his gold him. As the covetous takes away the
difference betwixt the richest Mine and basest mould, use: so this pawne-groper
spoils all with ouer-vsing it. It is his ill luck that the beams of wealth
shine so full upon him: for riches like the sun fires and inflames objects
that are opposed in a diameter, though further removed; but heateth kindly,
when it shines upon a man latetally, though nearer. He shrinks up his guts with
a staruing diet, as with knot grass; and puts his stomach into his purse. He
sels time to his customers, his food to his coffer, his body to languishment,
his soul to the Devil.

Cure.
HIs Cure is very desperate: his best reprehension is deprehension: and the
best purge is to purge him out of the land. Hiera picra Galeni is a sovereign
confection to clarify him. Let him be fed, as Physicians prescribe in the cure
of the corporal disease, with fat suppings: and let him drink abundantly, till
he forget the date of his bonds. Turn him out from the chimny-corner into some
wilderness, that he may have a cold and perspirable air. Give him a good
vomit of Stibium, till he has spued up his extortions. Let his dyet-drinke be
repentance, his daily exercise restoring to every man his gotten interest. Give
him a little Opium, to rock his cares a sleep: and when he is cold, make him
a good fire of his Bills and Bonds. Give him a Iulep of the Gospel, to beget in
him the good blood of faith. If nothing work with him, let him make Psalm. 15.
his will, and hear his sentence, that he shall never dwell with the blessed.

Pride and the Pleurisy, Disease 8.
THe Pleurisy is defined to be an inward inflammation of that upper skin,
which girdeth the sides and the ribs: and therefore is called dolor
lateralis. Pride is a pursie affection of the soul, Lege, modo, ratione
carens: Without law, for it is rebellious: without measure, for it delights in
extremes: without reason, for it does all things with precipitation. The proud
man is bitten of the mad dog, the flatterer, and hence runs on a garget.

Causes.
THe Pleurisy is caused of an abundance of hot blood flowing unnaturally to
the foresaid place: or by the engendring of cold, gross, and viscous humors,
gathered into the void place of the breast, or into the lungs. This spiritual
disease arises from a blown opinion of ones self: which opinion is either
from ignorance of his own emptiness; and so like a Tumbrell full of nothing
but air, makes a greater sound, then a vessel of precious liquour: or from
arrogance of some good, which the owner knows too well. He never looks short
of himself, but always beyond the mark, and offers to shoot further then he
looks, but ever falls two bows short, humility and discretion.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Symptoms of the Pleurisy are difficult breathing, a continual Fever, a
vehement pricking on the affected side. The proud man is known by his gate,
which is peripateticall, strutting like a new Church warden. He thinks
himself singularly wise, but his opinion is singular, and goes alone. In the
company of good wits he fenceth in his ignorance with the hedge of silence,
that observation may not climb over to see his follies. He would have his
judgment for wearing his apparel pass vnmended, not vncommended. He shifts
his attire on some solemn day twice at least in twelve hours; but cannot
shift himself out of the Mercers books once in twelve months. His greatest
envy is the next Gentleman's better clothes: which if he cannot better or
equallize, he wears his own neglected. His apparel carries him to Church,
without devotion, and he rises up at the Creed to join with the rest in
confession, not of his faith, but his pride: for sitting down hides much of
his bravery. He feeds with no cheerful stomach, if he sit not at the upper end
of the table, and be called young master, where he is content to rise hungry, so
the obseruant company weary him with drinking to: on this condition he gives
his obligation for the shot. He loves his lying glass beyond any true friend;
and tells his credulous auditors, how many Gentlewomen have run mad for him:
when if a base femall servant should court him, I dare wager, he proves no
Adonis. If he were to die on the block as Byron, he would give charge for the
composition of his locks.

Pride.
PRide is of the feminine gender; (therefore the more intolerable in a
masculine nature:) much Ciuet is unsavory: No^ been olet, quae been semper
olet. She that breaths perfumes Ierom.
artificially, gives her self to have naturally corrupted lungs. This woman
has neither her own complexion nor proportion: for she is both painted, and
poynted together. She sits moderator every morning to a disputation betwixt the
comb and the glass: and whether concludes best on her beauty, caries her love
and praise. Howsoever, of men says the Poet: Forma viros neglecta decet.
Indeed Amor.
there is no graceful bahauiour like humility. This fault is well mended,
when a man is well minded: that is, when he esteems of others better then
himself. Otherwise a proud man is like the rising earth in montenous places:
this swells up monte, as he mente: and the more either earth aduanceth it self,
perpetually they are the more barren. He lives at a high sail, that the puffy
praises of his neighbors may blow him into the enchanted Island, vaineglory. He
shines like a Gloeworme in a dark village, but is a crude thing when he comes
to the Court. If the plethorie swells him in the vein of valor, nothing but
well-beating can hold him to a man. If ever he goes drunk into the field, and
comes off with a victorious parlee, he would swell to a son of Anak.

Cure.
THe Pleurisy is cured by drawing out some blood from the vein, that has
relation to the affected part. A Clister is very good, together with some
fomentations. It is helped much by cupping, I do not mean, drinking. God
prescribes the cure of Pride, by precept and pattern. Precept. Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God: the reason is given; for God resists the
proud, and gives grace 1. Pet. 5. 6.
to the humble. Pattern. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart; and you shall find rest unto Mat. 11. 29.
your souls. The Master is worth your hearing, the lesson your learning, the
recompense your receiving. The cure hereof is hard, for all vices are against
humility: nay, all virtues are against humility; as many are proud of their
good deeds: nay, humility has an opposition against humility, as if she were
false to her own person. Saepe homo de vanae gloriae contemptu vanus
gloriatur: so that often, humility by a prodigious and preposterous birth,
brings forth pride. Pride does make a wiseman a fool; co^tinues him a fool,
that is so; the opinion of his own wisdom excluding all opportune
possibility of receiving knowledge. Power precious juice into a vessel full of
base liquor, and it runs besides. That instruction is split, which you offer to
infuse into a soul so full of self affectation. Many a man had proved wise,
if he had not so thought himself. If the air of his pride be enclosed in a
baser bubble, attire, it is the more vile: for the generation of his sin is
produced from the corruption of himself. God made him a man, he has made
himself a beast; and now the Tailor (scarce a man himself) must make him a
man again: a brave man, a better man than ever Nature left him. Thus he is
like the Cynamon tree, the bark is better then the body; or some Vermin, whose
case is better then the carkase.

For his cure, open his pleuriticke vein with the sacrificing knife of the
Law; and tell him, that the cause of his pride is the effect of his sin. That
wickedness brought shame to nakedness, and apparel hides it; whereof being
proud, he glories in his own halter. Strip him of his gaudy clothes, and put
him in a Charnel house, where he may read visible lectures of mortality and
rottenness.

Palsy and timorous suspicion. Disease 9.
THe former sick were Tumidi, these are Timidi: they were bold to all evil,
these are fearful to all good. The palsy is a disease, wherein one half of
the body is endamaged in both sense and moving. Of that disease which is called
Paralysis, Resolution, or the dead palsy, wherein sometimes sense alone is lost,
sometimes motion alone, and sometimes both together perish, I intend not to
speak. It is (proportion considered) more dangerous to the body, then I would
imagine this disease to be to the soul. I would compare it to that corporal
infirmity, which Physicians call Tremorem, and some vulgarly the palsy;
wherein there is a continual shaking of the extremer parts: somewhat adverse
to the dead palsy: for that takes away motion, and this gives too much, though
not so proper and kindly. This spiritual disease is a cowardly fearfulness,
and a distrustful suspicion, both of actions and men. He dares not undertake,
for fear of he knows not what: he dares not trust, for suspicion of his own
reflection, dishonestie.

Cause.
THis evil in the body is caused generally through the weakness of the
sinews, or of the cold temperature of nature, or accidentally of cold drink
taken in Fevers. Old age and fear are not seldom causes of it. This
spiritual palsy arises either from the weakness of zeal, and want of that
kindly heat, to be affected to Gods glory, or from consciousnesse of
selfe-corruption, thereby measuring others. The first is Fearfulness, the
second Distrustfulnesse.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs of the palsy are manifest; of this not very close and reserved. He
conceiues what is good to be done, but fancies difficulties and dangers, like
to knots in a bul-rush, or rubbes in a smooth way. He would bowl well at the
mark of Integrity, if he durst venture it. He has no journey to go, but
either there are bugges, or he imagines them. Had he a pardon for his brother
(being in danger of death) and a Hare should cross him in the way, he would no
further, though his brother hanged for it. He owes God some good will, but he
dares not show it: when a poor plaintiff calls him for a witness, he dares
not reveal the truth, lest he offend the great adversary. He is a new
Nicodemus, and would steal to heaven, if no body might see him. He makes a
good motion bad by his fearfulness and doubting; and he calls his trembling
by the name of conscience. He is like that Collier, that passing through
Smithfield, and seeing some on the one side hanging, he demands the cause;
answer was made, for denying the Supremacy to King Henry: on the other side
some burning, he asks the cause; answered, for denying the real presence in
the Sacrament: some, quoth he, hanged for Papistry, and some burned for
Protestancie? then hoyte on a Gods name: chill be never another. His Religion
is primarily his Princes, subordinately his Landlords. Neither deliberates he
more to take a new religion, to rise by it; then he fears to keep his old,
lest he fall by it. All his care is for a ne noceat. He is a busy inquirer of
all Parliament acts, and quakes as they are read, lest he be found guilty. He
is sick, and afraid to dye, yet holds the potion in a trembling hand, and
quakes to drink his recovery. His thoughts are an ill balance, and will never
be equally poysed. He is a light vessel, and every great man's puff is ready
to ouerturne him. Whiles CHRIST stands on the battlements of heaven, and
beckens him thither by his word, his heart answers, I would feign be there,
but that some troubles stand in my way. He would ill with Peter walk to him on
the pauement of the Sea, or thrust out his hand with Moses, to take up a
crawling Serpent, or hazard the loss of himself, to find his Savior. His
mind is ever in suspicion, in suspension, and dares not give a confident
determination either way. Resolution, and his heart are utter enemies, and all
his Philosophy is to be a Sceptick. Whether is worse, to do an evil action
with resolution that it is good; or a good action with dubitation that it is
evil, some body tell me. I am sure neither is well: for an evil deed is
evil, whatsoever the agent think; and for the other, Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin. Negatiuely, this rule is certain and infallible: It is good
to forbear the doing of that, which we are not sure is lawful to be done.
Affirmatively; the work being good, labor thy understanding so to think it.

Fear rather then profit has made him a flatterer; and you may read the
statutes and his Landlords disposition in the characters of his countenance. A
Soldier, a Husbandman, and a Merchant should be ventrous. He would be Gods
Husbandman, and sow the seeds of obedience, but for observing the wind and
weather of great men's frowns. He Eccles. 11. 4. Luke 11. 13.
would be Gods factor, but that he fears to lose by his Talent, and therefore
buries it. He would be Gods soldier, but that the world and the devil are
two such shrewd and sore enemies. He once began to prosecute a deed of
charity, 2. Tim. 2. 3.
and because the event crossed him, he makes it a rule to do no more good by.

As he is fearful of himself, so distrustful of others, carrying his heart
in his eyes, his eyes in his hands: as he in the Comedy, Oculatae mihi sunt
manus, credunt quod vident: He knows nothing by himself but evil, and
according to that rule measures others. He would feign be an Usurer, but that
he dares not trust the Law with wax and paper. He swears damnably to the
truth of that he affirms; as fearing otherwise not to be believed, because
without that othing it, he will credit none himself. The bastardy of swearing
lays on him the true fatherhood. He will trust neither man nor God without a
pawn: not so much as his Tailor with the stuff to make his clothes: he must
be a Broker, or no neighbor. He has no faith; for he believes nothing, but
what he knows; and knowledge nullifies belief. If others laugh, he imagines
himself their ridiculous object: if there be any whispering, conscius ipse
sibi, etc. it must be of him without question. If he goes to law, he is the
advocates sprite, and haunts him worse then his own malus genius. He is his
own Cater, his own Receiver, his own Secretary; and takes such pains, as if
necessity forced him, because all servants he thinks thieves. He dares not
trust his money above ground for fear of men; nor under ground for fear of
rust. When he throws his censures at actions, his luck is still to go out:
and so whiles he plays with other men's credits, he cousins himself of his
own. His opinion lights upon the worst sense still; as the Fly, that passes
the sound parts to faste^ on a scab; or a Dorre, that ends his flight in a
dunghill. Without a Subpaena these timorous cowherds dare not to London, for
fear lest the city air should conspire to poison them: where they are ever
crying, Lord, have mercy on us, when as Lord, have mercy on us is the special
thing they feared. The ringing of bells tunes their hearts into melancholy; and
the very sight of a corpse is almost enough to turn them into corpses. On the
Thames they dare not come, because they have heard some there drowned: nor
near the Parliament House, because it was once in danger of blowing up. Home
this Emblem of diffidence comes, and there lives with distrust of others, and
dies in distrust of himself; only now finding death a certain thing to trust
to.

Cure.
THe Cure of this bodily shaking is much at one with that of the Palsy;
specially if it be caused of cold and gross humors. To help a man of this
spiritual trembling, these intentions must be respected. First, to purge his
heart by repentance, from those foul and feculent corruptions, wherewith it is
infected: and being clean himself, he will more charitably censure of others.
Then teach him to lay the heauiest load on himself, and to spare others. True
wisdom from above is without judging, Iam. 3. 17.
without hypocrisy. The wisest men are the least censurers: they have so much
a do to mend all at home, that their neighbors live quietly enough by them.
Set him a good affection, and he will have a good construction. Minister to his
soul a draught of charity, which will cleanse him of suspicion: for Charity
thinks no evil. None? It thinks no 1. Cor. 13. 5.
evil, unless it perceive it apparently. To credit all were silliness; to
credit none, sullinnesse. Against his timorousness he has an excellent
receipt, set down by God himself. Fear not the fear of the wicked; but
sanctify the Lord Esa. 8. 12. 13
of hosts himself: let him be your fear, let him be your dread. The way for
him to fear nothing as he does, is to fear one thing as he should. Awful
reverence to God does rather bolden, then terrify a man. They that trust in
the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for
ever. Psa. 125. 1.
They may be moved, they cannot be removed, from what is good, from what is
their good, their god. This course may cure his paralyticke soul; only if it
shall please God, to be his Physician.

Immoderate Thirst, and Ambition. Disease. 10
THere is a disease in the body called immoderate thirst; which is after much
drinking desired and answered, a still sensible dryness. By this I would (I
suppose not unfitly) express that spiritual disease, Ambition, a proud souls
thirst, when a draught of honor causes a drought of honor; and like Tullies
strange soil, much rain of promotion falling from his heaven the Court, makes
him still as dry as dust. He is a most rank Churl, for he drinks often, and
yet would have no man pledge him.

Cause.
THe disease is caused in the body, through abundant heat drying up moisture:
and this is done by hot, choleric, or salt humors engendered in the stomach,
or through Fevers burning or Ecticke.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs of the disease are best discerned by the patients words. The cause
of Ambition is a strong opinion of honor; how well he could become a high
place, or a high place him. It is a proud covetousness, a glorious and
Court-madnes. The head of his reason caught a bruise on the right side, his
understanding; and ever since he follows affection, as his principal guide.
He professes a new quality, called the art of climbing: wherein he teaches
others by pattern, not so much to aspire, as to break their necks. No staire
pleases him, if there be a higher; and yet ascended to the top, he complains
of lowness. He is not so soon laid in his bed of honor, but he dreams of a
higher preferment, and would not sit on a seat, long enough to make it warm.
His advancement gives him a fresh provocation; and he now treades on that with
a disdainful foot, which ere-while he would have kissed to obtain. He
climbes falling towers, and the hope to scale them, swallows all fear of
toppling down. He is himself an Intelligencer to greatness, yet not without
vnderofficers of the same rank. You shall see him narrow-eyed with watching,
affable and open-brested like Absolon, full of insinuation so long as he is at
the staire-foote: but when authority has once spoken kindly to him, with
Friend, sit up higher, he looks rougher then Hercules; so big, as if the
river of his blood would not be banked within his veins. His tongue is
flabellum Diaboli, and flagellum iusti: bent to scourge some, flatter others,
infect, infest all. Agrippina, Neros mother, being told by an Astrologer, that
her son should be Emperor, but to her sorrow: answered, Let my sorrow be
what it will, so my son may get the Empire. He has high desires, low
deserts. As Tully for his Pindinessus, he spends much money about a little
preferment; and with greater cost then the captain bought his Burgesship, he
purchases incorporeall fame; which passes away, as swift, as time does follow
motion; and whose weight is nothing but in her name, whereas a lower place well
managed, leaves behind it a deathlesse memory. Like a great wind, he blows
down all friends that stand in his way to rising. Policy is his post-horse,
and he rides all upon the spur, till he come to Nonesuch. His greatest
plague is a Rival. Nec quemquam iam far potest Caesarue priorem,
Pompeiusue parem. Iuuen. Sat. 2.

Tolluntur in altum, vt lapsu grauiore ruant.


He is a child in his gaudy desires, and great Titles are his rattles, which
still his crying, til he see a new toy. He kisses his wits, as a Courtier his
hand, when any wished fortune salutes him: and it tickles him, that he has
stolen to promotio^ without Gods knowledge. Ambitio ambientium crux. Ambition is
the rack, whereon he tortureth himself. The court is the sea, wherein he
desires to fish: but the net of his wit and hope breaks, and there he drownes
himself. An old courtier being asked what he did at Court, answered, I do
nothing, but undo my self.

Cure.
FOr the bodily disease, caused of heat and dryness, Physicians prescribe
Oxicratum, a drink, made of vinegar and water sodden together: a chief
intention in them, is to procure sleep, etc. To cure the immoderate Thirst of
Ambition, let him take from God this prescript: He that exalts himself,
shall be brought low: but he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. That he,
who sets himself down in the lower room, hears the masters of the feasts
inuitation, Friend, sit up higher. That a glorious Angel by ambition became a
Devil; and a Lucifer of his sons, the king of Babylon, that said, I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God, is brought down to hell, and to the
sides of the Esa. 14. 14.
pit. That the first step to heavens Court, is humility. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. That Mat. 5. 3.
he, who walks on plain ground, is in little danger to fall; if he do fall,
he rises with small hurt: but he that climbes high, is in more danger of
falling; and if he fall, of killing. That the great blasts of powerful envy
overthrow Oaks and Cedars, that oppose their huge bodies; and pass through
hollow Willowes, or over little shrubs, that grow under the wall. That the
higher state is the fairer mark for misfortune to shoot at: That which way
soever the ambitious man looks, he finds matter of deiection. Above him,
behold a God casting an ambitious Angel out of heaven, Luke 1. 48.
an ambitious king from the society of men: but so respecting the lowliness
of his handmaiden, that all generation call her blessed. Below him, behold the
earth, the womb that he came from, and the tomb that must receive him. About
him, behold, others transcending him in his best qualities. Within him, a
mortal nature, that must die, though he were clad in gold; and perhaps an
evil conscience stinging him, whose wounds are no more eased by promotion,
then a broken bone is kept by a tissue-coate from aching. That there is a higher
reckoning to be made of a higher place. That like citie-houses, that on small
foundations carry spacious roofes, his own toppe-heauy weight is ready to
tumble him down. That he mounts up like a seeled Dove, and wanting eyes of
discretion, he may easily light in a puddle. That he is but a stone tossed up
into the air by fortunes sling, to receive the greater fall. That for want of
other malignant engines, he begets on himself destruction. That Tiberius
complained of fortune; that having set him up in so high a monarchy, she did
not vouchsafe him a ladder to come down again. That the honors of this world
have no satisfactory validity in them. The poor labourer would be a farmer:
the farmer after two or three dear years aspires to a yeoman: the yeomans
son must be a Gentleman. The Gentleman's ambition flies Iustice-height. He is
out of square with being a Squire, and shoots at knighthood. Once knighted, his
dignity is nothing, except worth a noble title. Then, he thinks himself,
whiles a mere Baron, a bare on: the world must count him a Count, or he is not
satisfied. He is weary of his Earldome, if there be a Duke in the land. That
granted, he thinks it base to be a subject: nothing now contents him but a
crown. Crowned, he vilifies his own kingdom for narrow bounds, whiles he
has greater neighbors; he must be Caesar'd to an universal Monarch. Let it
be granted, is he yet content? No, then the earth is a molehill, too narrow
for his mind, and he is angry for lack of Elbow-roome. Vnus Pellaeo Iuueni
non sufficit orbis:
Aestuat infoelix angusto limine mundi.
Last to be king of men is idle, he must Deified: and now Alexander conceits
his immortality, and causes Temples and Altars to be built to his name. And
yet, being thus adored, is not pleased, because he cannot command heaven, and
control nature. Rome robbed the world, Sylla Rome, and yet again Sylla
himself, not content till then, when advancement has set him up as a Butte,
he cannot be without the quiver of fears. Thus the largest draught of honor
this world can give him, does not quench, but inflame his ambitious thirst.
Well, let repentant humiliation prick the bladder of his blown hopes, and let
out the windy vapors of self-love. And now let him hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and on my life he shall be satisfied. Mat. 5. 6.


Inflammation of the reins, or lustfulnesse. Disease 7.
AMong many diseases incident to the reins, as the Diabetes, ulcers, the stone
there, and the emission of bloody urine, there is one called inflammation of
the reins. To this not unfitly, by comparing the causes, Symptoms, and cure
of either, I do liken Lust: the Scripture calls it by a general name,
Uncleanness. Covetousness is commonly the disease of old age, Ambition of
middle age, Lust of youth: if it extends further, it portends less help.

Causes.
THe Causes of the bodily disease are given to be. First, corrupt humors.
Secondly, drinking of many medicines. Thirdly, vehement ridings. Consider these
in our comparison, and tell me, if they sound not a similitude. There is
corruption perdita, whence comes eruptio pestifera. Prouocatur libido, vbi
deficit; reuocatur, vbi desinit. Medicines are invented, not to qualify, but
to calefie; as if they intended to keep alive their concupiscence, though they
dead their conscience.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs are many. There is a beating pain about the first joint of the
back, a little above the bastard ribs, etc. with others, which modesty bids
cover with the cloak of silence. The Lustful man is a monster; as one that
uses, Humano capiti ceruicem iungere equinam.


He affects Popery for nothing else, but the patronage Hor.
of fornication, and frankenesse of Indulgence. He cites Harding frequently,
that common Courteghians in hot countries, are a necessary evil: which he
believes against Gods express prohibition, in a hoter climate then Italy.
There Deuteronomy. 23. 17
shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel: then certainly no whore-master.
He thinks it; if a sin, yet peccadillo, a little sin; and that the
venereall faults are venial, at least venall. Thus he would be a Bawd to the
sin, if not to the sinners. He is careless of his own name, of his own
soul: injurious to his own minion, whom he corrupts: to his bastard, whom he
brings up like himself. He increases mankind, not for love to the end, but to
the means. His soul is wrapped in the trusse of his senses; and a whore is
the Communis terminus, where they all meet. He has no command over his own
affections, though over countries; as our modern Epigrammatist of Hercules.
Owen Epigr.
Lenam non potuit, potuit superare leaenam;
Quem fera non valuit vincere, vicit hera.
His practice is, as it is said of some Tobacchonists, to dry up his purse,
that he may dry up his blood, and the radical moisture. Nil nisi turpe iuuat,
curae est sua cuique voluptas; Amor. 1.

Haec quoque ab alterius grata dolor venit.


The delight of his wickedness is the indulgence of the present, for it
indures but the doing. He never rests so contentedly, as on a forbidden bed.
He is a felonious picklocke of Virginities, and his language corrupts more
innocent truth, then a bad Lawyers. He is an Almanac from eighteen to eight
and twenty; if he scapes the fire so long. He can never call his hairs and
his sins equal; for as his sins increase, his hairs fall. He buys admission
of the Chambermaid with his first fruits. He lives like a Salamander in the
flames of lust, and quenches his heat with fire; and continues his days under
Zona Torrida. He spends his forencone with Apothecaries; the afternoon of his
days with Surgions: the former beget his misery, the latter should cure it.
Every rare female, like a wandering Planet, strikes him: hence he grows amazed.
His eyes are the trap-dores to his heart; and his lascivious hopes suck poison
from the fairest flower. He drownes himself in a woman's beauty, which is Gods
good creation, as a melancholy distracted man in a Crystal river. When
conscience plucks him by the sleeue, and would now after much importunacy
speak with him, he bids her meet him at fifty: he charge repentance attend
him at master Doctors. When his life's sun is ready to set, he marries, and is
then knocked with his own weapon: his own disablenesse, and his wives
youthfulness, like bells ringing all in. Now his common theme is to brag of
his young sins; and if you credit his discourse, it shall make him far
worse then he was. At last, he is but kept above ground by the art of
Surgery.

Cure.
FOr his cure, let him blood with the law of God: Thou shall not commit
adultery. That the righteous God tries Psalm. 7. 9.
the heart and the reins: even the place, where his disease lies. That Si
Renum cupis incolumem seruare salutem,
Sirenum cantus effuge, sanus eris.


That breuis est voluptas fornicationis, perpetua poena fornicatoris: Owen Epig.
the pleasure of the sin is short, the punishment of the Ieron.
sinner eternal. That Nuda Uenus picta est, nudi pinguntur amores:
Nam, quos nuda capit, nudos amittat oportet.


That his desired cure, is his deserved poison. Age and sleep are his
infalliblest Physicians. Disease is the mortifier of his sin, and cures it
with an issue. That no black shield of the darkest night, no subtle art can
hide or defend from Gods impulsive sight. That, as a modern Poet of ours: Joy
graven in sense, like snow in water wastes.
Without conserve of virtue nothing lasts.
That he walks the highway to the devil; and Winds down the blind
stairs to hell. That as it is called a noble sin, it shall have a noble
punishment. That he has taken a voyage to the kingdom of darkness; and is
now at his iournies end, when lust leaves him ere he discharge it. Let him
observe S. Paul's medicine: Fly fornication: Every sin that a man does, is
without the body: but he that 1. Cor. 6. 8.
commits fornication sins against his own body. And This is the will of
God, even your sanctification, and that ye 1. These. 4. 3.
should abstain from fornication. Let him shun Opportunity as his Bawd, and
Occasion as his Pandar. Let him often drink that potion, that Augustine at his
conversion. Let Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12. Romans 13. 13.
us walk honestly as in the day time, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, etc. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make
not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Phisicians
prescribe, for the reins inflammation, cooling things, cataplasmes, bathes,
etc. A special intention to cure this burning concupiscence, is to cool it
with the tears of penitence. Weep for thy sins; and if the disease grow
still strong upon thee, take the antidote God has prescribed, Marriage. It is
better to marry then to burn. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed 1.
Cor. 7. Heb. 13. 4.
undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Much exercise does
well to the cure of this Inflammation. When our affections refuse to sit on the
nest of Lust, and to keep it warm, the brood of actual follies will not be
hatched. How Aegistus (not without company) became an Adulterer, In promptu
causa est, desidiosus erat. For.
Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus.


Cupid shootes in a slugge, and still hits the sluggish. This intemperate fire
is well abated by withdrawing the fuel. Delicates to excite Lust, are spurs
to post a man to hell. It is fasting spettle, that must kill his tetter.
Uncleanness is the bastard begot of Gluttony and Drunkenness. Sine Cerere and
Baccho friget Uenus. When the mouth is made a tunnell, and the belly a barrel,
there is no contentment without a bed and a bedfellow.

The rotten Fever, or Hypocrisy, Disease 12.
AMongst almost innumerable kinds of Fevers; there is one called, (...), or
febris putrida, the rotten Fever: which is a fever of one fit, continuing many
days without any great mutation. Therefore it is called of some, continens
febris, a stable and constant fever. Hereunto I have likened a rotten disease
in the soul, called Hypocrisy; which is nothing else, but vice in Virtues
apparel.

Cause.
THis corporal disease is caused, when the humors do putrify and rot
equally within the vessels. It is not engendered in those that be lean and
slender, or of a thin and rare state of body, or of a cold temper; but in
those that be hot and abound with blood, fleshy, gross and thicke-bodied. Me
thinks this malady smells very like Hypocrisy; which is a rotten heart, festred
and putrified with habituated sins, there with great delight and indulgence
reserved: not incident to those that have a weak, thin, and slender opinion
of themselves; that through humility have a lean and spare construction of
their own deserts: no; nor to them that be of a cold temper and disposition
to religion, not caring either to be good, or to seem so: but to those that
have a gross and a blown conceit of themselves, swelling into an
incomprehensible ostentation, and implacably hot in the persecution of that,
they inwardly affect not.

Signs and Symptoms.
ROr the Signs of this putrid fever, they be not externally discerned; except
you feel the pulse, which beats thick, quick, and vehement. The Hypocrite is
exceedingly rotten at core, like a Sodom apple, though an ignorant passenger
may take him for sound. He looks squintey'd, aiming at two things at once, the
satisfying his own lusts, and that the world may not be aware of it. Bonus
videri non esse; malus esse non videri cupit. They would seem good, that they
might be evil alone: not seem evil, lest they might not then be evil so
much. Oues visu, Vulpes actu, actu: having much angel without, more devil
within: a villenous Host dwelling at the sign of, Friend. Tuta frequensque via
est, per amici fallere nomen.
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet,
Which one thus wittily englisheth:

A safe and common thing it is,
through friendship to deceive.
As safe and common as it is,
It Is knavery, by your leave.


He is on Sunday like the Rubricke, or Sunday-letter, zealously red; but all
the week you may write his deeds in black. He fryes in words, freezeth in
works; speaks in else, does good by inches. He is a rotten tunder shining in
the night: an ignis fatuus, looking like a fixed star: a painted sepulcher,
that conceales much rottenness: a crude Gloe-worme shining in the dark: a
stinking dunghill covered over with snow: a fellow of a bad course, and good
discourse: a loose hung Mill, that keeps a great clacking, but grindes no
grist: a lying hen, that cackles when she has not laid. He is like some
tap-house, that has upon the painted walls written, Fear God, be sober, watch
and pray, etc. when there is nothing but swearing and drunkenness in the
house. His tongue is hot as if he had eaten pepper, which works coldly at the
heart. He burns in the show of forward profession; but it is a poor fire of
zeal, that will not make the pot of Charity sees. He is in company holy and
demure, but alone demurres of the matter; so shuts out the devil at the gate,
and lets him in at the posterne.

His words are precise, his deeds concise; he prays so long in the Church,
that he may with less suspicion prey on the Church: which he does the more
peremptorily, if his power be answerable. If his place will afford it, his
grace will without question. He bears an earnest affection to the Temple, as a
hungry man to his meat, only to devour it. They say, come, let us take to
our selves the houses of Psalm. 83. 12.
God in possession. We pray for their conversion, but if there be no hope, we
must use the next words of the Psalm: Oh my God, make them as a wheel: like
the stubble before the wind. Uerse 13.
They can abide no point of Popery, but only this, Churchrobbing. Every thing
the Papists used but this is superstition. Some are so charitable, that having
got the tythe-corne from the Church, they reserve from the presented Incumbent
their petty tithes also: like monstrous thieves, that having stole the whole
piece, ask for the remnants. Nay, it is not enough, that they devour our
Parsonages, but they also devour our persons, with their contumelious
slanders. Advantage can make his religion play at fast and loose; for he only
so long grows full of devotion, as he may grow full by devotion. His
arguments are weak or strong, according to his cheer; and he discourses best
after dinner. Self-conceit swells him, and popular applause bursts him. He
never gives the law good words, but when it has him upon the hippe. Like a
kind Hen, he rules and feeds his chickens fat, starues himself. He
forces formal preciseness, like a Porter to hold the door, whiles devils
dance within. He gives God nothing but show, as if he would pay him his
reckoning with chalk; which increases the debt. If ever his alms smell of
bounty, he gives them in public. He that desires more to be seen of men
then of God, commend me to his conscience by this token, he is an Hypocrite.
He couers his ravenous extortions, and covetous oppressions, with the show of
small beneficences; and so may for his charity go to the devil. Indeed,
gentilem agit vitam sub nomine Christiano: He lives Hieron. ad Celant. Tom. 1
fol. 109.
Turk under the name of Christian. He is false in his friendship, hartlesse
in his zeal, proud in his humility. He railes against enterludes, yet is
himself never off the stage, and condemns a mask, when his whole life is
nothing else. He sends a beggar from his gate, bountifully feasted with
Scripture sentences; and (though he likes them not) so much of the Statutes, as
will serve to save his money. But if every house were of his profession,
Charities hand would no longer hold up pouerties head. What his tongue spoke,
his hands recant; and he weeps when he talks of his youth, not that it was
wicked, but that it is not. His tongue is his dissimulations lacquay, and runs
continually on that errand: he is the Strangers Saint, his neighbors
Sycophant, his own Politician: his whole life being nothing else, but a
continual scribbling after the set Copy of Hypocrisy.

Cure.
FOr his cure, there is more difficulty then of the rotten fever. In this, two
special intentions are used; bloudletting, and drinking of cool water, etc.
But alas! what medicine should a man give to him, whom he knows not to be
sick? His heart is rotten, his husk, fair and sightly. The core of his
disease lies in his conscience; and like an onyon, is covered with so many
pills, that you would not supect it: Their best Physic is that, God gives to
Israel: Cleanse thy heart from iniquity, Oh Jerusalem, that thou may Ier. 4.
14.
be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts remain within thee? If this serve
not, let them read Christ's bill, his denunciation against them, so often
menaced, Woe unto you, hypocrites. I would tell them, that simulata sanctitas,
duplez iniquitas; and their life is so much the more abominable, as they have
played the better part. But I refer them to the White-Diuell.

Flux and Prodigality. Disease 13.
THere be diverse Fluxes according to Physicians: Lienteria, a smoothness of
the bowels, suffering the meat to slide away not perfectly digested:
Difenteria, which is an exulceration of the bowels; (whereof also they make
four forts:) Tenasmus, which is a continual provocation to seege, that the
patient can neither defer, nor eschew, yet vents nothing but slime. The Flux
Diarrhea is the general, as being without exulceration or inflammation. To
this I compare Prodigality, which is a continual running out.

Cause.
THe corporal disease is caused: First, either by debilitie of the instruments
that serve to digestion. Secondly, or through abundance of nourishment, moist
and viscous soon corrupted. Thirdly, or through weakness of the retentiue
faculty. The similitude holds well in the causes of Prodigality. There is
first a weakness of his understanding and brain, to digest that which his
friends left him. Secondly, abundance of goods has made him wanton; and the
most part being slimy and ill gotten, it wastes like Snow, faster then it was
gathered. Thirdly, the debilitie of his retentiue virtue is a special cause.
For Prodigality is pictured with the eyes shut, and the hands open; lauishly
throwing out, and blindly not looking where.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Symptoms of this disease are manifest. He is an out liar, and never
keeps within the pale. He runs after liberality and beyond it. He is
diametrially opposite to the Covetous; and the difference is in the transposing
of one Aduerbe. The one, dat non rogatus: the other, non dat rogatus. One hand
is his receiver, but like Briareus, he has an hundred hands to lay out. He
would bear Dissipatoris, non dispensatoris officium. His father went to the
devil one way, and he will follow him another: and because has chosen the
smoother way, he makes the more haste. Parasites are his Tenterhookes, and they
stretch him till he bursts; and then leave him hanging in the rain. You may
put his heart in your pocke; if you talk to him bare-headed, with many
parentheses of your worship: there is no vpstart buys his titles at a dearer
rate. He loves a well furnished table; so he may have three Ps. to his guests:
Parasites, Panders, and Players: the fourth he cannot abide, Preachers. He will
be applauded for a while, though he want (almost) pity, when he wants. Like an
houreglasse turned up, he never leaves running, till all be out. He never
looks to the bottom of his patrimony, til it be quite vnrauelled; and then
(too late) complains that the stock of his wealth ran course at the fag-end.
His father had too good an opinion of the world, and he too much disdaines it.
Herein he speeds, as he thinks, a little better; that those that barked at his
Sire like dogs, fawn upon him, and lick his hand like Spaniels. He vyes
vanities with the Slothful, and it is hard to say, who wins the game; yet give
him the bucklers: for Idlneesse is the coach to bring a man to Needome,
Prodigality the post-horse. His father was no man's friend but his own; and he
(says the Proverb) is no man's foe else: of what age soever, he is under the
years of discretion; and if Providence do not take him Ward, his heirs shall
never be sought after. His vessel has three leakes, a lascivious eye, a
gaming hand, a deified belly; and to content these, he can neither rule his
heart, nor his purse. When the shot comes to be paid, to draw in his company is
a quarrel. When he feels want, (for till then he never sees it) he complains
of Greatness for ingratitude, that he was not thought of when promotions were a
dealing. When his last acre lies in his purse, he proiects strange things, and
builds houses in the air, having sold those on the ground he turns
malecontent, and shifts that he never had, Religion. If he have not learned
those tricks that undid him, Flattery and Cheating, he must needs press
himself to the wars. He never before considered adposse, but advelle, and
now he forgets velle, and looks only to posse. Take him at first putting
forth into his sea of wealth and profuseness, and his fullness gives him Mant.
-- Languentis stomachum, quem nulla ciborum,
Blandimenta mouent, quem nulla inuitat orexis:
His stomach so rasping since his last meal, that it grows too cowardly to
fight with a chicken: then he calls for sport like sauce to excite appetite; and
when all fails, thinks of sleep, lies down to find it, and misseth it. In
the conniuence of his security, harlots and sycophants rifle his estate, and
then send him to rob the hogs of their prouander, Jove's nuts, acornes. In
short time he is dismounted from his coach, disquantitied of his train,
distasted of his familiars, distressed of his riches, distracted of his wits;
and never proves his own man, till he has no other. At last, after his
houering flight, he drops to a center, which is a room in the Alms house,
that his father built.

Cure.
FOr his Cure; (I will not meddle with his estate, I know not how to cure that;
but for his soul) let him first take a pill of Repentance: for howsoever he
has scowr'd his estate, he has clogged his conscience, and it must be purged.
Bind up his unruly hands, so lavish and letting fly. Pull off from his eyes
that filme of error, that he may distinguish his reproouing friends from his
flattering enemies. Cool his luxurious heat with Solomon's aftercourse, the
banquet of his pleasures being done: that for all these things God will bring him
to judgment. That beggerie Eccl. 11 9. Luke 15. 13.
is the heir apparent of riote, as the younger son in the Gospel (we have
too many such younger brothers.) That his answer to those that admonish his
frugalitie, is built upon a false ground: My goods are my own, as the
Parasites said of their tongs: whereas he is not a Lord, but Psalm. 12. 4. Luke
16. 2.
a Steward, and must one day reddere rationem dispensationis. The bill of his
reckoning will be fearful. Item, for so many oaths. Item, for so many lies.
Item, for drunkenness. Item, for lust, etc. Nay, and Item for causing so many
Tavern Items, which were worse then Physic bills to his estate. To conclude,
if Death find him as Bankerout of spiritual, as of worldly goods, it will
send him to an eternal prison.

The Iaundeis and Profaneness. Disease 14.
ICterus or the Iaundeis, is a spreading of yellow choler or melancholy all
over the body. To this I compare Profaneness, which is an epidemiall and
universal spreading of wickedness throughout all powers of the soul.

Cause.
THe Iaundeys is caused sometimes accidentally, when the blood is corrupted by
some outward occasion with out a Fever; or through inflammation and change of
the natural temperament of the liver; or through obstruction of the passages
which go to the bowels, etc. The causes of Profaneness are an affected
ignorance, a dead heart, a sensual disposition, an intoxicate reason, an
habituated delight in sin, without sense, without science, without conscience.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Symptoms of both the Iaundeys and Profaneness need no description: their
external appearance discoloring, the one the skin, the other the life, save
both Physicians much labor; if it be true, that the knowledge of the disease
is half the cure. He has sold himself to wickedness, for the price of a
little vanity, like Ahab; or let a Lease, not to expire without his life. At
first sight you would take him for a man; but he will presently make you change
that opinion, for Circe's cup has transformed him. His eyes are the casements,
that stand continually open, for the admission of lusts to the unclean rest of
his heart. His mouth is the devils trumpet, and sounds nothing but the music
of hell. His hand is besmeared with aspersions of blood, lust, rapine, theft;
as if all the infernal serpents had disgorged their poisons on it. He loves
Satan extremely, and either swimmes to him in blood, or sails in a vessel of
wine. His heaven is a Tavern, whence he never departs, till he has cast up
the reckoning. He is ready to swear, there is no God, though he swears
perpetually by him. Religion is his footstool, and Policy his horse, Appetite
his huntsman, Pleasure his game, and his dogs are his senses. He endeavors by
the continuance of his sports, to make the motion of pleasure circular, and the
flame of his delight round, as the Moon at full, and full as bright. The point
of his heart is touched with the Lodestone of this world, and he is not quiet
but toward the North, the scope of wickedness. He has bowled his soul at the
mark of sensuality, and runs to hell to overtake it. If the devil can
maintain him a stock of thoughts, let him alone for execution; though to
bastard his own children, and water on his fathers grave. To conclude, he is
but a specialtie of hell antedated and strives to be damned before his time.

Cure.
HIs Physic, as in some Iaundeis, must be strong of operation; for the
dryness of the ones stomach, of the others conscience, does eneruate the
force of medicines. The special intentions of his cure are strong purgations
and bloodletting. If the law of God does not purge out this corruption from
his heart, let him blood by the law of man: manacle his hands, shackle his
feet, dispute upon him with arguments of iron and steel: let him smart for
his blasphemies, slanders, quarrels, whoredoms: and because he is no allowed
Surgeon, restrain him from letting blood. Musle the Wolf, let him have his
chain and his clogge, bind him to the good behavior: and if these usual
courses will not learn him continence, sobriety, peace, try what a Newgate
and a grate will do. If nothing, let us lament his doom. Their end is
damnation, whose Phil. 3. 19.
God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things.

Apoplexy and Security. Disease 15.
THe Apoplexy is a disease, wherein the fountain and original of all the
finewes being affected, every part of the body loses both moving and sense;
all voluntary functions hindered, as the wheels of a clock when the poyse is
down. To this I liken Security, which though it be not sudden to the soul, as
the other is to the body; yet is almost as deadly. There may be some difference
in the strength of opposition, or length of obsession; all similitudes run not
like Coaches on four wheels: they agree in this, they both lie fast a sleep;
the eyes of the ones body, of the others reason shut, and they are both wtihin
two groans of death.

Cause.
THe cause of the Apoplexy is a flegmaticke humor, cold, gross, and tough,
which abundantly fills the ventricles of the brain. The cause of Security, is
a dusking and clouding of the understanding with the black humors, and dark
mists of selfe-ignorance; a want of calling himself to a reckoning, till he be
non-suted.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs of the corporal are more palpable, then of the spiritual
sickness. The parish of his affections is extremely out of order; because
Reason his Ordinary does not visit; nor Memory his Churchwarden present; (or
if it at all, Omnia been.) Neither does Understanding the Judge censure and
determine. He keeps the chamber of his heart locked, that meditation enter
not, and though it be sluttish with dust and cobwebs, will not suffer
repentance to sweep it. He loses the fruit of all crosses; and is so far
from breaking his heart at a little affliction, that a sharp twitch stirs
him not. Whereas a melting heart bleeds at the least blow, he feels not the
sword drinking up his blood. Most men sleep nigh half their time, he is never
awake: though the Sun shines, he lives in sempiternall night. His soul lies
at ease, like the rich man's, and is loath to rise. Custom has rocked him
asleep in the cradle Luke 12.
of his sins, and he sleeps without starting. His Security is like Popery,
a thick curtain ever drawn to keep out the light. The Element he lives in,
is mare mortuum. He is a foolish Governor, and with much clemency and
indulgence nurseth rebellion; neither dare he chide his affections, though they
conspire his death. He is the Antitype to the fabulous Legend of the seven
Sleepers. Policy may use him as a block, cannot as an engine. He is not
dangerous in a commonwealth; for if you let him alone, he troubles nobody.

Cure.
THe Cure of the Apoplexy is almost desperate. If there be any help, it is by
opening both the Cephalica veins; and this course speeds the patient one way.
Security, if it sleeps not to death, must be rung awake. There are five bells,
that must ring this peale.

First, Conscience is the Trebble, and this troubles him a little: when this
bell strikes, he drownes the noise of it with good fellowship. But it sounds
so shrill, that at last it will be heard; especially if God pulls it.

Secondly, Preaching is the Stint or the Certain to all the rest. This is Aarons
Bell, and it must be rung loud to wake him: for lightly he begins his nappe
with the Sermon, and when the parish is gone home, he is left in his seat
fast asleep: yet this may at last stir him.

Thirdly, another Bell in this ring, is the death of others round about him;
whom he accompanyes to the Church with a deader heart then the corpse; knows he
is gone to judgment, yet prouides not for his own accounts at that Audite. It
may be, this spectacle and a mourning cloak may bring him to weep.

Fourthly, the oppressed Poor is a Counter-tenor, and rings loud knels of
mones, groans, and supplications, either to him for his pity, or against him
for his injury. If this bell, so heavily tolling, do not waken him, it will
waken God against him. Their cry is come up into the ears of the Iam. 5. 4.
Lord of Hosts.

Fifthly, the Tenor or Bow-bell is the abused creatures; the rust of the gold,
the stone out of the wall crying against the Oppressor: the corn, wine, oil,
against the Epicure.

Happily this peale may wake him. If not, there is yet another goade,
affliction on himself, God cutting short his horns, that he may not gore his
neighbors: and letting him blood in his riches, lest being too rank, he
should grow into a surfeit: or casting him down on his bed of sickness, and
there taking sleep from his body, because his soul has had too much. If
neither the Peale nor the Goade can waken him, God will shoot an Ordinance
against him, Death. And if yet he dies sleeping, the Archangels Trumpe shall
not fail to rowse him. Awake then, thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee Ecl. 5. 14.
light.

Windiness in the stomach, and vainglory. Disease 16.
INstation in the stomach has some correspondence with vainglory in the
soul: a disease in either part of man full of ventositie, where all the humor
rises up into froth.

Cause.
VVIndinesse is engendered through flegmaticke humors in the stomach; or
through meats dissolved into vapors by deficiencie of kindly heat. The
cause of vaineglory is a vaporous windy opinion of some rare quality in
himself: which though it be but an atomus, he would blow (like an Alchymist)
to a great mass. But at last, it either settles in a narrow room, or
vanishes into foam.

Signs and Symptoms.
Symptoms of the corporal disease are a swelling of the stomach, empty
belchings, much rumbling of wind in the bowels, which offering to descend, is
turned back again. You shall easily know a vainglorious man: his own
commendation rumbles within him, till he has bulked it out; and the air of it
is unsavory. In the field, he is touching heaven with a lance; in the street,
his eye is still cast over his shoulder. He stands up so pertly, that you may
know he is not laden with fruit. If you would drink of his wisdom, knock
by a sober question at the barrel, and you shall find by the sound, his wits
are empty. In all companies, like chafe he will be uppermost: he is some
surfeit in natures stomach, and cannot be kept down. A goodly Cipresse tree,
fertile only of leaves. He drinks to none beneath the salt; and it is his
Grammar rule without exception, not to confer with an infetiour in public.
His impudence will overrule his ignorance to talk of learned principles;
which come from him, like a treble part in a base voice, too big for it.
Living in some vnder-staire office, when he would visit the country, he
borrowes some Gallants cast suit of his servant, and therein (Player-like) acts
that part among his besotted neighbors. When he rides his masters great horse
out of ken, he vaunts of him as his own, and brags how much he cost him. He
feeds upon others courtesy, others meat: and (whether more?) either fats him.
At his Inn he calls for chiekens at spring, and such things as cannot be had;
whereat angry, he sups according to his purse with a red Herring. Far enough
from knowledge, he talks of his castle, (which is either in the air, or
enchanted) of his lands, which are some pastures in the Fairy-ground,
invisible, no where. He offers to purchase Lordships, but wants money for
earnest. He makes others praises as introductions to his own, which must
transcend; and calls for wine, that he may make known his rare vessel of
deal at home: not forgetting to you, that a Dutch Merchant sent it him, for
some extraordinary desert. He is a wonder every where; among fools, for his
bravery, among wisemen for his folly. He loves an Herald for a new Coat, and
hires him to lie upon his Pedigree. All Nobility, that is ancient, is of his
alliance; and the Great man is but of the first head, that does not call him,
Cousin. When his beams are weakest, like the rising and setting Sun, he
makes the longest shadows: whereas bright knowledge, like the Sun at
highest, makes none at all; though then most resultance of heat, and reflection
of light. He takes great pains to make himself derisory; yet (without
suspecting it) both his speech and silence cries, Behold me. He discommends
earned worth with a shrugge, and lispes his enforced approbation. He loves
humility in all men, but himself, as if he did wish well to all souls but
his own.

There is no matter of consequence, that Policy begets, but he will be Gossip
to, and give it a name, and knows the intention of all proiects, before they
be full hatched. He has somewhat in him, which would be better for himself,
and all men, if he could keep it in. In his hall, you shall see an old rusty
sword hung up, which he swears killed Glendower in the hands of his Grandsire.
He fathers upon himself some villainies, because they are in fashion; and so
vilifies his credit, to advance it. If a new famous Courteghian be mentioned,
he deeply knows her: whom indeed he never saw. He will be ignorant of
nothing, though it be a shame to know it. His barrel has a continual spigot,
but no tunnell; and like an unthrift, he spends more then he gets. His speech
of himself is ever historical, histrionicall. He is indeed admirations
creature, and a circumstantiall Mountebanke.

Cure.
FOr the cure of the corporal disease, you must give the Patient such
medicines, as divide and purge phlegm; with an extenuating diet. To cure this
windy humor of vainglory, S. Paul has a sharp medicine: That his glory
Phil. 3. 19.
is in his shame. Prescribe him, that the free giving all glory to God, is the
resultance of the best glory to man. The counsel of both Law and Gospel
meets in this. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong in
his strength, nor Ier. 9. 23. 1. Cor. 10 17.
the rich in his wealth; but let him that glories, glory in the Lord. That he
has nothing, (which is good) that he has not received; and it is a shame for
the Cisterne not to acknowledge the Fountain. That the praise of good deserts
is lost by want of humility. That there is none arrogant, but the ignorant:
and that if he understood himself, his conceited sea is but a puddle, which
every judicious obseruers plummet finds shallow, and muddy. That trafficking
for the fraught of men's praises for his good worth, He suffers Chryshom. 24 ad
pop. Ant.
shipwreck in the haven; and loses his reward there, where he should receive
it.

The Itch, or the Busy-body. Disease 17.
THe Itch is a scuruy disease; a man would not think the soul had any
infirmity to sample it. You shall find the humor of a Busie-body, a
contentious intermeddler very like it. The Itch is a corrupt humor between
the skin and the flesh, running with a serpedinous course, till it has defiled
the whole body. Thus caused.

Cause.
NAture being too strong for the evil humors in the body, packs them away to
the utter parts, to preserve the inner. If the humors be more rare and subtle,
they are avoided by fumosities and sweat: if thicker, they turn to a scabious
matter in the skin: some make this the effect of an inflamed liver, etc.

Signs and Symptoms.
IF this Itching curiosity take him in the Cephalica vein, and possess the
understanding part, l e mootes more questions in an hour, then the seven Wise
men could resolve in seven years. There is a kind of down or curdle on his
wit, which is like a Gentle woman's train, more then needs. He would sing
well, but that he is so full of Crochets. His questions are like a plume of
feathers, which fools will give any thing for, wisemen nothing. He has a
greater desire to know where Hell is, then to escape it: to know what God did
before he made the world, then what he will do with him when it is ended. For
want of correcting the garden of his inventions, the weeds choke the herbs;
and he suffers the skin of his brain to boil into the broth. He is a
dangerous Prognosticator, and propounds desperate riddles; which he gathers
from the conjunction of Planets, Saturn and Jupiter; from doubtful Oracles
out of the hollow vaults and predictions of Merlin. He dreams of a cruel
Dragon, whose head must be in England, and tail in Ireland; of a headless
cross, of a popish curse. And Our Lord lights in our Ladies lap, and
therefoee England must have a clappe. But they have broken day with their
Creditors, and the Planets have proved honester, then their reports gave them.
Thus as Bion said of Astronomers, he sees not the fishes swimming by him in the
water, yet sees perfectly those shining in the Zodiac. Thus if the Itch hold
him in the theoricall part. If in the practical;

His actions are polypragmaticall, his feet peripateticall. Erasmus pictures
him to the life. He knows what every Merchant got in his voyage, what plots
are at Rome, what stratagems Enchirid. mil. Chan.
with the Turk etc. He knows strangers troubles, not the tumultuous
fightings in his own bosom, etc. His neighbors estate he knows to a penny;
and wherein he fails, he supplies by intelligence from their flattered
servants: he would serve well for an Informer to the Subsidie-book. He delays
every passenger with inquiry of news; and because the country cannot satiate
him, he travels every term to London for it: whence returning without his
full lode, himself makes it up by the way. He buys letters from the great
city with Capons; which he wears out in three days, with perpetual opening
them to his companions. If he hears but a word of some State-act, he
professes to know it, and the intention, as if he had been of the Counsel. He
hears a lie in private, and hastes to publish it; so one knave guls him, he
innumerable fools, with the strange Fish at Yarmouth, or the Serpent in
Sussex. He can keep no secret in, without the hazard of his button. He loves
no man a moment longer, then either he will tell him, or hears of him news. If
the spirit of his tongue be once raised, all the company cannot conjure it down.
He teaches his neighbor to work unsent for, and tells him of some dangers
without thanks. He comments upon every action, and answers a question ere it
be half propounded. Alcibiades Laert. mill dram.
having purchasd a dog at an unreasonable price, cut off his tail, and let him
run about Athens; whiles every man wondered at his intent, he answered, that
his intent was their wonder, for he did it only to be talked of. The same
Author reports the like of a gawish Traveler that came to Sparta, who
standing in the presence of Lacon a long time upon one leg, that he might be
observed and admired, cried at the last: Oh Lacon, thou can not stand so long
upon one leg. True, said Lacon, but every Goose can.

His state, belike, is too little to find him work; hence he busieth himself
in other men's common wealths: as if he were Towne-taster: he scalds his lips
in every neighbors pottage. If this Itch proceed from some inflammation, his
bleach is the breaking out of contention. Then he has humorem in cerebro, in
cord tumorem, rumorem in lingua. His brain is full of humor, his heart of
tumor, his tongue of rumor. He spits fire at every word, and does what he can
to set the whole world in combustion. He whispers in his neighbors ear how
such a man slandered him: and returns to the accused party (with like secrecy)
the others inuectiue. He is hated of all, as being indeed a friend to none, but
Lawyers and the Devil.

Cure.
FOr his Cure; if his Itch proceed from a Moone-sicke head, the chief
intention is to settle his brains; lest Act. 26. 24 Deuteronomy. 29. 29
too much learning make him mad: as Paul was wronged. Give him this
Electuary. That secret things belong to the Lord, and revealed to us and our
children for ever. That the Judgments of God are, soepe secreta, semper iusta:
and therefore it is better mirari, quam rimari. That in seeking to know more
then he ought, he knows not what he should. That gazing at the stars, he is
like to fall into the lowest pit.

If his Itch be in his fingers, and that he grows like a Meddler in every
bodies Orchyard, let him apply this unction. That he meddle with his own
business. That he recall his prodigal eyes, like wandering Dinahs, home; and
teach the^ another while to look inward. That he be busy in repairing his own
heart; for of other meddling comes no rest.

If his disease proceed from a greater inflation or inflammation, thus sharply
scarifie him: That sowing discord among brethren, is that seventh abomination
to the Lord. That as Prou. 6. 19. Genesis 49. 7.
troublesome men seek faction, they shall meet with fraction; and as they
have a brotherhood in evil, so they shall be Senee. de ira. lib. 2. cap. 3 4.
divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel. That cum pare contendere, anceps
est; cum superiore, furiosum: cum inferiore, sordidum. If thy enemy be equal,
yet the victory is doubtful. If low, parce illi, it is no credit to conquer
him. If great, parce tibi, favor thy self, contend not. Serua parcem domi,
pacem Domini. Love peace, and the God of peace shall give thee the peace of
God, which passes all understanding.

Stinking breath and Flattery. Disease 18.
THe Flatterer has a disease very odious, foetorem or is, a stinking breath.
The corporal disease is caused, 1. sometimes through putrefaction of the
gummes. Secondly, sometimes through hot distemper of the mouth. Thirdly,
sometimes through corrupt and rotten humors in the mouth of the stomach.
Fourthly, and not seldom through the exulceration of the lungs. The maine
cause of Flattery is a kind of self-love; for he only commends others, to
mend himself. The communis terminus, where al his frauds, dissimulations,
false phrases and praises, his admirations, and superlatiue title meet, is his
purse. His tongue serves two Masters his great-ones ear, his own avarice.

Signs and Symptoms.
IF the cause of this Stench be in the mouth, it is discerned: if in the
vicious stomach, or vlcerate lungs, it is allayd by eating; and not so forcible
after meats as before. So the Flatterers stomach is well laid after dinner;
and til he grow hungry again, his adulatory pipes go not so hotely. His
means come by observance, and though he wait not at table, he serves for a
fool. He is after the nature of a Barber; and first trimmes the head of his
masters humor, and then sprinkles it with Court-water. He scrapes out his diet
in curtsies; and cringeth to his glorious object, as a little Curre to a
Mastiff: licking his hand, not with a healing, but poisoning tongue. Riches
make many friends: truly; they are friends to the riches, not to the rich man.
A great proud man, because he is admired of a number of hang-byes, thinks he
has many friends. So the Ass, that carried the goddess, thought all the
knees bowed to her, when they reverenced her burden. They play like flies in
his beams, whiles his wealth warnes them. Whilst like some great Oak, he stands
high and spreads far in the forest, innumerable beasts shelter themselves
under him, feeding like hogs on his acornes: but when the axe of distress
begins to fell him, there is not one left to hinder the blow. Like burres,
they stick no longer on his coat, then there is a nappe on it. These Kites
would not flock to him, but that he is a fat carkase. Seianus, whom the Romans
worship in the morning as a Semi-god, before night they tear apieces. Even now
stoopes, and presently strokes. You may be sure, he is but a gally-pot, full of
honey, that these wasps houer about; and when they have fed themselves at his
cost, they give him a sting for his kindness.

The Flatterer is young Gallants Schoolmasters, and enters them into
booke-learning. Your cheating Tradesman can no more be without such a Factor,
then an Usurer without a Broker. The Fox (in the Fable) seeing the Crow highly
perched, with a good morsel in his mouth, flattered him that he sung well,
with no scant co^mendations of his voice: whereof the Crow proud, began to make
a noise, and let the meat fall: the foolish bird seeing now himself deceived,
soon left singing, and the Fox fell to eating. I need not moral it. The
Instrument his tongue is tuned to another ear; but like a common fiddler, he
dares not an honest song. He lifts up his Patron at the tongues end, and sets
him in a superlatiue height; like a Pharos, or the eye of the Country, when
he is indeed the eyesore. He swears to him, that his commending any man is
above a Justice of peaces letter; and that the eyes of the Parish wait upon
him for his grace. He insinuates his praise, most from others report: wherein
(very rankely) he wrongs three at once. He belyes the named commender, the
person to whom this commendation is sent, and most of all himself, the
messenger. Whilst he supplies a man with the oil of flattery, he wounds his
heart; like thunder, which breaks the bone, without scratching the skin. He
seldom speaks so pompously of his friend, except he be sure of Porters to
carry it him. He is the proud man's eare-wig, and having once gotten in,
impostumes his head. A continent man will easily find him; as knowing, that it
is as evil, laudari a turpibus, as ob turpia. One being asked, which was the
worst of beasts, answered; of wild beasts the Tyrant, of tame beasts the
Flatterer. Like an ill Painter, because he cannot draw a beautiful picture,
he is ever limbing deformities and devils: so the Flatterer, ignorant of
goodness, lays fair colors upon foul iniquities. This cunning wrastler
stoopes low, to give the greater fall, and wishes to his object, as a whore
to her Lover, abundance of all goods, except only sober wits. He studies all
the week for preuentions, to keep his Patron on the Sunday from Church: a
Sermon and he are antipodes. Lest his Observed should take him into the light,
and look on him, he keeps him perpetually hoodwinked with the opinion of his
own knowledge; admiring his deeds for sanctimonious, and his words for
Oracles. Sometimes Conscience is his riuall-aduocate, and pleades against him
in his Patrons heart: but because the Judge is partial on his side, and his
periurous tale runs so smooth with the grain of his affections, he gives
Conscience the check-mate. In short, he is (at last) one way a Pandar,
Cosenages Factor, sins Magician, and a pleasing murderer, that with arrident
applauses tickles a man to death.

Cure.
TO cure this stinking breath of Adulation, give him a vomit. Pro. 24. 24.
He that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse;
nations shall abhor him. But to them Verse 25.
that rebuke him, shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.
As (not serving our Lord Jesus Christ, but his own Romans 16, 18.
belly) by good words and fair speeches he has deceived the hearts of the
simple; so he has most deceived himself, and been no less his own fool,
then others knave. Tell him, that his beginning is hateful to God, his end to
men also. His great friend did no more love him in his dream, then he will
hate him waking: as a sick man, after the receite of a loathsome potion, hates
the very cruze, whereout he drank it. And lightly, what he has got by
flattering fools, he spends upon knaves; or worse, and dies full of nothing
but sins and diseases. Let him soundly repent, reform himself, inform
others, whom he has deformed; become a friend to goodness, and so to
himself and others. Repentance and Obedience can only make his breath sweet.

Short windednesse and weariness of doing well. Disease 19.
THe Asthma is caused by abundance of gross and clammy humors, gathered into
the gristles, or lappets of the lungs: or through some distillations, wherewith
the Trachea arteria, or windpipe is repleate.

Cause.
THe causes of this spiritual Short-windednesse, are 1. want of Faith, which
is the true life-bloud of courage against all difficulties. 2. want of
Patience, to hold out in the working up of salvation. 3. a feeble hope, not
supposing the recompense to the worth of their labors.

Signs and Symptoms.
THe Signs of both the diseases are palpable: the Physician may easily judge
of his Patient, the Patient of himself. He prays for a brunt very zealously,
but like a hasty shower soon over. You shall have him the first man at Church,
on a Sabbath morning, and the first man out. He lays the foundation of an
Almes-house, and so leaves it. He shootes up, like Jonas gourd, in a night, and
next day withers. He is in religious practices, like the Spring in that windy
month, March many forwards. He rises fair, as a Summer-sunne, but is soon
clouded: no man rides faster at first putting forth, nor is sooner weary of his
iourny. A little onwards to heaven, he quandaries, whether to go forward to
God, or with Demas to turn back to the world. The light of his devotion is
ever anon in the eclipse, and his whole life rings the changes; hot and cold,
in and out, off and on, to and fro: he is peremptory in nothing, but in
vicissitudes. He is early up and never the near; saluting Christ in the
morning, but none of those that stayed with him: therefore losing his reward,
because he will not tarry working in the Vineyard till night. He purposes to go
to God, Mat. 15. 32.
and in the fit of his devotion tells him so, but still breaks promise. One
told Socrates, that he would feign travel to Olympus, but he feared his ability
to hold out the journey. Socrates answered him, I know you walk every day a
little, put that together in a continuing straitness, and you shall come
whither you desire. This man rows (as we al should do) against the stream; and
whiles he neglects 2 or 3. strokes, he is carried down further in an hour,
then he can recover in a day. He loves, like a horse, short iourneys: and walks
on so warily, wearily, timorously, that he tells his steps, and his stops; and
reckons every impediment to a rub and a thorn.

Cure.
FOr his cure. Pro ratione victus, as they prescribe for the Asthma, which is a
disease in the body, to avoid perturbations of the mind: so let this
Orthopnick, for the help of his mind, avoid needless perturbations of the body.
He is troubled, like Martha about many things, but forgets the better part.
Give him some juice of Bulapathum, which is the herb patience. For he has
need of patience, that after he has done the Heb. 10. 36.
will of God, he might receive the promise. He considers not that heaven is up
an hill, like Olympus with the heathen, mount Sion with the Christian, and
therefore thinks to get thither per saltum, not per scansum. Assure him, that
Salvation Phil. 2. 12. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
must be wrought up, and Election made sure by diligence. That vincenti
dabitur; not to him that flies, nor to him that knockes a bout or two, nor to
him that faints and yields, but To him that ouercomes. That who continues to
the end shall be Reu. 2. and 3. Mat. 24. 13.
saved. That it was a shame to see Lot incestuous with his daughters in the
Mount, that kept him chaste in Sodom: to see Noah mocked of his son for
drunkenness, by whose righteousness his son escaped. That he has many
encouragements, Christ calling, the Father blessing, the Spirit working, the
Angels comforting, the Word directing, 2. These, 3. 13 Gala. 6. 9. Esa. 28. 12.
the Crown inuiting: all tuning him this one lesson, Be not weary of
weldoing. For in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: and after our
weary labor find rest.

The Conclusion.
INnumerable are the bodies infirmities; introitus vnus, innumeri exi-tus,
there being but one means of coming into the world, infinite of going out;
and Sickness is Deaths Ledger* Ambassador. But they are few and scant, if
compared to the souls; which being a better piece of timber, has the more
teredines breeding in it: as the fairest flower has the most Cantharides
attending on it. The devil loves the soul as the jewel, the body of the
rind or husk, as if it were without the other a dead commodity, and would
stink in his hands. He cries as the king of Sodom to Abrahrm, Da mihi animus*
caetera cape tibi. If he can corrupt this, he knows the other will fall to
corruption of it self: for the soul works by motion, the body but by action
for the souls servant. Now satan was ever ambitious and will not care for the
waiting Maid, if he may get the mistress; or uses the other but for his
better conueyance and insinuation to this. And because it bears the narrow
portraiture and image of that Creator he emulates, this he seeks the more
violently to deface. Let the body enjoy the light and warmth of the Sun, so
he can enwrap this in the cold clouds of dark night. A dark night indeed,
wherein many souls do live; having the little windows or loope-holes of
reason shadowed by the curtains of fleshly lusts. Night is a sad, heavy, and
uncomfortable time, to the vnresting body (a nurse of anguished thoughts at
whose dugges sorrows and dreams lie continually sucking:) thinking every hour
an Olympiade, till the Sun arises: so is the souls darkness, if security
has not rocked asleep; and custom (which is the apoplexy of bedridden nature,
and wicked life) obstupefied her; an unquiet, turbulent, and peacelesse time:
with such hurrying tempests within, that the body tumbles upon a soft bed, and
after many experienced shiftings finds no ease.

There be three things, say Physicians, that grieve the body. First, the cause
of sickness, a contranatural distemper, which lightly men bring on themselves,
though the sediments rest in our sinne-corrupted nature. Secondly, sickness it
self. Thirdly, and the coincidents, that either fellow it, or follow it. In
the soul there be three grieuances. First, original prauitie, a natural
(...), procliuitie to evil, contradiction to good. Secondly, actual sin, the
maine sickness: Thirdly, and the concomitant effects, which are punishments
corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal. For all sin makes work;
either for Christ, or Satan: for Christ, to expiate by his blood, and the
efficacy of that once performed, ever auailable passion; or for the devil, as
Gods executioner to plague. Many remedies are given for many diseases: the sum
is this; the best Physician is Christ Jesus, the best Physic the Scriptures.
Ply the one, fly to the other: let this teach thee, he must cure thee: that
express image of his Fathers person, and brightness of his glory, in whom the
graces of God shine without measure: often have you seen in one heaven I^b. 1. 3.
many stars; behold in this Son, as in one star many heavens: for in him
dwells all fullness. let us fly by our faithful prayers to this Physician,
and entreat him for that Colos. 1. 19.
medicine, that issued out of his side, water and blood, to cure all our
spiritual maladies. Fusus est sanguis medici, vt fiat medicamentum aegroti.
And when in mercy he has cured us, let our diet be a conversation led after
the canon of his sacred Truth: that whatsoever become of this frail vessel,
our flesh, floting on the waves of this world, the passenger our Soul may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
FINIS.

