A Learned Astronomical discourse, of the judgment of Natiuities. Divided into
three Books, and dedicated first to Katherin the French Queen, by Oger
Ferrier her Physician.

Translated by Thomas Kelway Gentleman.

Published by Authority.

Psalm. 147. 4. He counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by
their names. AT LONDON, Printed at the widow Charlewoods house, for Richard
Watkins. Anno. 1593.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, VIRTUOUS, AND LEARNED LORD HENRY, Earl of
Northumberland: (*) Lord Percie, Lucie, Brian, Fitzpaine and Poynings: Lord of
the Honors of Cockermouth and Petworth etc. Knight of the most honorable order
of the GARTER. All true felicity both in this life and in the world to come
most heartily wished.
IF that saying of Plato (right noble Lord) be true, that our Country
challenges an especial interest in our very uttermost ability, which any way
may tend to profit and benefit the same: then will it sufficiently
countenance the poor received Talent of mine, in that being so strictly
charged by so great and grave a Philosopher, I ought not to bury in oblivion
my knowledge whatsoever, but rather as freely bestow mine endeavor on her, as
she did franckly impart the light thereof to me.

For though it be a common phrase in the mouths of men altogether ignorant in
the precious value and profit of Sciences: That the study of Letters is a
bottomless Gulf, and so long and so uneasy a journey, that they which rashly
think to finish it, oftentimes are drowned in the midway, and so under this
pretense, account it better not to know much, yea, nothing at all: Against such
slothful suggesters of men in a deadly obscurity while they live, let me
avouch that saying of Aristotle, Man (says he) was created to understand and
to do, for knowledge begets judgment, and by judgment men execute all
good and virtuous actions.

O Science (says Plato) how would men love thee, if they did but know thee?
for even as health is the conservation of the body, so is knowledge the sure
and only safe-garder of the soul. And Cicero being of the same opinion,
says: O knowledge, the guide of our life, the only cause of virtue, and
enemy to vice: What is the life of man without thee?

If then (right learned Lord) such a maine and current stream of unconquerable
reason, washes to nothing the empty and confused wits, of such as are enemies
to the excellency of Art, and makes most fertile (like the ouer-flowings of
Nylus) the judgments of the^ that are governed thereby: (though far from me
be the thought of arrogating the very least title of Art to my self, yet as
one that desires to receive the breath of life from her sacred dwelling, and
holds with the learned in all ages, that man is as a brute beast without
her:) then let me thus far presume under your noble favor, to show that I
have not altogether trewanted in my life time, but how I have bestowed those
permitted hours of exercise, that more weighty affairs in the world affoorded
me, both to declare my reverend zeal to so high a mystery, and unfeigned
affection. I bear to your honor.

The work was first written in French, by an excellent Scholar, Oger Ferrier,
a Physician, borne in Tolouze, and dedicated to Queen Katherine of France,
mother to the King that last deceassed. And being now by me changed into an
English habit, that it might receive no indignity by dedication, I have
stamped your noble name in the forehead thereof, that it may be said (in
despite of the proudest carper or controller,) This is the God-chylde of a
peerless Godfather.

And as I doubt not of your honorable acceptauce, so I am likewise persuaded,
that what has wanted on my behalf in translation, or any other imperfection
beside, shall be as nobly censured: in which resolution I humbly kiss your
hand, and continue as forward in affection, as any to your Honors welfare.

Thomas Kelway. One of her Highness Trumpets in ordinary.

TO THE COVRTEVS Reader.
I Am to request (gentle Reader) one favor at thy hand, that if this work of
the judgment of Natiuities seem harsh and unpleasant to thee, thou would
not therefore wound the same with injurious words, to charge thy self with
more folly then needs: but if thou find it above thy knowledge or capacity,
say as honest minded Chion said: Let my betters judge of these matters. For I
must and do confess, that it is not a Book for every man's reading, and he
that reads with derision, because he understands not, must blame his own
insufficiency, and not the book: for if he could learn as much in an hour,
as cost a learned man many years to compass, then would his humor be pleased,
and the work not reproched. But let such loyterers understand, that knowledge
requires the whole circuit of a man's life, and live he never so long, yet may
he learn: but if it might be attained in a Summers day, a number would be
excellent, that through default thereof remains utterly ignorant.

To use many words, I account needless, knowing that the reproof of the
unlearned, is rather the badge of their own weak brain, then any blemish to
a work of worth: Therefore let them censure as they please, the learned (I
know) will judge like themselves, of whom I had rather be deservedly
controlled, then by the other be ignorantly commended.

Thomas Kelway.

The Table of the matters in this present Treatise.
The first Book.
OF the Celestial figure of a Nativity. Fol. 1. Of the verification of the
hour of the Nativity. fol. 1. The manner to set down the said figure
verified. fol. 3. Of the parts of Natiuities. fol. 3. Of the latitudes and
aspects of the Planets. 6. Of the fortunes and infortunes of Plannets, and
parts of heaven. fol. 6. If the Child shall live or no. fol. 8. Of the gyuer of
life, called of the Arabians Hyleg. fol. 9. Of the gyuer of years, called of
the Arabians Alcocoden. fol, 10. Of them that augment and diminish the number
of the said years. fol. 11. Of the Lord of the nativity. fol. 12. Of the
understanding and manners of the man. 13. Of riches and poverty. fol, 15. By
what means riches and poverty come. fol, 16. Of the time that the riches and
damages shall come. folio. 17. Of Brethren. fol, 18 Of Father and Mother. fol,
18 Of heritages and goods of the earth. fol, 19. Of Children. fol, 19. Of
Servant. fol, 20. Of Diseases. fol, 21. Of marriage. fol. 22. Of Dowery and
other goods by the means of marriage. fol. 23. Of the death. fol. 23. Of
voyages by Land and by Sea. fol, 25 Of the constancy in his religion. fol. 25
Of the action and profession. fol, 26. Of dignities, offices and honors. fol.
26. Of companions and friends. fol, 27. Of suits and enemies. fol, 28. Of
imprisonments and captiuities. fol, 28. Of Horses, Muttons and other beasts.
29
The second Book.
Of the significations of the Planets. fol. 29. Of the significations of the
twelve signs. fol. 32. Of that which the Plannets signify in the said
signs. fol. 34 Of the aspects of the Planets between them. 36. Of the
significations of the twelve houses. fol. 40. Of the Lords of the Tryplicities
of the said houses. fol. 41 What the Plannets signify in the twelve houses.
folio. 42. The significations of the Lords of the houses, by all the places of
the figure. fol. 48.
The third Book.
Of Directions. fol. 52. Of the Seperator or Burner, called of the Arabians
Algebuthar. fol. 53. Of the Lords of the Tryplicities. fol. 54. Of Reuolutions.
fol, 54. Of the judgments upon the Reuolutions. fol. 54 Of the years governed
by the Planets, called of the Arabians Fridarie. fol. 55. Of Profections. fol.
57 The Lord of the circulation, from the Lord of the hour of the nativity.
fol. 58 Of the circulation of the Lord of the ascendant, and of the Planets
which be in the ascendant. fol. 58. Of the Eclipses and great conjunctions
appertayning to the Reuolutions of natiuities. fol. 58. Of the particular
meetings of all the year. fol. 58.
FINIS.
OF THE IVDGEMENTS ASTRONOMICALL UPON NATIVITIES. The first Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Celestial figure of a Nativity.
FOR to judge of Ascendants and Natiuities, after the traditions of the
ancient and learned Astrologians, it is convenient first to explain the
Celestial figure, and in the same, to apply the seven Planets, with the head
and tail of the Dragon Lunaire, together with the part of Fortune, and the
part of the spirit and others, more appertaining to the high and notable
significations of the stars; Then, to set down plainly the Celestial
figure, you must in the first place, note the year, the day, and the hour,
with the most nearest minute of time of the nativity that you have undertaken.
The number of the hours and mynutes, you must set them down after the
manner of the numbering of the Astrologians, within their tables: always set
down the hower's afternoon, as well by day as by night, and never say, one
hour, two hours, three hours after midnight, but number xiij. hours,
xiiij. hours, xv. after noone. This done, search in the Ephemerides in the
table of the year of your nativity, in the right month and day proposed, the
degree of the sign wherein the Sun is: look afterward in the Table of
houses, which serve for the latitude of your Country, and search there the said
degree of the Sun under the line of the tenth house. And having found in the
same place the same degree of the Sun, you shall find directly upon the left
hand of the same Table, a number of hours and minutes, the which write apart.
To which number, you must add the hours and mynutes that has been given you
of the same nativity, and that which rests by your addition, you must seek
in the table of houses: and there where you find the same number of hours and
mynutes coming of the same addition, you must take to a right line the points
and beginnings of the six houses, which you shall find marked: the which you
shall direct upon your figure, beginning at the point of the tenth, and
continuing toward the left hand.

The beginning of the other six houses, you must take the opposite signs; and
if it happen that the number of houses and mynutes, come to more then
twentiefoure hours, it is then convenient to substract twentiefoure hours of
the same time, and the residue seek out as we have aforesaid. If the hour of
the same nativity, be upon the point of twelve hours of noone, you must take
the houses in a right line of the degree of the sun, in the table of your
latitude, without making any other addition, or substraction, and that when in
the figure estimatiue: within the which, it is needful by all means to apply
the moving of the Moon exactly calculated, according to the vulgar cannons
of the Ephemerides, for to verify afterward your nativity by the hour of
the conception. As follows.

CHAP. II. Of the verification of the bower of the nativity.
Leaving the Animodar of Ptolome and the meetings of Schoner, and all other
uncertain ways (although they have their Authors) to verify the hours of
natiuities, I will presently follow the method of Hermes, approved by long
experience, and confirmed by Ptolome in his Centiloque, and by Abraham
Auenesrus, by Alphonce Leopolde, Haly, and other most expert Astrologians.
Hermes says, that the ascendant of a nativity, has been the place of the
Moon at the time of the co^ception; and that the ascendant of the conception,
is the place of the Moon at the hour of the nativity. Who would be moore
near certified of the hour and mynute of a nativity, and of the true
ascendant, it is convenient that you follow the doctrine of Hermes by the
method following. First of all that you look into the figure estimatiue,
whether the Moon be above the Horrizon or beneath. If she be above the
Horrizon, count the distance that is between the point of the seventh house
and the Moon: if she be beneath the Horrizon, count the distance which is from
the first house unto the Moon, which distance of signs and degrees, you must
search in the table that follows, under the title of the Moon, above the
Horrizon or beneath, as truly you have found in the said figure. In a right
line of the said distance, you shall find the time that the infant has
remained within the womb of his Mother, in a certain number of days, the
which you must reckon from the day of your nativity backward; and there where
the number ends, you must mark the day of the conception, if the Moon be
found in the sign of the ascendant estimatiue. If you find her not in the same
place, go backwarde or forward certain days of your account, until you have
found the Moon within the said sign, not far from the degree ascendant in
the said figure. The day considered, and in what hour, go forward to the
East point, the place where you have sound the Moon in the figure estimatiue,
and at that hour you must calculate the moving of the Moon. For this degree
and mynute in the which you found her, you must place it in the ascendant of
your nativity.

And to know the hour in the which the place of the Moon of the nativity,
rose to the East point at the time of the conception, take first the overthwart
ascension of the said place of the Moon, within the table of the directions of
your country, in the book of John de Regiomonte, of the same ascension take
away 90. degrees, (and ad to the whole circle which is of 360. degrees, when
the substraction cannot be otherwise made) the residue shall be the right
ascension of the height of the point of the Merydian circle: take afterward the
right ascension of the Sun, and take out by the substraction of the right
ascension of the said point of the Merydian, and add 360. degrees if it be
necessary, and turn that which is left into hours and minutes, in gyuing to
30. degrees two hours, to fifteen degrees one hour, to one degree 4. minutes
of an hour, to fifteen minutes one minute of an hour; by this means you
shall exactly come to the hour of the conception, to the which you must
calculate the place of the Moon, and the same well calculated, put it to the
point of the first house, in the figure of the nativity.

Diverse for this verefication do dress and garnish the motions of the Planets
four figures. One of that hour estimatiue of the nativity, the other, of the
precedent conjunction or opposition of the brightness: the third, of the
verification by the Animodar: the fourth, of the conception. The which besides
the unprofitable and superfluous labor, err greatly, thinking to find out the
time of the conception by the Animodar of Ptolome, the which experience from
day to day shows to be false, and that it has no ancient Author to
maintain it, or has made mention of this new doctrine, being full of
contention and disproued verity.

The Table of the time that the Child does remain within the womb of his
Mother.
The Moon being under the Horrizon, reckon from the Ascendaunt. The Moon
being above the Horrizon, reckon from the seventh. sig degr days 0 0 273
Indifferent abiding. 258 Little abiding. 0 12 274 259 0 24 275 260 1 6 276 261
1 18 277 262 2 0 278 263 2 12 279 264 2 24 280 265 3 6 281 266 3 18 282 267 4 0
283 268 4 12 284 269 4 24 285 270 5 6 286 271 5 18 287 272 5 29 288 Long
abiding. 273

CHAP. III. The manner to set down perfectly the said figure verified.
Having put to the point of the first house, the degree and minutes of the
Moon of the time of the conception, take the overthwart ascentions of the said
degrees and minutes: take out afterward 90. degrees of the said ascentions, and
add thereto 360. degrees, if otherwise the substraction cannot be made: that
which remains, shall be the right ascentions of the highest point of the circle
Meridian, the which search in the table of the right ascentions, in the book
of Alphonce, or of John de Regiomonte, etc. and put to the point of the tenth
house, the degrees and minutes of the sign you find, aunswering to the right
number of the said right ascentions. The point of the fourth is always against
the sign and degree of the tenth: likewise the point of the seventh, to the
point of the first. The other houses sufficed, take the Ephemerides, because
they do not desire exact calculation, seeing that the most part of the
Astrologians, desire more to take of the equal portion of the Eclipse then of
the horizontall sect.

For to know the exact hour of the said figure, verify first the said right
ascentions of the Meridian, and take from them the right ascentions of the
Sun, that which remains turn into hours and minutes, gyuing to xv.
degrees one hour, to every degree four minutes of an hour. etc. as we have
said before. At this hour you must newly count the moving of the Moon, and
of the Sun, and of the other Planets: and upon this figure you must ground
the parts and judgments Astronomicall.

CHAP. IIII. Of the parts of Natiuities.
AFter you have well sought the Planets in the said figure verified, you must
consider their above certain proportions of the Planets and parts of the
heaven, taken of their distances, as follows.

The parts concerning the significations of the first House.
The part of the quality of the life, is taken by the distance of Jupiter from
Saturn, counting as much space from the ascendant, as when the nativity is by
day: for when it is by night, they take it to the contrary, the distance of
Saturn unto Jupiter, following the natural order of the signs, counting
likewise as much space since the ascendant.

The part of life by day and by night, is taken of the degree of the precedent
conjunction, or opposition of the lights unto the Moon, counting from the
ascendant.

The part of the Spirit (many do call the part of earthly things and secrets,
the other, the part of things to come, the others, the part of the Sun) in the
day from the Move unto the Sun, from the ascendant, in the night to the
contrary.

The part of the understanding, by the day, is from Mercury unto Mars, from
the ascendant, at night to the contrary.

Of the second House.
The part of Fortune by the day, is from the Sun unto the Moon, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary. Ptolome does take it as much by day as by
night, from the Sun unto the Moon.

The part of the goods as well by day as by night, is from the Lord of the
second house, unto the said second house, taken upon the quality of the
Eclipse, from the ascendant.

Of the third.
The part of brothers, by the day, is from Saturn unto Jupiter, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary.

The part of the love of brethren, by the day, is from the Sun unto Saturn,
from the ascendant, at night to the contrary. If Saturn be under the beams
of the Sun, take Jupiter in his place.

Of the fourth.
The part of father, by the day, is from the Sun unto Saturn, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary. This same is like the love of brethren:
then if Saturn be underneath the beams of the Sun, in his place take Jupiter.

The part of inheritances and possessions, by day and by night, is from Saturn
to the Moon, from the ascendant.

The part of fortune in tillage and sowing, by day and by night, is from Venus
unto Saturn, from the ascendant.

Of the fifth.
The part of Infants, is as the part of the quality of the life.

The part of male children by day and by night, is from the Moon unto Jupiter,
and is numbered from the ascendant.

The part of daughters, by day and by night, is from the Moon unto Venus, and
is taken from the ascendant.

Of the sixth.
The part of diseases inseparable, in the day, is the distaunce of Saturn unto
Mars, and it is cast from the degree ascendant, and in the night from Mars,
which is contrary.

The part of servant, by day and by night, from Mercury unto the Moon, is
from the ascendant.

The part of prison and captivity by day, from the lord of the place of the
Sun, unto the Sun, and is reckoned from the ascendant. By night, from the
Lord of the place of the Moon, unto the Moon.

If the Sun by day, or the Moon by night, be in their proper houses or
exaltations, they shall be signifiers of this part.

Of the seventh.
The part of the marriage of men, by day and by night, from the Sun unto
Venus, is from the ascendant.

The part of the marriage of women, by day and by night, from Venus to Saturn,
is from the ascendant.

The part of marriage common to men and to women, by day and by night, is from
Venus unto the point of the seventh house, accounting from the ascendant.

The part of kindred, by day and by night, from Saturn unto Venus, is from the
ascendant.

The part of discord and agreement, by day, is from Mars to Jupiter from the
ascendant: by night to the contrary.

Of the eight.
The part of death, by day and by night, from the Moon unto the degree of the
eight house, taken upon the equality of the Eclipse accounting from the place
o^ Saturn.

The part of the mortal Planet by day is from the Lord of the ascendant, unto
the Moon, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the perrillous year of death, or poverty, or of any other
misfortune by day, and by night, is from Saturn unto the Lord of the
foresaid conjunction or opposition of the light, from the ascendant.

The part of all enuies, by day, is from Saturn unto Mars, by night to the
contrary, accounting from the place of Mercury.

Of the ninth.
The part of faith and of religion by day, is from the Moon unto Mercury,
from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of ways by land by day and by night, is from the Lord of the ninth
unto the ninth, taken upon the equality of the Eclipse, from the ascendant.

The part of travail by water by day, is from Saturn unto the fifteenth
degree of Cancer, from the ascendant, at night to the contrary.

If Saturn do meet in the said fifteenth degree of Cancer, he shall be
signifier of this part, with the ascendant.

Of the tenth.
The part of nobility by day, is from the Sun unto the nineteenth degree of
Aries, accounting from the ascendant, by night, from the Moon unto the third
degree of Taurus. If the Moon by night be in the said degree of Taurus, or the
Sun by day, in the said degree of Aries, they shall be signifiers of the said
part.

The part of government by day, is from Mars unto the Moon from the ascendant,
by night to the contrary.

The part of Magistrates, as the part of the understanding, written upon the
first house.

The part of conquest and victory, as the part of father.

The part of sudden advancement, by day, is from Saturn unto the part of
Fortune, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary; If Saturn be burned,
take in his place Jupiter.

The part of estimation, by day and by night; is from Mercury unto the Sun,
accounting from the ascendant.

The part of governments and seats of war, by day, is from Mars unto
Saturn; from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the profession and action, by day and by night, is from Saturn
unto the Moon from the ascendant.

The part of honor proceeding of the profession, by day and by night, is from
the degree of the Sun, unto the degree of the tenth house, from the ascendant.

The part of the industry of the hands, by day, is from Mercury to Venus, from
the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the fear of Merchandise, by day, is from the part of the spirit,
unto the part of Fortune, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of felicity, and profit, by day, is from the part of Fortune unto
Jupiter, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the mother, by day, is from Venus unto the Moon, from the
ascendant, by night to the contrary.

Of the eleventh.
The part of friends, by day and by night, is from Mercury to the Moon, from
the ascendant.

The part of praise, by day, is from Jupiter unto Venus from the ascendant, by
night to the contrary.

The part of honorable companies, by day, is from the part of Fortune unto the
Sun, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

Of the twelfth.
The part of enemies, by day and by night, is from the lord of the xij. house
unto the said xij. taken upon the equality of the Eclipse, from the ascendant.

The second part of enemies, as the part of diseases inseparable, written in
the sixth house.

The part of pain, travail and affliction, by day and by night, is from the
part of the spirit, unto the part of fortune.

CHAP. V. Of the latitudes and aspects of the Planets.
Having applied the Planets in the said figure, and ordained as we have said
in the former chapter, the parts proceeding of the proportions of the said
Planets, you must consequently draw out of the Ephemerides their latitudes, and
put apart all the aspects which is among them, and toward the said parts and
xij. houses; also the radiations, after the last proposition of the book of
Directions of John de Regiomonte: upon the which note, that the aspects
opposites, have always diverse latitudes to them of their Planets, although
they keep the same number. As if Saturn had two degrees of latitude
septentrionall, his opposition has two degrees of latitudes meridionall. The
quadrant aspect has no latitude, for it falls always upon the Eclipse.

The Trine aspect, retains the half of the number of the latitude, in
contrary part: for if a Planet have one degree of latitude meridionall, his
trine shall have thirty minutes of latitude septentrionall. The Sextile
retains the same side, with the half of the number. You must also note, that
these aspects of Saturn and of Jupiter, do not extend but unto nine degrees,
or for the most longest unto twelve; those of Mars unto eight, or for the most
part to ten. The Sun extends his beams to xv. degrees, Venus and
Mercury almost to eight. The Moon unto twelve, the head and tail of the
Dragon, likewise extend their forces unto twelve degrees.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the opposition is a plain aspect and
perfect enmity: the Quadrate of less enmity: the Trine of perfect love: the
Sextile of imperfect love. That which always receives exception in Jupiter
and Venus, (of the which opposites and quadrate aspects) profit the Sun and
the Moon with reception, or without reception, and to others also with
reception.

CHAP. VI. Of the fortunes and infortunes of the Planets, and parts of Heaven.
AFter this, you must consider the forces and weakness of the Planets, parts
and Houses, and conferring the ones significations with the other, you must
collect the fortunes and infortunes of every place, as follows.

Here follows the infortunes.
The Planets and other places of the Heaven, be called unfortunate, when they
be burned under the beams of the Sun. Burnings are called Saturn and
Jupiter, when between them and the Sun they have less then twelve degrees.
Mars when he is burned of the Sun, has at the least xj. degrees and a half.
Venus and Mercury, when they be near the Sun, xj. degrees. The Moon when
she is not burned, by xiij. And yet you find other terms, when you will take a
Planet for to give the years. Then the three superiors are esteemed burnt,
because they are near the Sun by xv. degrees, and if they be occidental. For
when they be oriental unto ten degrees, they are burnt from the ten unto
xv. under the beams. Venus and Mercury occidentall near to the Sun by
seven degrees, or oriental by five, be burned, from thence unto twelve under
the beams. The Moon near by twelve degrees is burnt, from thence unto xv.
under the beams. And you must note, that the said accidents are not hurtful
when they fall in the signs of Aries, and of the Lion.

Unfortunate also are the Planets, when they go backwarde, and when they be
joined with Saturn or with Mars: or when they receive evil aspects of them.

When they are joined with any fixed star of violent nature.

When they are in their detriments or fallings, (that is to say) in places
opposite to their houses or exaltations.

When they are in their declining houses.

When they are first standers, (that is to say) when they be in the degree and
minute wherein incontinently they begin to go backward.

When they are in the way of burning, which begin at the 19. degree of Libra,
and end in the third degree of Scorpio.

When they be with the tail of the Dragon.

When they are joined with a backward Planet, or otherwise unfortunate.

When they are Peregrines, without being received. They are called Peregrins,
when they have no dignity or place where they be. Of the reception we will
speak afterward.

When they be meridionall descendents.

When any of the three superiors are occidentall, or Venus and Mercury
oriental, when they be in evil aspects of the Sun.

When they do not regard any other Planet.

When they be opposits to the Lord of the sign where they be.

When they be set, (that is to say) between two evil Planets, although they
have 30. degrees of distance.

When they be in evil houses or terms.

When they be in the twelfth sign of their principal houses.

When they be under the Horrizon in the day, or above the Horrizon in the
night: if they be Diurnes, as Saturn, Jupiter, and the Sun.

When they be above the Horrizon in the day, and beneath at night. If they be
Nocturnes, as Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon.

When they be in signs and degrees feminine, they be masculines, or in signs
and degrees masculine, they be feminines. Feminines are Venus and the Moon,
Mercury and Androgine, the others are masculines.

When they be in degrees which are called Azemenae, or in degrees stinking,
dark, or smokie. That which is marked in the Ephemerides, in the table of the
dignities of the Planets.

Infortunes particular to the Moon.
When she decreaseth.

When she is within the eight House, out of her principal dignities.

When she is within the seventh, and that as to the life. And as for any other
significations she is not unfortunate in the seventh.

When she is in the xix. degree of a sign.

When she is slack in her course, (that is to understand) when she goes in
twenty-foure hours, less then thyrteene degrees and xi. minutes.

The fortunes of the Planets.
Fortunate be the Planets, and other places of Heaven, when they be in angles,
or at the least in houses succeeding.

When they be in a good aspect of Jupiter, or of Venus, or at the least in
evil, with reception.

When they be joined to the Sun within sixteen mynutes.

When they be in a good aspect of the Sun, of the Moon, or of Mercury
fortunate.

When they be joined with any fixed star of a loving nature.

When they be directs, or at the least, in the second station, (that is to
understand) when they be in degree and minute, in the which begins
incontinently the direction.

When they be within their proper houses or exaltations.

When they be in their triplicities and terms together, or triplicity and face
together.

When they be in houses, wherein they naturally take pleasure, as Mercury in
the ascendant, the Moon in the third, Venus in the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the
Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh, and Saturn in the twelfth.

When they be in any of their dignities, or if they be peregrines, when they be
received. Received; that is, the Planets, which receive aspect of him, which in
their place has at the least four dignities, the which reception is
fortunate, when she is made of a good aspect.

At all times the receptions of Jupiter and Venus be always favorable,
although they be not made of good aspects.

When they mount to the highest part of their Circles.

When they be septentrionals, principally ascendants.

When any of the three Superiors is oriental, or Venus and Mercury
occidentall.

When they begin to go from the beams of the Sun.

When they be in Houses or terms of favorable Planets.

When they be above the Horrizon in the day, or under the Horrizon in the
night, if they be Diurnes.

When they be under the Horrizon in the day, or above the Horrizon in the
night. If they be nocturnes.

When they are in signs and degrees masculine, they be masculine, or in signs
and degrees feminines, they be feminines.

When they be in degrees fortunate and clear degrees, which are called Lucides.

Particular fortunes of the Moon.
When she increases.

When she is within the house or exaltation of the Sun.

When she is very swift in her course, (that is to understand) when she goes
more then thirteen degrees and 11. minutes in 24. hours.

CHAP. VII. If the child shall live or no.
ALL this above considered, you must first look, whether he that is borne, is
for life in this world or no. That which principally will show us the light
of the time, (that is to say, the Sun by day, and the Moon by night) are the
Lords of the triplicity of him, and the ascendant with his Dominator.

When the Dominator of the ascendant, shall be unfortunate by the Lord of the
eight house, the Child cannot live: and less, if the Lords of the
triplicitie of the temporal light be unfortunate.

When within the first house shall be any fixed star of violent nature, or
any ill fortune, (that is to say, Saturn or Mars) without having at the least
four dignities, and the temporal light shall be unfortunate, the child shall
die quickly. If you find not any fixed star of amiable nature, or if Jupiter
and Venus, or the Sun or the Moon, do not communicate unto him their
beams. For and if the aspect be of love, or of enmity with reception, the
child shall live.

If the Dominator of the ascendant be burnde, the child shall dye before 9.
days be acomplished, and more sooner if he be burned within the eight house,
or in this estate, if he be joined with the Lord of the eygth. Except when he
is burned in his own house or exaltation, or within the house or exaltation of
the Sun.

When the Moon, being the temporal light, shall be unfortunate within the
first house, without any aspect of the fortunes, and without the conjunction of
any fixed stars of amiable nature, the hope of life shall not be great.

When the Moon shall be unfortunate within the fourth house, and he that has
the misfortune shall be also unfortunate, and out of his principal dignities,
the Infant cannot live, and the mother shall be in great danger of death at
her deliverance, and principally if the ascendant be the house or exaltation of
the Moon.

When the infortunes are conjoined within the eighth house, it signifies very
short life: except when Mars and Saturn be in Capricorn.

Many joint Plannets within the first house, bring not good testimony of life,
although they be all fortunate.

When the Domynator of the ascendant, and the temporal light, and the Lords of
their triplicities be not altogether unfortunate, the child may easily live.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Giver of life, named of the Arabians Hyleg.
THe giver of life is taken out of the principal places of the Figure (that is
to say) of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Ascendant, of the part of
Fortune, and of the degree of the last conjunction or opposition of lights; the
which having well noted, we consider first, if the nativity be diurnal or
nocturnal? For if she be diurne we begin at the Sun, the which within the
first, tenth, or eleventh house, in a masculine or feminine sign, shall be
fit to give life, if it have any giver of time that does regard it: If it be
in the nynth, eygth, or seventh house, it may also be the giver of life, if it
be in a Masculine sign, and not in a Feminine: in other places it cannot be
the giver of life, but by constraint. It is always necessary for such an
act, that the giver of time regard the giver of life, otherwise, the said
giver of life shall be as person that has good will to do his friend good and
has not wherewithal; And so when the Sun shall be without aspect of any
giver of time, you must leave it there, and go to the Moon, which may give
the life within the first house, in the sign Masculine or Feminine, and within
the tenth, eleventh, seventh, fourth, fifth, second and third house, in signs
Feminines and not Masculines, receiving aspect of any giver of time. If the
Moon have not all the said conditions, you must come to the degree ascendant,
if the nativity be coniunctionall (Coniunctionall is said the nativity,
before the which lastly the lights have been conjoined) and if the said
degree receive aspect of his gyuer of time, he shall be gyuer of life:
otherwise not. Wherefore you must examine the part of Fortune, the which shall
give life in the Angles and houses succeeding, with the aspect of the giver of
time, otherwise you must come to the degree, to the which lastly the lights
have been conjoined: the which within the Angles or houses succeeding shall be
giver of life, if he receive aspect of his giver of time.

It is here necessary that the giver of time have dignity of house, or of
exaltation in places of the part of Fortune, and of the said degree
coniunctionall. By this order you must seek the gyuer of life, when the
nativity is coniunctionall. When she is preuentionall, (Preuentionall is
said, before the which lastly the lights have been opposites) after you have
considered the Sun and the Moon, you must consequently contemplate the
place of Fortune, more than the degree ascendant, and lastly the degree of the
oppositions of the lights, and see that it have 2. degrees in the opposition,
one of them of the Sun, and the other of the Moon. The Astrologians command
to consider it, that at the time of the opposition it has been in the first
house, or elsewhere above the Horizon.

When the Nativity is nocturniall, we follow the same order, (except that
first we consider the Moon, secondly the Sun, etc.) This gyuer of life, when
either by direction, or by profection, or by other way, meet any evil aspect
of the infortunes, or of the stars fixed of vyolent nature, or any of the
notable conjunctions, or Eclipses of the lights, it causes then some
sickness, and very suddaynly brings death, when the Fortunes do not
intermingle the favorable beams.

CHAP. IX. Of the giver of years, called of the Arabians Alcocoden.
THE gyuer of time or giver of years, is the same that has dignity of house,
exaltation, triplicitie, or term in the place where is the giver of life. As
if the Sun were in the xj. in the sign of Sagitarius, (there where he may be
gyuer of life,) and Jupiter were in the sign of Aquarius, he shall regard the
Sun of the Sextile aspect, and look that he have dignity of the house in
the sign of the Sun, he shall be giver of years. It is then necessary, that
these two things concur together, to the end that one Plannet be giver of
years, that is to say, that he has dignity nevertheless of term (for the
dignity of face is not sufficient enough for one so great effect) in sign and
degree, in the which shall be the giver of life, and that he regard the said
giver of life, of one aspect or other.

This gyuer of time, well lodged upon the point of Angles, gives him old
years, in points of the houses succeeding: is means, is Cadants, is
smalnesse, and for as much as he shall be long from the beginnings of the said
houses, so much the more or less he must diminish the number of his old
years, means, and smalnes, after the difference taken of the next houses with
the difference of years. And first of all if it be within any angle of heaven,
not always to the first point, you must proceed also, and take in the first
place the distance of the said angle, and of the next house succeeding. Note
afterward, how many degrees the said giver of years is from the point of the
angle. Then take the difference of his old years and means, multiply this
difference by the number of the said elongment, and part it by the distance of
the said angle, and of the house succeeding: that which rests, take for the
exact number of the years of life, promised by the said giver of years. If
he be within any house, succeeding out of the points and beginnings of the
same, you must first take the distance of the house succeeding, and of the next
Cadant: then note how many degrees the said giver of years shall be elonged
from the point of the said house succeeding; afterward take the difference of
years, means and smalnes, the which multiply by the second number, and part it
by the first: the residue shall be the time of life which was promised by the
said giver of years. If it be in Cadant houses it shall be upon the points of
them, or after, he gives but only small years: Except when he is within 5.
degrees near to the point of the said angles, and then you must reckon as it
follows. Take the difference of the old years, and smalnes of the Plannets
that gives the years, and divide them into 5. parts; afterward look in which
of the said 5. degrees shall be the said Plannet. For if it be in the first and
most near the point of the angle, (that is to say) if he be elonged from the
said angle one degree only, then is it convenient to take out of his old
years, one of the said 5. parts: if he be elonged by 2. degrees, you must take
out 2. parts: if he be elonged 3. degrees, you must substract 3. parts, etc.
You must note that the Moon in the viij. gives but small years. And that the
Sun within the 9. and Jupiter in the 11. and Venus in the 5. and Mercury by
the whole ascendant, and the Moon in the 3. give their old years as
perfectly, as if they were upon the points of the angles: For they be places
wherein principally they do rejoice. Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury within the 9.
give their years indifferent: and the Moon in the 11. gives them old. Mars in
the 6. and Saturn in the 12. they are indifferent, because in the said places
they greatly delight themselves: wherefore if they were not evil, they would
there give old years.

Upon this propose it is convenient also to note, that one burnt Plannet
cannot be a giver of years: and the Moon in the prime of the beams of the
Sun, cannot give life nor time. If a Plannet, which otherwise may be a giver
years, be burnt in his proper house or exaltation, receiving there the Sun,
causes the Sun to take the charge to be the giver of years. If it come to
pass that the Sun or the Moon be in their proper houses or exaltations,
they may be giuers of life and time together, with out need to desire aspect
of any other Plannet. If one place being significator of life, have many giuers
of years, we will take him that has most dignities in the same place, and if
they be equal in dignities we will take him that has his aspect most whole,
and his beams most nearest the said giver of life. If they find two or three
or many giuers of life, that have their giuers of years, they must always
consider and direct, as the first and principal, following the years of the
Plannets.

Old years. Mean years. Small years. Of 57 43 30 Saturn. 79 45 12
Jupiter. 66 40 15 Mars. 120 69 19 Sol 82 45 8 Venus. 76 48 20 Mercury. 108 66
25 Luna.

CHAP. X. Of them that augment and diminish the number of the said years.
THey which augment the number of the said years, are Jupiter, Venus, the
Sun, the Moon, and Mercury fortified; the which fortunatly regarding the
gyuer of years, with an amiable aspect adding to their small years, (that is
to understand) the Sun x. and ix. Venus viij. the Moon xxv. etc. Likewise If
the gyuer of time be conjoined with any fixed star of amiable nature, it
takes of the said star the number of the small years of the Plannet, of the
which the said star holds his nature. If the said Plannets regard the giver
of time with an evil aspect with reception, they add as before, which they
do not when they have no reception: Except Jupiter and Venus, that in every
sort of aspects, with reception or without reception, always adding to their
small years, for to see that the gyuer of time be not Saturn or Mars, toward
the which the reception is necessary, if the aspect be of enmity.

The said Plannets evil placed and unfortunate, in the place of the whole
small years, in adding the half, or the third, or fourth part, or certain
number of months, of weeks, or of days, according to the greatness or
smalnesse of their infelicitie. The amiable aspects of ill fortunes, with
reception, give their years small: without reception, they do neither good
nor evil. If the giver of years be retrogarde or meridionall descending, or
in his fall or detryment, or in the way burned, that takes from it the fifth
part of that which he had given being otherwise disposed. That which happened
also to the 3. superior Planets, when they be occidentall, and to the Moon
when she decreaseth, and when she is in the xx. and ix. degree of a sign, and
when she is slack in her course. The Sun regarding the Moon with the aspects
of enmity without reception diminished. Saturn, Mars, or Mercury deprived,
looking to the evil aspect of the giver of light they take away the number of
their small years: Except they recover; For then by opposition they do but
half the evil: By quadrate aspect, they diminish but the fourth part. The
tail of the Dragon taken from the Moon xij. years, I have found it often by
experience, that the fortunes (that is to understand, Jupiter and Venus) or the
Sun and the Moon, and Mercury fortunate in the first house, or near to the
giver of life, adding to their small years, although they do not regard the
giver of time: and to the contrary, that the infortunes in the said places,
take away the small years, without regarding the said giver of time. Except
when they were well honored in the said places, or when they were Lords of
the Natiuities.

CHAP. XI. Of the Lords of the Nativity.
YOu must take the Lord of the Nativity, out of the places of the which we
have taken the giver of life, (that is to understand) of the place of the Sun
and of the Moon, of the degree ascendant of the part of Fortune, and of the
degrees of the precedent conjunction or opposition of lights. Of all these
places likewise it is to be considered, what Plannet has most dignities, for
he shall be Lord of the Nativity, that which the giver of years shall
signify the time of our life, according to the situation and felicity or
infelicitie, as we have before said of the giver of years. And if the one give
more than the other, you must take the difference of both, and the half ad or
diminish: according as shall be necessary.

The Signs. 5 The house of the Planettes. Exaltation. 3 The triplicitie of the
Planettes. 2 The terms of the Planettes. 1 The faces of the Planettes.
Perigren. The hurtes. The falls. S D N P G G G G G G G G D 6 ^ 12 10 25 30 10
20 30 When the Planettes naue no dignities. N ^ 14 22 2^ 30 0 20 30 D ^2 17 24
30 10 20 ^0 DN 7 13 ^9 26 30 10 20 30 DN 6 11 18 24 30 10 20 30 N 7 17 21 28 30
10 20 30 ^ 14 2^ 28 30 ^0 20 30 N 7 11 ^9 24 ^0 10 20 30 D 12 ^7 21 26 30 ^0 ^0
30 N 7 14 22 26 30 10 20 30 D 7 13 20 25 30 10 20 30 N 12 16 19 28 30 10 20 30

CHAP. XII. Of the understanding and manners of a Man.
HOW to know the felicity or infelicitie of the Spirit, and the nature of
the same, you must look in the place of Mercury and of the Moon, the Planet
that in these two places has most dignities, shall be signifier of the
spirit. The which if it be Saturn well disposed, shall signify the man of a
great and profound knowledge, of good counsel, and of good gravity or a
strong opinion: close, secret, solitary, dissembling his good and evil, a
lover of just men, and of good age: rejoicing upon the treasures, heritages and
labourings; holding discourse of antiquities and of great affairs, admirator
of buildings. Sometimes a little merry, incontinent sad: sometimes laughing
or murmuring by himself alone, a little slothful, a little envious, and not
always keeping his promise. If he be unfortunate, he shall be noted envious,
sad, solitary, fearful, mellancholie, faint-harted, a raylor, jealous, a
malefactor, evil, a blasphemer, a liar and deceiuer, a Usurer, and holder of
opinions: rejecting the counsel of others: fearing that all the world does
deceive him: uncivil, a villain, a slouine, dishonest, flying the company of
men unless it be to deceive them, and to draw any profit, having no other
friend but his villainous gain, using sometimes sorcery.

Jupiter signifier of the spirit, well disposed, shows the man sweet,
courteous, honest, gracious, amiable, faithful, pitiful, liberal, of good
behauior, of good heart and good love: following nobleness and all honesty:
loving God, abounding in friends, dreaming always upon some virtuous thing,
and withdrawes himself sometimes solitary, to think upon some goodness: using
in all and by all his affairs, a great equity, prudence and modesty, having
great courage to accomplish. If he be unfortunate of himself, and not to
meet with other stars, in the place of good love, he will give sometimes
foolishnes in the place of honesty, pride in the place of liberality,
prodigality in the place of loving good will, does yield him an hypocrite,
seeming to follow nobleness, when indeed he will dispraise all the world: in
the place of honesty, it will make him dream of tyranny.

If the said Jupiter be unfortunate of other Planets and not of himself, he
takes all their vices, and covers them with his said virtues in manner of
an evil hypocrite. If Mars well fortunate be the said significator, he shall
cause the man to be of a high courage, hardy, irefull, furious, a hazarder, a
conducter of wars, and the first in business, and only in deeds and
cogitations given to arms: strong, stubberne and mighty, trusting too much to
his own puissaunce, not fearing any perrill, and blessed in all his deeds. If
he be unfortunate, it makes the man tymerous, a thief, a liar, blasphemer,
mutenous, cruel, a murderer, hardy, proud, arrogant, not to be borne
withal, despysing his own proper goods, and the goods of other, using force
and violence against his Parents, and against all the world: a diuilish man,
without shame, without counsel, without virtue, without love, without any
fear or reverence of God, furious, seditious, given and prompt to all
mischief.

If the Sun be significator in his good disposition, it makes the man
mannerly, wise, prudent, of good counsel, a lover of noblenes, following glory
and honor, given to justice and governments of Towns and Cities, loving
hunting, worthy, and of great estimation. If it be unfortunate, it shows
great pride, excessive ambition, and tyranny, and does nourish the thought.

If Venus signify the quality of the spirit in good disposition, it makes
the man pleasant, merry, dancing, laughing, content, amiable, gracious, of
good conversation, and a little ielous. If unfortunate, it makes the man
frowning, and too merry, of evil maintenance, using dishonest words, given to
voluptuousnes, and ielous of that which belongs not unto him.

If Mercury be fortunate, it gyues good understanding, good memory, great
perseverance, great subtlety of spyrite, good discourse of reason, full of
wit, very apt to know the Mathematicals, and the secrets of nature; it makes
the man a Poet, an Orator, well spoken, writing well, and a great trader. If it
be evil disposed, it makes him presumpteous, of little knowledge, with great
estimation of his person, inconstant, a liar, a mocker, a deceiuer ordinarily,
fine, fantastical, and vicious.

If it be the Moon that is fortunate, she makes him that is borne, pacified,
modest, of good heart, or good will, and easy to endure any thing that one will
do. Unfortunate does show inconstancy, lightness of spyrite, faint-harted,
prodigal, faythlesse. If the said signifiers, are not greatly fortunate or
unfortunate, it is convenient to rebate the said significations good and
vicious, after the quality of their good and evil dispositions.

If any Planet be participant in the signification of the manners, or if it
have great communication of aspect with the principal significator, then
considering the vices and virtues of him, that (according to his good or evil
disposition) we do join them to him which gives the principal. As if
Saturn well disposed, be principal significator, and Mars unfortunate be
participant, or regard Saturn of one whole aspect with reception, then it is
convenient to mingle some little of the nature of Mars unfortunate, with the
significations of Saturue fortunate.

The Astrologians do advertise us, that if the Lord of the ascendant be well
placed, and the said significator of manners evil disposed, you must more
consider upon that which the Lord of the ascendant signifies, then upon that
which the said significator does promise. Moreover, they consider more
particulerly, the place of Mercury and of the Moon, and the aspect which they
receive. If Mercury be in the ascendant, it makes the Man ingenious, and of
great and profounde knowledge, a great Philosopher, a Mathematician, an Orator,
a Poet, a Divine; principally when he is in the place in the which Saturn has
at the least 4. dignities, or when he receives aspect of Saturn.

Mercury in the twelfth, receiving aspect of the Moon, has very near as
great force for to give wit and knowledge, as if he were in the first. And
where that Mercury is, if he regard the Moon, and both two, or the one or the
other, regard the ascendant or the Lord of the ascendant, this is sign of a
good and subtle spyrite. And if Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, or other Planets,
do communicate to him their favorable beams, if they mingle their good
virtues, if they regard the evil aspect, they intermingle their vices: except
Jupiter and Venus, which of evil aspect do never anoy them, and less when he
has reception.

If the Sun be temporal light, it may signify the quality of the spyrite
with the Moon and Mercury in the form above said. If Mercury be occidentall
within the house or exaltation of the Sun, having aspect of the Moon, or of
the ascendant, or of his Lord, it is the sovereign sign of good and high
spirits, of men of al knowledge, given to great enterprises and virtues, as
Poets, Orators, Mathematicians, Counselors, Administrators of Commonweals,
and Governors of Realms: principally when he is fortunate in every angle of
Heaven.

Mercury within the seventh house fortunate, gives good understanding, and
ripe judgment: it makes the man subtle, watchful, and of good counsel,
with great craft to govern his affairs. Mercury in the ninth or third house,
gives knowledge and contemplation. The part of the understanding of the
spyrite with their Lords fortunate, signifies good spirits and good manners.

Mercury in the sign of Pisces, does not any way love learning: the contrary
happens, when he is in the sign of Virgo and of Gemini, by all the places of
the figure of Heaven. Saturn within the houses of Mercury, is always
contemplative: Mars, a little deceiuer. Mercury within the houses of Saturn
fortunate, is always studious, within those of Mars, he is full of evil
words, and often false.

When the lyghts and significators of manners shall be oppressed with ill
fortune, the child shall be of a very strange and perverse nature. The Moon
opposite to the Sun, makes him hate all men. If the Sun and the Moon with
the ascendant and his Lord, be all in feminine signs, the manners of him
shall be feminine, and he shall be a man of little heart. If they be in signs
masculine at the nativity of a woman, her deeds shall be manly, and she shall
be a woman of great enterprise.

If Venus be in the sign of the Lion, or under the beams of the Sun, or in
conjunction or other aspect of Mars, she makes that the man shall be suddenly
stricken in love. And if in that estate she be within the first or tenth house,
without any aspect of Jupiter, he shall be voluptuous without having shame;
and when she shall be in the sign of Scorpio, the aspect of Jupiter toward
Venus, gives always chastity, and love of virtue.

CHAP. XIII. Of riches and poverty.
FOR the riches and poverty, it is convenient first that you look to the
second house, for if she and her Lord be fortunate, we say that the child
shall be rich, and if they be unfortunate, he shall be poor on that side. Then
afterward you must consider the part of Fortune, the which with his Lord well
disposed, promises great store of goods, without other witness. If they be
evil disposed, you must come to the part of goods the which with his Lord
fortunate enricheth, unfortunate gives nothing. Likewise you must judge of the
part of felicity and of his Lord. And that thing which the other places
signify, you must always have recourse to the natural significator of
riches, which is Jupiter, the which well placed and fortunate, gives goods in
abundance: principally if he be Lord of the nativity, or Lord of the hour,
or of the ascendant, or of the second house, or of the part of Fortune, or of
the part of goods, or of the part of felicity, or of temporal light, or of
the tenth house, otherwise he gives nothing.

When the aboue-sayde Significators shall be unfortunate, the child cannot be
rich, if the tenth house (of the which we will speak hereafter) do not
promise him some good luck. Men find also often by experience, that when a
Planet is within his own house or exaltation, or in his joy, (without being
unfortunate, or else where environed with the fortunes or their beams) that he
gives goods, although he be not Significator of riches. If in the fourth house
be his lord or other fortunate Planet, he promises inheritaunces. If any fixed
star of the first or second greatness be joined to the temporal light, or to
the degree ascendant, or to the points of the other angles, or to other Planets
in the said places placed, she does raise the man of base estate, to great
authority and honor: and if he be of the race of Princes, it will make him a
puissant Lord and King.

When a like Planet shall be Lord of the ascendant, and of the second house,
the child shall be covetous of money and gain, as that which happens when
Capricorn is ascendant. When the Lord of the second house shall be within the
first, the goods come without labor. Likewise when the Lord of the second
house gives strength to the Lord of the ascendant. When the Lord of the
ascendant shall be in the second, the goods shall not come without travail:
nor when the lord of the ascendant shall give strength to the Lord of the
second. Saturn, Mars, Mercury depraved, the Sun and the tail of the Dragon
lunarie, within the second, destroy the man, and disperse his goods; except
when they have at the least four dignities, or when they be received. When the
Lord of the ascendant shall regard with evil aspect the second house, or the
part of goods and of fortune, or their Lords, the child of his own proper will
shall disperse his goods. If the Lord of the ascendant be unfortunate in the
second house, the child shall be too large a giver, and prodigal. If any
misfortune have domination upon the ascendant, and in the second, the child
shall be destroyed by others, which shall destroy his goods and rob him. When
the said Significators of goods shall be unfortunate, the child shall be all
his life in pain and travail, without any advancement or profit.

Abraham Auenesre says, that if the Lord of the second be burnt, and Jupiter
evil disposed, that the child shall be Four Planets in their falls or
detryme^ts, do show great miseries, as it was in the natiuite of John Duke of
Saxony, who was taken prisoner of Charles the 5. This good Duke had 3. Planets
in their detryments, and one Perigren.
always poor. And Hermes says: when the Lord of the profession (of the which
we shall speak in the 27. chap.) shall be burnt, or retrogard, or in the sixth
or xij. house, and not any Planet regarding the Moon, the child shall seek
his living from door to door like a beggar. Jupiter, Venus, and the head of
the Dragon in the second, always enrich. Venus in the fifth promises some
good. The Sun in the nynth fortunate, gives benefices, or other goods of the
side of the men of the Church. Mars in the sixth well disposed, gives good or
nourishment to Beasts, and exercise of Physic. The Sun in the sign of
Leo, will never suffer the child to be poor.

CHAP. XIIII. By what means riches and poverty comes.
Having well noted the places which promise and bring riches, in regarding the
situation of the said significators, we will know by what means ought to come
the good and the evil. For if the significator be in the first house received
and fortunate, it easily inricheth the person by his industry and proper
labor: and if he be in the said place unfortunate, it is that his industry and
labor does profit him nothing; and the sooner from thence to loss and damage.

If he be in the second house well disposed, it profits to talk with
Merchants, and lend merchandise and money, and of them make gain. And if he be
there evil disposed, the said business brings great damages. If he be within
the third house fortunate, it brings the goods from the side of Brothers and
Sisters, and Cosins and alyes, or from the side of the men of the Church in
taking charge of their affairs: or to traffic here and there about his
Country. If he be in the 4. well placed, he is enriched of inheritances and
goods of our fathers and predecessors, of laborings and tilling of ground, of
houses, and oftentimes does meet with treasure. If it be within the fifth, it
profits to be a good Dauncer, a good Player, to be brave, gracious, pleasant
and delightful, and sometimes to be voluptuous: always well, because of
Godfathers and Godmothers, and of their proper children; or because of gyfts,
or to make some voyage and do some embassage. Those things that come
appertaining to bravery and volupteousnesse, and making ready delicates, odours
and perfumes, of this house they very suddenly draw their profit. If the said
significator be in the sixth well placed, he shall make his profit in
nourishing, and buying and selling of Sheep, muttons, and other small beasts,
or shall become rich by the diligence and faithfulness of his servant, or
shall gain by the exercise of Physic. The Gaylors and others which have the
charge of prysons, draw oftentimes their profit from this house.

If the significator be in the seventh fortunate, it promises great good of
the side of women, by marriages or like agreements: and oftentimes to have
pleaded and gained his suit in the law, or having been in the wars and
pilled the enemies. If it be in the eight well disposed, it gives great dowry
and great good, because of women, and sometimes heritages, of the which he
shall not greatly think of. If it be in the ninth fortunate, he shall be
enriched of the goods of the church, or by traffic and traueling in strange
Countries.

If it be well in the tenth, he shall have his profit of the side of Kings,
Princes, and Lords, and be made of them Governors of Towns, and honorable
Officers; or be enriched by their own vocation and profession.

If it be within the eleventh in good disposition, he profits by reason of
friends, and by favor of men in authority.

If it be in the twelueth, fortunate, it gives gain by nourishing and selling
of Horses, Mares, Oxen, Kyne, Cammells, and other great beasts: or to have
charge of prysonners: or of the persecution of enemies, with profitable
victory in the end; As oftentimes it happens to some, which accusing others,
and cannot prove the crimes intended be condemned to make a good amends to
the party: after all which persecution, the party does find himself content.

Saturn by himself, enricheth by heritages and labors, nourishing of all
Cattle, and with trading with ancient men, or with Contrymen, Mariners,
and other vilde men: in Corn, Wines, Oils, Fysh, Oade, Rosen, Alum, Leather,
Tyles, Stones, Plaster, Chalk, Lyme, and such merchandise.

Jupiter, by Offices, benefices, and business of men of the Church, and all
gaynes that are made without deceit. Except when he is unfortunate, for then
under the shadow of virtue, he does his affairs craftily.

Mars, by wars, suits, or thefts, or by slaughter, and selling of Cattle: or
if it be in aspect of Venus, by physic.

The Sun, by honorable offices, dignities and Lordships, by great credit, by
charges to keep and gather the money of Princes and Commonweals.

Venus, by music, pleasure, grace and virtue, by bravery, by play, and
sometimes by voluptuousnes, and sometime to serve some great Lady.

Mercury, to speak well and write well, and to be very skillful, to be a
Secretary, a Register, a Poet, an Orator, and a good advocate, to be a
Geometrician, Arethmetrician, Astrologian, and a good trader. The moon for
voyages, navigations, wandering, and trading in far Countries, to have the
chardge of small affaieres of the common wealth.

If the said Significator be unfortunate in the same places, they bring damage
and interestes, and if they be within the houses of Saturn, Jupiter or other
planets, we judge the profit and interest after the nature of Saturn,
Jupiter, and other planets which shall be lords of the same places.

CHAP. XV. Of the time when the riches and damages shall come.
THe said riches shall come, when the Significators of goods shall meet by
direction, in body or in aspects of amity. As if Venus in some nativity
promise goods, they shall come when Venus by direction shall touch the place
of Jupiter, or the degree of the second house, or the part of fortune, or their
good aspects: Likewise you must judge of damages in goods. For when a
significator of damages and interestes does meet by direction a significator
of goods, or his aspects of enmity, then certainly comes the loss and damage.
As when Saturn or Mars meet Jupiter in the part of fortune, the part of
goods and other places which signify riches, the which also you must direct
to the said ill fortunes, or to their evil aspect sygnifying always some
loss.

By the reuolutions also you may know the time of good and evil fortune. For
when Jupiter in the nativity shall be in the sign Libra well disposed, always
and as many times, as you shall find him in the revolution in the sign, in the
same fortune certainly he shall then bring the goods that he promised, at the
hour of the Nativity.

To the contrary, if he be unfortunate by Saturn or Mars in the Nativity,
always and as many times as he shall be in the revolution over against the
said vnfortunators, then the said damage shall come in the sort and manner as
was signified in the nativity.

If the Significator of goods be Oriental, the goods come in youth, if it be
Occidentall, in age. If it be in the first house he shall be rich in his first
age, if it be between the first and the tenth, upon the time of twenty and
seven years. If it be in the tenth, between thirtye and five and thirty. If
it be between the tenth and seventh, about forty and forty eight. If it be
in the seventh he shall be rich in his old age. You must also look to the three
Lords of the triplicitie, and to every Significator of goods. For the first
lord signifies the first age, the second of the time of thirty or forty
years, the third the last age. Wherefore if the first lord of the triplicitie
of one significator of riches be fortunate, the said goods signified shall
come at the first time: or if he be unfortunate, the damage then shall stick,
by this means you may apply the other lords, to the ages following, and
according to the good or evil disposition you must judge of the fortune of
every one.

CHAP. XVI. Of Brethren.
MArs and Saturn within the third house out of their principal dignities and
not received, signifies that the child shall have no brother nor Sister. And
if they be in their principal dignities, or if they be fortunatly received,
they may then give some brethren, but by reason of the which he shall always
be in sorrow, strife, and contentions. The tail of the Dragon or lunaris,
makes him see the death of his brethren, when she is in the third house.
That does the Lord of the said house also, when he is in the tenth or eight,
and when he is burned or otherwise euilly disposed.

If in the ix. be any Plannet well dignified, and the Lord of the third house
be unfortunate, his brethren shall dye before him, if he do not find in the
same house some favorable Plannet, or if the Lord of the said house be not
amiably regarded of fortunes.

Jupiter, the Sun, Venus, the head of the Dragon, the Moon, and Mercury,
fortunate in the third house, do give many brethren, happy, pacified and
fortunate. Mars, regarding the said house, or his Lord of evil aspect,
signifies strife and debate among the brethren. That which signifies also
the Lord of the said house, in the vij. and xij. And Mars opposite to the
ascendant, or to the Lord of the ascendant, and to the temporal light, and
when a like Plannet is Lord of the iij. and vij. or xij. house. The part of the
amity of brethren with his Lord fortunate, signifies concord: unfortunate,
discord among brethren. The part of brethren, and the third house, with
their Lords in watery signs, denotes many brethren and sisters: and if they be
fortunate, they signify concord and good love together: unfortunate, denotes
the contrary.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Father and the Mother.
THe Lords of the fourth, and of the part of the Father, burnt out of their
proper houses and exaltations, signify that the Father cannot long live; The
ill fortunes within the 4. signify that the father shall dye presently after,
if within the said house they be not dignified, or if the fortunes do not
enterlace their favorable beams: Likewise you must judge of the mother, when
the said Constellations shall be in the 10. The fortunes in the 4. signify
long life to the Father, and happy fortune: and likewise of the mother, when
they be within the x. The Sun unfortunate within the iiij. or viii. house,
testifies that the Father shall not live long: likewise you must judge of the
mother when the Moon shall be so disposed. If the Lord of the 4. be in the 11.
the child shall see the death of his Father. If the Lord of the x. be in the
5. he shall see the death of his mother. Venus or the Moon in the 4.
unfortunate, gives perrill to the mother at her deliverance. The Lord of the
4. in the 7. or 12. house, or in evil aspects of ill fortunes, signifies
strife and quarrels between the Father and the Son. Likewise you must judge
of the mother, when the Lord of the 10. shall be in the same disposition. The
part of the Father fortunate, denotes long and happy life to the Father:
unfortunate, he shall dye very quickly. The part of the mother, signifies as
much of the mother, after her good or evil disposition.

Commonly the Astrologians have regard to the Sun and to Saturn for the
Father, and to Venus and the Moon for the mother; If the nativity be by day,
they take the Sun for significator of the father: if it by be night they take
Saturn, if the Sun be not in any angle of heaven: For if it be in the 1. or
4. they prefer him always to Saturn. If the Sun be in the 1. in the
nativity of the 1. child, the figure of the nativity of the Father and of
the Son shall be both one. The significator of the Father, joined to the
Fortunes, or receiving their amiable aspects, denote good fortune and long life
to the Father: the contrary you must understand when they be unfortunate.

If the Lord of the ascendant, and the Lord of the 4. do look with an evil
aspect; the Son and the Father shall be in discord, principally if Mars
intermeddle with his pernicious beams. For the mother you must look
principally to Venus, if the nativity be by day: or to the Moon if it be by
night; And after their good and evil dispositions, you must judge the good or
contrary fortune of the mother.

CHAP. XVIII. Of inheritances and earthly goods.
THE Fortunes, or other Plannets fortunate, within the fourth or eight house,
denotes inheritances and possessions: the ill fortunes do deny or despise
them. Saturn, natural significator of heritages, lands and possessions, well
disposed, does give great goods and lands, and makes the man happy in
laboring and tyllage; That also signifies the significators of riches, when
they be well disposed within the houses of Saturn. And the part of heritages,
and the part of fortune in sowers and tyllers when they be fortunate, with
their Lords. If the said significator be unfortunate, you must judge the
contrary.

When one self Plannet is lord of the first and fourth house, the child
shall have inheritances which shall enrich him, if the said lord be fortunate:
and if he sell and dispearse them, he is unfortunate. The lord of the
ascendant, or the Moon within the fourth fortunate, and amiably by Jupiter or
Venus regarded, denote that he shall find some great sum of money under the
earth, principally, if Saturn cast his Trynes or Sextil beams: or that of
Mines of gold and silver he shall be made rich.

The tail of the Dragon in the south, makes him to sell and dispearse his
goods. That does also the head of the Dragon, when she is in a sign earthly or
watrish: In ayrie signs or fiery, she gives great goods and lands.

CHAP. XIX. Of Infantes.
THe Fortunes in the fifth, give the children: the vnfortunes denies them.
Except when they be in their proper house or exaltations, for then they give
evil children; that which they do also, when regarding the said house, or
the lord of the same, with eeuill aspects. If the Lord of the first be burned,
he gives the children abortiues, or which presently after their birth, dye. If
the said lord be in the xij he shall see the death of his children. If he be
in the vij. or xii. or if a like Plannet be Lord of the v. vij. or xij. he
shall have suits and questions with his children. The lord of the ascendant,
in evil aspect of the lord of the v. denotes as much. Before you give
judgment of the Children, you must consider the x. and the vii. house, and the
parts of children with their lords. The significators of the children in
Masculine signs, signifies Male children. in feminines, denote daughters:
Likewise you must judge when they be coupled with plannets, masculines, or
feminines.

CHAP. XX. Of Servant.
THe significations of servant must be taken of the place of Mars and
Mercury, of the sixth house of the part of servant, and of their lords. The
which fortunate gives faithful servants, unfortunate give them evil. When
the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the syxt shall be in good aspect
together to the sygnificators of riches, the child shall be come rich by the
industry and faythfulnesse of his servants. Likewise when the fortunes be
within the syxt house: to the contrary, when the Significator of riches shall be
unfortunate in the syxt house, he shall be undone by his servants. Likewise
when the ill fortunes shall be in the said house. If the lord of the vi. be in
the x. he shall yield his servant more greater masters then himself. If
the lord of the vi. house be in the sign of a humane figure, his servants
shall bear him reverence and be at his commandment.

What kind of conditions every Planet does yield.
Fortunate.
Sad and of a deep cogitation. Secret. Solitary. Laboursome. Painful. A
heaper of goods. Patient. Sparing. Careful of his own preferment.

Unfortunate.
An abject. A fugitive. Base minded. A vile man. Negligent. Fearful. Sad or
pensive. Covetous. Envious. A Witch. Stubberne. A Roge. Suspicious.
Superstitious. A Deceiuer.

Fortunate.
A lover of GOD. Religious. Honest and virtuous. Stout. Courageous. Just.
Upright. Authority. Modesty. Bountiful.

Unfortunate.
A lover of himself. High-minded. Proud. Superstitious. fearful.
faint-harted. Careless or negligent. Prodigal. Nothing so good as when he is
fortunate.

Fortunate.
Gentle. Manly-minded. Full of courage, Stout. Irefull. Earnest. Fearing no
danger. Patient. Delighting in wars and manly exercises.

Unfortunate.
Quarrelsome. Cruel. Angry. Tyranical. Unjust. Unfaithful. A blood-shedder.
Theeuish. A makebate. Hasty, or rash. A boaster. Very proud.

Fortunate.
Pleasant Merry. Fair. Gentle of speech. Of comlie iesture. Good. Merciful.
Given to pleasure both of body and mind. A lover of dianty and delicate
things.

Unfortunate.
Womanish. Fearful. Weak of nature. Slothful. Lecherus. A slaunderer. Not
caring for his good name, Given to filthy lust. Sodomiticall.

Fortunate.
Of an excellent wit, Studious. Of a quick capasitie. Of a good and sound
judgment in every thing. Poetical. Gramatical. Mathematical. Finding out many
things untaught.

Unfortunate.
Unstable. Malicious. A liar, chiefly if he be with the Dragons tail. Privily
sowing deceit. A slaunderer. Forgetful. Foolish. Full of wicked counsel and
malice.

Thus may you gather the natural disposition of any man, either present or
absent: according to the nature of the Planets as is above specified. As for
the lyghtes, the from her to her does make their manners most apparent, from
her to her more obscure.

CHAP. XXI. Of Diseases.
YOU must first of all consider the places of Saturn and of Mars, and of the
Lord of the sixth house. And according to the sign in the which they be, you
must judge the sickness to be in the place marked by the said sign. As if
Saturn were in the sign of Libra, it denotes that the sickness is in the
reins of the nature of Saturn: because that Libra is the sign that has
government over the reins, as shall be declared in the second Book. Likewise
you must judge of other Significators, after the government of the sign in the
which they be.

The sickness and accidents coming by Saturn, Mars and other Planets, shall be
explaned in the second book. Mars in the ascendant, gives always some
notable hurt upon the face, or upon the head, and often near the eyes, when
he is near the lights. Saturn in the first house, yields the man to be
very sad, and melancholy, and vexes the mind, causing horrible ill and
fearful imaginations. The tail of the Dragon in the first, darkeneth much
the sight and often yeeldes the men blind, when the Luminaries or the fortunes,
do not intermingle their favorable beams. Saturn and Mars in the tenth,
signify sickness in the neck, in the seventh, in the buttockes: as Fistuloes,
Emrods, Ulcers, and hurts etc. In the sixth, diseases in the feet: in the
twelfith, hurts and grieses in the legs, as I have often tried. Saturn
unfortunate, signifies diseases in the parts appertaining to Saturn. Jupiter
and the other, signify as much when they be evil disposed. Of the parts
which belong to the Planets we will speak of in the second Book.

They which have the Lumynaries, or any of the principal places in the figure
unfortunate in the figne of Scorpio, are subject to the French-pocks. The ill
fortunes in the sign of Gemini, give always some great and violent blows
upon the shoulders, legs and arms. The Moon unfortunate in the sign of
Aries, signifies great pain in the head. Saturn and Mars joined to the
Lumynaries, or to the Lord of the ascendant, trouble the sight, and spoil the
eyes with some blow. The Sun in the natiuities Diurnes, signifies the right
eye, the Moon the left: in the Nocturnes, to the contrary. If the degrees of
the first house, or the Lumynaries be joined with any troublesome star, the
eyes shall be dark, and the sight troubled; likewise if they be in the signs
which the Astrologers call Azemena and filthy dregs. etc.

Saturn in the sixth house burned in a warry sign, denotes some form of
leprosy. Saturn in the ascendant, makes some notable deformity in the face,
when he is near the Moon. The ill fortunes, and the Moon and Venus in warry
signs, signify leprosy, ulcers and cankers on the body, and villainous spots
in the face. Saturn in the ninth, and the Moon in the eight unfortunate,
denote trouble of mind and solly. Venus joined to Mercury unfortunate by
Saturn or Mars, without aspect of Jupiter or of the Sun, signify notable
grief in the parts of generation. If Venus and Mercury be under the beams of
the Sun, they signify as much. Saturn with the Moon burned, causes
Palsies and Impostumes. Mercury unfortunate, gives always some impediment in
the tongue: and so does Saturn also when he is unfortunate in the temporal
lights. The Sun unfortunate, denotes weakness of the heart: principally when
he is lord of the sixth house, or Lord of the part of sicknesles. The ill
fortunes with the tail of the Dragon, cause looseness and the flixe of the
belly. They that have the Sun or Mars in the signs of Aries or Gemini, be
subject to the Stone. The retrogradation and burning of Saturn and Jupiter,
spoil the hearing, and the teeth.

When the Moon and Mercury do not look between them, and do not regard the
ascendant, nor the Lord of the ascendant, the child shall be troubled in his
understanding. The retrogradation of all the five Planets, signifies the
falling sickness. The ill fortunes joined in the ascendant in evil aspects of
the Moon or the Lord of the ascendant, denote entire folly. The part of
sicknesses with his Lord fortunate, preserves from sickness, unfortunate, give
many evils.

CHAP. XXII. Of Marriage.
FOR the marriage, you must look the vij. house and his Lord, the places of
Venus and the Moon in the natiuities of men, and in the places of the Sun
and of Mars in natiuities of women: and the parts of marriage, and the place of
Jupiter. If the said Significators be fortunate, the marriage shall be happy,
if they be unfortunate, it shall be full of enuies, reproaches and evils. If
some be fortunate, and some unfortunate by certain times, now happy, and then
unhappy, it shall be manifest. Many Planets in the seventh house, give many
women: likewise when many Planets regard the said house or his Lord. If Venus,
and the Lord of the seventh house be burned, or otherwise of Saturn
oppressed, the child shall never marry. Jupiter and Venus within the 6. or 8.
signifies that he shall marry a widow. Jupiter burned, signifies as much.
Otherwise, if Jupiter behold Venus, and the other significators of marriage, it
promises maids and virgins. If Venus or Jupiter, or the Lord of the seventh
house be joined to Saturn, or if Saturn be within the seventh house, the
woman shall have some note of infamy; (that is to understand) she shall be
of a strange religion, or shall be a bastard, or shall be of the race of
Lepors, or of some other, by whom the Parents have received some shame, or she
shall be deformed, and her Parents shall be of a very weak condition. Mars in
the said house, or beholding with evil aspect the Significators of marriage,
intermingle strife and contentions between the man and the wife: the same does
also Venus in the seventh or twelfth house.

Mars in the ninth, as much in the natiuities of women as of men, denotes some
manner of separation of marriage. And Venus in the ninth, signifies that the
man shall hate his wife, not so much for the vice which he shall find in her, but
of a desire to be solitary. The Significators of marriage unfortunate, or
within the houses Cadents, signifies the woman to be of a simple race, or the
husband in the natiuities of women.

If Venus and the Lord of the seventh house, join with the Significators of
riches, beholding the Lord of the ascendant with an amiable aspect, she gives
much goods by reason of women. The Significators of marriage within the third or
ninth, or else where Peregrines, signify that he shall marry out of his
Country. The fortunes within the seventh house, denotes happy marriage, the
ill fortunes unhappy. The Lord of the seventh within the second, denotes
that he shall see the death of his wife. The Significators of marriage
occidentall, witness that he shall marry late, or in his youth take a wife
older then himself. Oriental, denotes that he shall marry in his youth, or
in his age marry a young wife. Likewise you must judge of husbands in the
natiuities of women.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a dowery and other goods by the means of marriage.
BEcause the eight house is succeeding to the seventh, by good reason it
signifies the profit of the significations of the seventh, (that is to say)
of marriage. If then in the eight there be any fortunate Planet, or any part
fortunate, the child shall have great dowry by his wife, and of that side
shall meet with great inheritaunces and great goods. To the contrary, if
Saturn and Mars be unfortunate in the said house, he shall have small dowery,
and the same shall never be fully paid.

When the fortunes be in the said house unfortunate, he has hope of great
goods the which in the end he shall not enjoy. The Lord of the said place
unfortunate, denotes as much: and if he be fortunate and coupled with the
Significators of riches, it denotes great goods and great profit on that
side. It happens well sometimes when the seventh house is fortunate, and the
eight unfortunate. As that which signifies a little dowery and desperation of
other goods toward his wife, and that always he shall be enriched by the
diligence, industry, and faithfulness of his wife.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Death.
YOU must first consider if there be any Planet in the eight house, for it is
convenient to take it for Significator of the death. If within the said house
there be never a Planet, take them for Significators that be in the seventh,
preferring him always that is best dignifyed. If within the seventh you find
none, draw the Sgnifycator of the death from these places which follow.

Of the ascendant and of his Lord.

Of the eight house and of his Lord.

Of the part of Death and of his Lord.

Of the eight Sign, from the place of the Sun and of his Lord.

Of the eight Sign, from the Moon and of his Lord.

Of the place of the first Lord of the triplicitie of the fourth angle.

Of the place of the Planet which has dignity of term, to the degree of the
seventh house.

The Planet which in all these places shall be most dignifyed, shall be
principal Sgnificator of death.

If Saturn being in the eight or seventh house, or otherwise more dignified
in the above said points of the figure, he is principal significator of the
death. If he be well disposed, it witnesses, that the same party shall dye
of the Dropsy, of some great stopping of the liver, and of the Spleen, or of a
quarterne Fever, of the flixe of the belly, of Pthisick, or of some burning
Fever, and of Impostumations of the ears. etc. If it be greatly unfortunate,
and together with the Lord of the ascendant, and the luminaries temporally be
evil disposed, it denotes violent death by Impostumes, Palsies, falling down
of humors, suffocations, ouer-flowen with water. When it is in watery Signs, by
some fall or ruin: when it is in earthly Signs, by great blows: for to be
hanged when it is in ayerie Signs.

If Jupiter be Significator of the death, it denotes that he shall die of a
Pluresie, of a Squinance, or of some hot appostumations of the liver, or of
the lunges, or of other sicknesses coming of wind or of blood; and that if he
be fortunate. For when he is evil disposed and unfortunate, it makes him die
by the hand of justice, by the commandment of the Prince, by sentence of the
Judge or of the Marshall, by ouer-flowing in waters, to be whypped and
scourged, by long imprisonment.

If it be Mars well disposed, by continual tertian Fevers, by flixe of blood,
by Carbuncles and pestilences, by Impostumes coming of chollerick matters,
burnings by too much using of women. If he be very evil disposed, it makes him
to be hanged and strangled, or smothered, or otherwise killed in his bed, or
on his horse. When he is an ayrie sign or partaker within the water, when he
is a watery sign or fallen from on high, or of some ruinous murderer. When he
is a terrestiall, or burned: when he is a fiery Sign: principally if the Lord
of the ascendant and the luminaries temporally be unfortunate by Mars. If it be
the Sun well disposed, he shall die of some hot disease. If it be
unfortunate, by the commandment of the Prince, or by sentence of the Judge,
or he shall dye among a great company of men, subject to death, or in prison,
or in a Dungeon, or in some other stinking and filthy place. If it be Venus
well disposed, he shall die of too much eating fruits, or with too much
continuing his voluptuousnes, or of some Fistula or Impostume. If she be
unfortunate, it denotes death by venim, principally when she is burned, or
joined to Saturn, or of too much burning affection of love, or of great
griefs of the French pockes. If it be Mercury fortunate, it makes him dye by
sadness, by great apprehensions, by the Yellowe iaunders, by pthisickes, by
the burning Fever, or by too much watching. If he be greatly unfortunate, it
signifies that he shall die by madness, the Falling-sicknes, by violent
Coughes, with breaking in sunder the veins, by foolish mellancholie, by
Jealousy.

If it be the Moon well disposed, with too much eating moist meats, by
drinking water, by too much continuing his pleasure; If she be unfortunate, you
must consider the nature of him which is unfortunate. For if it be Mars he
shall dye by fire, or by hurt: or by abortisment if it be a woman. If it be
Saturn, by ruins, falls, pestilences, and like accidents.

Before concluding of what death the party shall dye, you must consider the
disposition of the Lord of the ascendant, and of the luminaries temporal: For
if they be well disposed, the death shall not be vyolent, although the
principal significator be greatly unfortunate. If the said significator be
unfortunate, together with the luminaries temporal, or the Lord of the
ascendant evil disposed, we esteem certainly that the death shall be vyolent,
if Jupiter or Venus do not intermingle their favorable beams, and then the
said person shall fall in great danger of the said violent death, and from the
which he shall always escape myraculously.

If one of the ill fortunes be in the sign of Cancer, and the other in the
sign of the Lion, the death shall be vyolent; Likewise, if any of the said
ill fortunes be in the sign of the Lion, and the luminaries temporal, or the
Lord of the ascendant be unfortunate, and one of the ill fortunes be in the
first house, and the other in the seventh or fourth, or one of them in the
tenth and the other in the fourth.

The Sun, or the Moon, or the Lord of the ascendant, joined with Mars, have
right in one fixed star, which the Astrologers call the head of Meduse, or
otherwise the head of the devil, makes him by the hand of the Executioner to
leese his head.

When the Sun, and the Moon, and Saturn, and Mars, occupy the 4. angles of
heaven, or at the least 3. the person shall dye a horrible death: for he
shall leese his head, or be cut in four quarters, or be drawn with four
horses: principally, if in the said angles be the signs of Gemini, Pisces and
Aquarius. Mars in the ninth or eight in the sign of Aquarius or of Gemini,
opposite to the Moon, or the Lord of the ascendant, without good aspect of
fortunes, makes him perrish by Sulpher or fire from heaven. Saturn in the
twelfth, sixth, eight, or fourth house unfortunate, the lord of the said houses
makes him dye in prison, or else where in great pain and travail: principally
when the luminaries temporal, or the Lord of the ascendant be unfortunate in
any of the said houses.

The tail of the Dragon being joined to the Significators of death, denote
poisons, venims, and violent medicines, or ill applied, and flixe of the belly.
Mars within the fourth, eight, twelfth, or sixth unfortunate, their lords and
the luminaries temporal, or the Lord of the ascendant, witness violent
death, by the shedding of blood or otherwise.

The Significators of death within the ninth or third house, signify that the
person shall die by the way, or in a strange Country: except they be in their
own proper houses or exaltations, for then he shall die in his house, and
bring his evil from the high ways. The said Significators in their proper
houses or exaltations, make him die in his house, if they be Peregrines, they
make him dye out of his house.

The Moon joined to a fixed star, named the Claire of the balance
meridionall, denotes violent death. That does she also when she is joined
with other stars that have the nature of the luminaries. Mars in the viij.
house with the head of the Dragon, makes him to be hanged and strangled. Many
Planets within the seventh house, make him dye of some strange and terrible
kind of death. Saturn, Mars, and the head of the Dragon in the first, Venus
and Mercury with the tail in the seventh, make the body in a thousand pieces.

If the principal Significator be burned in his own proper house or
exaltation, without being otherwise unfortunate, it makes him dye suddenly of
some feeblenes, or other sudden and secret accident, without other violence.
The fortunes well disposed in the eight house, preserve him always from
violent death.

CHAP. XXV. Of voyages by Land and by Sea.
IVpiter, Venus, the Sun and Mercury fortunate in the ninth house, denote
that he shall be happy in viages by Land and by Sea. Saturn and Mars signify
to the contrary; and principally Saturn does hinder the viages by water, and
Mars the ways by Land. If within the ninth house there be never a Planet, you
must consider the Moon, and the Lord of the ninth, and the parts of the ways
and viages by land and by water, with their Lords, the which fortunate, gives
profitable nauigations: unfortunate, denote the contrary. Likewise you must
judge of the third house and of his lord, when they be well or evil disposed.
The head of the Dragon in the ninth, favors greatly to the fortune of
viages, and the tail to the contrary.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the constancy in his Religion.
ALso as the head of the Dragon, the luminaries, and Mercury in the ninth
house well disposed, denote entire faith and constancy in his Religion,
Saturn, Mars, and the tail of the Dragon do hinder it. Saturn of his nature
is most inclined to the Law of the Jews: and Mars to the law of the Turks and
Mahometists; the tail of the Dragon, causes him always to err from the
truth of the law. The lord of the nynth, and the part of the faith, with his
Dominator fortunate, yields a man constant in his faith: unfortunate makes
him variable.

If the part of the spirit be in the sign of the Lion at the birth of a
Christian, he shall be very constant in his religion, if the Sun be
fortunate: if he be unfortunate by Saturn, to go from his faith, and to
address it to that of the Jews. If he be unfortunate by Mars, it makes him
more to incline to the law of the Turks and Mahometists. If the said part be
in the houses of Saturn at the nativity of a Jew, or in the houses of Mars
at the nativity of a Turk, they shall deny their law: if the said lords of
the said part be retrogrades, or otherwise ill disposed. Saturn in the nynth
at the nativity of a Jew, does nothing diminish his faith. Saturn in the
said house when he is fortunate, signifies Dreams to be true. Mars and the
tail of the Dragon signify them vain and false. The other significators do
aslure them to be true.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the action and profession.
HOW to know of what profession the child shall be, you must chiefly
consider if any Planet be in the tenth house, for he shall be Significator of
the profession: otherwise, you must come to the part of Fortune, and to his
lord, to the part of the profession, and to his lord, to the tenth house, and
to his lord, and to the places of Mars, Mercury and Venus.

The Planet that upon these places shall have the most dignities, shall be
Significator of the profession. The which if it be Saturn, it shall signify a
Husbandman, a good housekeeper, a Receiver of rents, and many times a
Governor of Towns, when he is in angles fortunate. Jupiter denotes the
officers, Judges, Benefices, Prelates, Bishops, Governors of the goods of the
Church. Mars signifies Captains, men of war, Coyners, Forgeours, and other
that use to work with fire and iron: and Physicians when he is in the aspect
of Venus.

Sol represents Princes, Lords, Magistrates, Hunters, Treasurers and Archers.
Venus Players, Dauncers, Perfumers, Appothecaries, and in aspect of Mars,
Physicians. Mercury, Advocates, Notaries, Registers, Poets, Rymers,
Philosophers, Mathematicians, Diuiners, writers, Messengers and traders.

The Moon, Ambassadors, Counselors, Consuls, Rulers of Common wealth,
Trauailers, Hunters. If there be many Significators, or if the principal be
coupled with many Planets, you must mingle the significations of the one and of
the other, and of the said mixture, gather together the profession coming of
the concurrence of the stars. You must also consider in what house the said
Significators be, if they be within the second, the profession shall be of
feats of merchandise and traffiques: if within the third or ninth, of feats
of religion, or gathering the goods of the Church. If in angles, of Dominations
and governments. If in the fifth of Embassages, legations, and other things of
pleasure. If in the sixth, of feats of diseases, of servant and of Cattle.
etc. If the part of the honor coming of the profession, be with his Lord
fortunate, the Infant shall obtain great credit and honor because of his
profession. If they be unfortunate, if he do never so well, he shall never
gain to himself honor in the feats of his profession.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of dignities, offices, and honors.
FOR the dignities, offices, charges and honors, you must have respect to the
tenth house, to the luminaries temporal, to the part of noblenes, to the part
of government, to the part of Magistrates, and others appertaining to the tenth
house, with their Lords. The Planet that in the said places shall have most
dignities, shall be Significator of the said considerations in good or evil,
according to his good or evil disposition: particulerly also you must follow
the said places one after another to know of what side principally the said
dignities, offices and honors ought to come.

Saturn in the tenth house, or in the ascendant in natiuities by day,
signifies great advancement and honor after thirty years, when he is not
evil disposed: in natiuities by night, it denotes continual fear, to
receive damage of Princes and Kings. Mars in the said places in natiuities by
night, signifies also great advancement, and by day more then Saturn.

The part of government and his Lord within any of the angles, witness great
favor of Kings. Likewise you must judge of the other part that we have
deducted upon the tenth house. Mercury in the tenth well disposed and
fortunate, promises dignities, offices and honors, by reason of knowledge.
Venus and the Moon because of women. Jupiter for his virtue. The Sun and the
head of the Dragon in the same house, denotes as much. The two luminaries in
their houses or exaltations placed in the figure of Heaven, do denote great
advancement and honor.

That which Jupiter does also when he receives the virtue of all the other
Planets, and communicates his own to Saturn and the Sun; and the fortunes
and the luminaries when they be in the angles of Heaven. Many Planets in the
fourth house, denotes great honor after death. If in the points of the angles
be any fixed star of the first or second greatness, or other having the nature
of lumynaries, it is a great sign of incredible advancement. That which
happens also when the said stars be joined to the lumynaries temporal, or
to the part of Fortune, or to his Lord, or to the Planets and parts that be
in the angles.

They which have Saturn in the tenth burnt, or the Lord of the tenth burnt, or
be by Saturn oppressed, or that have the tail of the Dragon in the tenth,
receive commonly some form of dishonor, and often be deprived of their
estate, when the Fortunes do not intermingle their favorable beams: except
when they be also unfortunate in their proper houses or exaltations, or in the
signs of Aries and the Lion.

You must note that Saturn and Mars, hinder greatly the good fortunes, until
that the man has passed the number of years corrispondent to the number of the
small years of the said Planets: and if they hinder any more time, it shall be
until that the man shall accomplish the number of years aunswering to the
number of degrees, of the overthwart ascentions of the Sign, in the which they
shall be at the nativity.

CHAP. XXIX. Of companions and Friends.
YOU must for the Companions and Friends, have respect to Jupiter, the
eleventh house, the part of friends, the part of honorable companions. The
Planet having most dignities in the said places, shall be principal
Significator of friends: the which after his good or evil disposition, shall
denote honorable, faithful, and profitable friends: or unprofitable,
disloyal, and of base condition. Jupiter and the Sun in the said house,
signify honorable companies and profitable: so does Venus, the Moon and
Mercury also in the said place. Saturn in the eleventh fortunat, witnesses
grave friends, ancient and honorable. Mars, men of war, Captains and Lords.

Saturn or Mars in the eleventh out of their principal dignities, deprived of
the beams of the favorable Planets, signify some great suit against his
friends, or some great evil by reason of them: as it happens commonly to
the Aunswerers and Suerties. The parts of honorable companions and of praise,
with their Lords fortunate, signifies profit and honor on the side of
friends: unfortunate denotes the contrary. The part of friends denotes as
much.

The head of the Dragon in the eleventh house, gives favor of friends: the
tail denotes a thousand mischiefs by reason of them.

CHAP. XXX. Of suits and Enemies.
THE fortunes in the seventh and twelfth house, give victories against
enemies, when they be in good aspect to the lord of the ascendant. And
commonly those which have these 2. houses with their Lords fortunate, be happy
in their suits: the contrary you must judge, when they with their Lords be
unfortunate. The ill fortunes in the said places, signify much strifes and
enemies. That does also the parts of enemies, and of discord and accord, when
they and their Lords be evil disposed.

The Lord of the twelfth house fortunate, it denotes little puissaunce of
enemies: unfortunate denotes the contrary. If one of the two ill fortunes be
in the twelfe, and the other in the sixth, in evil aspect of the lumynaries
temporal, or of the Lord of the ascendant, the child shall be killed by his
enemies. They which have Saturn, or Mars, or the Moon opposite to the Sun in
the Sign of Cancer, be commonly contrary to all the world. Mars in any of the
four angles, ingendereth naturally strife, suits, debates, and enmities
against all the world: except when he is in a good aspect of Jupiter and Venus.
For then he does expel his ire and anger against the vices, and of great zeal
maintains the right of every one.

The Lord of the ascendant, or the Moon, or the Sun unfortunate in the
twelfe house, denotes great persecutions and calamities of the enemies. The
Lord of the ascendant by the lord of the twelfe oppressed, testifies that he
shall die by the hand of his enemies.

The Lord of the twelfe, and the Planets that be in the seventh and twelfe
house, signify the quality of enemies, (that is to understand) the Sun
signifies the Princes and great Lords, the Moon all the world, and Mars the
men of war. etc.

CHAP. XXXI. Of imprisonments and c^ptiuities.
THE Lord of the ascendant, or the Moon or the Sun greatly unfortunate in
the 12. 6. 8. and 4. house, do signify imprisonments, and death within the
prysons, or in captivity: principally when they be burned out of their
principal dignities, and out of the signs of Aries and the Lion, and when
they be oppressed by Saturn lord of one of the said houses. Saturn and Mars
in the angles of Heaven, signify always some imprisonment: and principally
Saturn. Mercury in the angles under the beams of the Sun, receiving an
evil aspect of ill fortunes, signifies as much. If Mercury or the lord of
the ascendant give his virtue to Saturn, being in the eight house, it
signifies that the child shall dwell long in prison and captivity.

If the lord of the ascendant be in the twelfe in a sign of a humane figure,
without aspects of fortunes or of luminaries, he shall be captive and a slave
in his youth. If the lord of the nynth be burned in any of the angles of
Heaven, he shall be taken by the highways, and put in prison.

The parts of prison, and of pain, travail and affliction with their lords
burnt, or otherwise unfortunate, signifies imprisonment and captivity. That
does also the vnfortunes when they be well dignified in the said places.

The parts of all enuies, and of the perrillous year does signify as much,
when they with their Lords be greatly unfortunate.

The said parts with their Lords fortunate, preserves from prison, and from
captivity.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Horses, Sheep, and other beasts.
THE fortunes and Planets fortunate within the 6. and twelfe house, yield the
men happy in horses and nourishing of beasts. The lords of the said houses
fortunate, and coupled with the Significators of riches, signify as much.
Naturally the sixth house denotes Sheep, and Goats, and other small beasts,
the 12. Horses, Oxen, Kine, Camels, and other great beasts. The ill fortunes
within the said houses, or the lords of the said houses unfortunate, signify
loss and damage of the said beasts.

Saturn and Mars in the twelfe, makes the horses to fall with notable loss.
The which they do also when they be elsewhere in the Sign of Sagitarius. The
lord of the nativity in the twelfe house in evil aspect of the Lord of the
twelfe, makes him fall from his horse in great perrill of death, when the
fortunes and luminaries do not yield their amiable aspects.

If the twelfe be of Sagittarius or the Lion, and the lord of the ascendant, or
the Sun, or the Moon be unfortunate, he shall fall from his horse and dye,
if the fortunes within the eight house do not hinder the evil.

The end of the first Book.
Of the Astronomical judgments upon the Natiuities, containing particular
considerations. The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the significations of the Planets.
Saturn, having regard over the right part of Septentrion, over the earth and
the water, over the melancholy, and sometimes over the phlegm, gross humors,
over the ears, the spleen, the bladder, the mawe, the sinowes, and the bones.
And signifies pale men, or black, lean, pensive, solitary, fearful,
raylers, grave, contemplators, laborers, Masons, buyers of rents, Usurers,
Carpenters, Fishers, Merchants of oils, Leather, Fish, tyles, stone, allome.
etc. Of diseases it signifies leperousnes, cankers, rottennes,
quarterne-feuers, opilations, dropsies, flixe of the belly, collicke,
burstnesse in the coddes, misconception of women, the gowte in the legs, gowte
in the wristes, Sciatiqua, deafenes, the falling sickness, foolish melancholy,
very difficult in fetching breath, and others, ingendered of gross humors or
of wind, which endure long. Of ages, oldnes: of parts of the year Autumn: of
colors the black, clear, tawny, dark: of sauors, the sharp and abstringent,
pricking with sharpnes: of days, the Saturday: of Regions, Bauieres, Saxony,
Romanie, Constance, and the first Clymate. Of particular places, Caves, Lakes,
Pondes, close places, old and ruinous houses, solitary places, obscure deserts
and stinking places.

Jupiter regarding the occident, the air, the blood with the vital spyrits,
the lunges, the sides, the liver and the veins: and signifies men of good
stature, and full faced, bald, curled, white with a pleasant redness
intermingled, having the eyes indifferent great, the nostrils reasonable short,
the fore-teeth reasonable great, honest men, gracious, blessed, religious,
Abbots, Bishops, Prelates, Officers, Judges, Magistrates. With copulation of
Saturn, it signifies Nigromancers, Enchaunters, Sorcerers. With Mars,
Physicians. With the Sun, appeasors of quarrels, controversies and
disputations. With Venus, Musitions. With Mercury, Mathematicians. With the
Moon, Geometricians, Geographers, and Hidrografers. Of Diseases, it signifies
burning Fevers, Quincies, Plurifies, swellings, Impostumes, phlegmes, and
other, coming of blood. Of ages, between age and youth. Of the parts of the
year, the Springtime.

Of colors, as clear as a Sapphire, as yellowe as a Citterne, green, and a
little drawing upon the red. Of savors sweet and amiable. Of days, the
Thursday. Of Countries, Babylon, Persia, Hungary, Spain, and the second
Clymate. Of particular places, churches, palaces, privileged places, clean,
honest, and religious.

Mars looking toward the South, the fire, chollericke humors, the reins, the
pain in the nostrils, the gaul, the genitories. He denotes men with red
faces, and the skin read, the face round, the eyes yellow, horrible to
behold, furious men, cruel, desperate, proud, sedicious, soldiers,
Captains, Smythes, Colliers, Bakers, Alcumistes, Armourers, Furnishers,
Butchers, Chirurgions, Barbers, Sargiants and Hangmen, according as they shall
be well or evil disposed.

With Saturn, commonly it signifies Chirurgions. With Jupiter, Natural
Philosophers and Physicians. With the Sun, healers of eyes. With Venus,
Barbers and Sheremen. With Mercury, men of skill to let blood. With the Moon,
Tooth-drawers, and clensers of the ears. Of diseases, it denotes tertian
Fevers, and continual impediments, pestilences, megrams of the head,
carbunckles, ring-wormes, blisters, chollericks and burnings, madness,
phrensies, issues of blood, vomiting of blood, chollericke passions, the yellow
Iaunders, the bloody-flixe, and others, coming of chollericke humors and
burnings. Of ages, the flower of youth. Of the parts of the year, the Summer.

Of colors, red, flame-colour, sanguine, and drawing to an iron color. Of
savors, the bitter and sharp. Of Of the days, Tuesday. Of Regions, Getulie,
Lombardie, and the third Clymate. Of places particular, houses of Smythes,
Coyners of money, slaughters, furnices, all places dedicated to fire, iron and
blood.

The Sun having domination over the East and South, over the fire, over the
pure blood, and over the vital spyrites, over the eyes, over the brain, over
the heart. And it signifies wisemen, prudent, dyscreete, covetous of glory and
of honor: of an indifferent stature, brown of color, great bearded, yellow
eyed, the face marked, a great voice, and very ill favored. Honorable men,
Officers, Magistrates, Lords, Princes, Kings and Governors of Countries and
great hunters. And with Saturn, denotes principal Meaters, Renters, and
laborers honorable. With Jupiter, Beneficed men, Pryors, Abbots, and
Prelates, or Judges and Officers of justice. With Mars, Captains and
Conductors of wars. With Venus, Governors of the goods of Princes, and
officers of the same. With Mercury, Counselors, Secretaries, Chauncellors.
With the Moon, Legates, Ambassadors, and honorable messengers.

Of diseases, hot rumes upon the face, and upon the eyes, rednes of the face,
tympanies, palpitation of the heart, dolor of the head coming of too much
blood, or with tarrying long in the beams of the Sun. Of ages, youth. The
parts of the year, the beginning of Summer. Of colors the yellow, the clear
read, color of gold.

Of savors, sowernes and sweetness agreeably intermingled. Of days, Sunday.
Of Countries, Italy, Cicillia, Bohemia, and the fourth Clymate. Of particular
places, houses of Princes, Palaces, Theaters, and other large places,
excellent and clear.

Venus Dominatrix over the right part of the East, upon the air and water,
upon the mixtion of phlegm, blood and spyrits, and seed of generation. Upon
the reins, belly, nauill, liver, back, and other parts dedicated to
generation. And signifies white men or brown, with some redness
intermingled: fair faced, pleasant looks, hawke-nosed, full of hair,
joyful, laughter, liberal, pleasers, dauncers, entertayners of women,
players, perfumers, musitions, messengers of love. With Saturn, it signifies
Preachers, and others that sing and joyfully assist at deceases and burials.
With Jupiter, musicians and others, which sing the praise of God in solemn
hymns. With Mars, trumpeters and dromslades in war. With Mercury, singers
of rymes and poetry. With the Moon, singers of common songs. Of diseases,
impostumes, and of moist matters, fystuloes, imbecility of the stomach, of the
reins, and of the part of generation, folly coming by too much love, the
French-pockes with his supporters, and other, coming of cold and moist matter,
and of venims.

Of ages, young years: of parts of the year, the beginning of the
Springtime: of colors, the white, green, read, and a little yellow; of
savors, the sweet, delectable, and sauourliest. Of days, Friday: of Regions,
Arabia, Austria, Sweecherland, and the fifth Clymate. Of particular places,
near gardens, fountaynes, Chambers well decked, halles hanged with Tapestry,
beds well adorned, and others, dedicated to plays, dauncies, songs and al
voluptuousness.

Mercury being chief over the Septentrion over the water and earth, and of
the spyrits of beasts, and over the confusion of humors. Over the hands,
feet, arms, shoulders, tongue, mouth and teeth. And signifies men neither
white nor black: lean: of small stature: long fingered: long faced: high
fore-headed: the nose straight and long: little beard: full of hair: the eyes
little and quick: subtle men: ingenious: unconstant: Rymers: Poets:
Advocates: Orators: Philosophers: Soothsayers: Arithmeticians: Merchants: and
busy fellows.

With Saturn, Geomitricians: Architects: With Jupiter, Lawyers: Cannons: and
those that keep the Registers of the benefits of Churches and suits. With
Mars, Sargiants of the band, Archers of the Guard. etc. With the Sun,
Masters of the houses of Princes and great Lords: and their Secretaries and
Stewards. With Venus, Musitions: Apothicaries and Perfumers. The Moon,
trauailers, messengers and traffiquers. Of diseases, vertigo or turning of the
head: lightness of the brain: like to folly: foolish imaginations: lets of the
tongue: pthisickes: issues in the legs, feet and hands: and other, that have
causes hydden, and that come by certain times. Of ages, the time between
seven and fourteen years: Of the parts of the year, Autumn. Of colors,
the strangest, diuerst and mixtious. Of savors, the strangest and of new
taste. Of days, Wednesday. Of Countries, Egypt, Greece, England, Flaunders:
Paris: and the 6. Clymate. Of particular places, shops: fayers: co^mon-markets:
schools: halles of Lawyers.

The Moon does govern over the right part of the West: over the water: over
the phlegm: sweatinges: monthly flowers: and like superfluities. Over the
stomach: the belly: the brain: the lunges: the breast and the eyes. And
signifies men of fair stature, white, and the face round and spotted: the
eyes a little black, and a little lowering: long bearded: his eyebrows knit
together: amiable men, peaceable: Trauailers: Pilgrims: Hunters: Ambassadors:
Legates: Consuls: Atturneyes: Benchers: Governors of Towns: principal in
deeds of policy.

With Saturn, it signifies Carters and vile Workers. With Jupiter,
Geomitricians and Geographers. With Mars, Drawers of teeth: Alcumists and
Blowers. With the Sun, honorable messengers. With Venus, carriers of packs.
With Mercury, Poets, Rymers, messengers, trauailers and traffiquers. Of
diseases, gowtes of the feet and wristes: sciatiqua: dropsies: lyttargy:
palsies: rumes: shaking of the members: drowsy sicknesses: flixe of the
belly: vomitings: fistuloes: worms: and other causes of cold and moystnes. Of
ages, the infancy: of the parts of the year, Winter: of colors, white:
yellow: green: of savors, the saltish: fresh: or without favor: of days,
Monday. Of Countries, Flaunders: Afric: and the seventh Clymate. Of
particular places, fields: fountains: mountains: Havens of the Sea: woods:
highways and desert places.

CHAP. II. Of the significations of the twelve Signs.
ARies does govern over the heart of the Orient, over the fire, over the
chollerique humors and hot: over the beginning of the Spring: over the head:
the nose, the face, the ears and the eyes. And signifies lean men, read
colored, flat nosed, chollericke, strong, and right men of war: Captains:
soldiers: Alcumistes, and other martialists. Of diseases, it denotes
lytargy: madness: issues of blood: rednes of the face: filthiness: falls:
hurts: and all sicknesses violent and continual.

Of colors, read: yellowe: and sanguine color: Of savors, the sweet. Of
Countries, Brittany: Almanie: Inde: Judah: England: Naples: Florence: Fauence:
Imole: Capne: Ferrara: Venice: Verone: Pauie: Craconie: Marselle: Saragosse:
and the third Clymate.

Of particular places, feildes, pastures, houses of Forgiours of money, and
places of blood, and justice.

Taurus governs over the left part of the meridies, over the earth, over the
melancholy humors, over the middle of the spring, over the neck, and
throat. And signifies little men, well fleshed with great shoulders, great
eyes, large bellyed, paynefull men, liberal, trusty, voluptuous, messengers
of love, dauncers, players. Of sicknesses, the kings evil, Caterches,
Squinacies, and other sicknesses of the neck. Of Color, the green and
white. Of savors, the sweet with adstriction. Of Countries the Sea coasts of
Asia the lesser, Cyprus, Media, Persia, Campanie, Rhetia, Sweathland, Lorraine,
Bolongne, Seen, Montorie, Tarrante, Parme, Panorme, Capne, Salerne, Verone, and
the vi. Climate. Of particular places, Feildes, Tillages, Vines very near
green, Gardens, and other pleasant and odoriferous places.

Gemini governs over the right part of Occident, over the air, over the
blood, and other end of the spring time, over the shoulders, arms, and hands.
And signifies men of middle stature, fair faced, and bodyed, store of hair,
little eyes, laboring men, subtle, ingenious, prudent teachers, fraudulent,
Arethmetricians, Geometricians, Astrologians, Orators, Poets, Advocates,
Witches, Southsayers, Busy fellows, Weauers. Of sicknesses, Phleames,
Foroncles, and others coming of blood in the said part. Of Colors, the
mixtures. Of Sauors, the sweet. Of Countries, Hircanye, Armenie, Montiane,
Syrenianque, Marmarique, Low Egipte, England, Sordigne, Brabant, Flaunders,
Lombardie, Viterbie, Vercel, Norremberge, Louayne, Magonce, Brudges, London,
Paris, Cordube. Of particular places, Fayres, Schools, Shoppes, places of high
mountains, places of hunting of birds, places garnished within with
instruments of music.

Cancer governs the heart of the Septentrion, over the water, over the hollow
humors, and Phlegmatiques, over the breast, sides, and lunges, and over the
dugges and stomach. And signifies amiable men, peaceable, modest, white, full
faced, the nose indifferent long, lardge shoulders, little bearded, slowthfull,
unconstant, and effeminate, Nauigators, Strangers, Consulls, Attournies, etc.
Of diseases, Litargy, Leprousie, darkness of the sight, galling of the
skin, and evil sicknesses, of the face and body. Of Colors, the white and
yellow. Of savors, the salt, and his contrary freshnes. Of Countries,
Bythinie, Phrigia, Africa, Carthage, Scotland, the kingdom of Grenade, the
County of Burgony, Prusie, Holland, Zelande, Constantinople, Thunis, Venis,
Millayne, Genes, Luques, Pise, Treues, Madebourge, Berne: Of particular places:
pondes, lakes, rivers, the sea, and ports of the sea.

Leo, governs the left part of Orient, over the fire, over the choler, over
the heart, stomach, liver and back. And signifies fair men, straight, the
nose broad and little, great ears, with a little strong look, the face
brown, the body reddish, hairy, courageous and of great heart, Princes,
Officers, Magistrates, Governors Kings. Of diseases, shaking of the heart,
swoundings. Of Colors the yellow and red as gold. Of sauors, the bitter,
and the strong. Of Countries, Italy, France, Apulie, Sicillia, Chaldea,
Bohemia, Rome, Rauenna, Prage, Vlme, Mantoue, Cremone, Syracusa: Of particular
places, noble lands, Lordships, Castles Towns, Palaces, and Royal buildings.

Virgo governs over the right part of the Meridies, over the earth, over the
malancholly, over the gutts, belly and diaphragme: And signifies men of
indifferent greatness, the body straight, the face sayre, good voice, shining
hair, little eyes, prudent, learned, ingenious, covetous of glory and honor,
Scriueners, Arithmeticians, Geometricians, Boat men. Of diseases, the
collique, (the disease which causes the patient to vomit his excreme^ts at his
mouth called Iliaque) etc. Of Colors, the white and purple: of savors, the
astringe^t: of Countries, Greece, Achaia, Creet, Mesopotania, Assiria, Cicilia,
Athe^s, Rodes, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Corinth, Tarrante, Beneuent, Farrare,
Pauia, Basle, Paris, Lions, Tholose. Of particular places, faires: shops:
schools: and arrable grounds.

Libra governs over the heart of the Occident, over the air, over the blood,
over the beginning of Autumn, and over the reins: and denotes simple me^,
honorable, fair faced with whitnes over all the body, the eyes a little
troubled or spoiled, plaiers, dauncers, musitia^s, hunters, judges. Of
diseases, suppressio^ of the urine, issue of blood in the lower parts, stones
in the reins, and darkness of the eyes. Of colors, the green: of savors,
sweet: of Regions Bactriane, Caspie, Thebes, Trogloditique, Ethiopia, Tuscia,
Austria, Sauoy, Danphina, Gaiete, Plaisance, Argenton, Vienna in Austria,
Franckford, Spire, Auguste, Arles, Lisbone. Of particular places, where suites
be judged upon, all high places and mountains bearing corn, grapes, or other
fruits.

Scorpio governs over the left part of the Septentrion: over the water: over
the phlegmatique humors and aquosits, over the parts dedicated to generation.
And signifies men very deformed: broad brested: the head deformed: great
speakers: bablers: mockers: liars: gluttons: voluptuous: traitors: spies:
poysonnours. Of diseases, darkness of the eyes: scabbes: scurffes: kanckers:
leoprousnesse: falling off the hair: and deformed diseases in the face: and
all the body impoysoned by violence of medicines, etc. Of colors, the red
and tawnie. Of savors, salt and fresh. Of Regions, Syria, Cappadocia: the
land of the Moors: Catalongne: Bauaires: Trapezonce: Saxony: Padua: Vrbin:
Brixie: Valence in Spain: Vienna in Danphinna. Of particular places,
vineyardes: and gardens evil trimmed, desert places: stinking: infected:
abounding in woormes: snakes: and scorpions, etc.

Sagitarius governs over the right part of the Orient: over the fire: over
choler: over the end of Autumme: over the thighs: and all superfluous parts:
as a sixth part of the finger etc. And represents men of right and high
stature: the face yellowe or reddish, the breast large: Cattes eyes: just men
and pitiful: and ceremonious: judges: magistrates: prelates: beneficed men
merchants, hunters. Of diseases, darkness of the eyes, falls from high places:
hurts by horses: Agues and wounds. Of colors: clear: yellow. Of savors:
strong and sharp with some sweetness intermingled: of Countries, Tuscan, Spain:
Arabia the happy: Portugale: Hungary: Slauonia: Volterre: Mutine: Bude:
Caschonia: Narbona: Auignon: Tolete. Of particular places, Gardens: Ways:
Mountains: or where men keep horses.

Capricorn governs over the heart of the meridies, over the earth:
melancholy: the knees: over the beginning of the Winter. And signifies
little stature, a little round head: the face brown: fair nose: fair eyes:
chollerique and sad: subtle: secret: prudent: paynefull: sheepheards:
fishers: marryners: carpenters: buyers of Rentes. Of diseases, scabbes: gauls:
infirmyties of the skin: hinderaunces of the hearing: of the voice: of the
eyes: issues of blood in the lower parts. Of colors black and earthly. Of
savors, the bitter and astringent. Of Regions, Macedonia, Thracia, Indea,
Brandebourge: Anchone: Fauence: Tortonne: Ausburge, Constans, Gand, Malnies. Of
particular places, Gardens, Fountaynes, Rivers, Fields tilled, Land plowed,
Prisoners, Caves, Obscure places, deepes; and full of fewmes and vapors.

Aquarius governs over the left part of the Occident, over the air, over
the blood, over the legs, over the middle of Winter. And signifies fair
men, fayer and somewhat long faced, and the face somewhat red, the breast or the
elbowes marked, and men Courteous, Scotiable, Covetous, Prudent, given to the
acts of Saturnins. Of diseases, quarterne fevers, the black iaunders, etc. Of
Colors, the green and dark yellow. Savors, sweet. Of Countries, Arabia,
Ethiopia, Sarinatia, Oxione, Tartaria, Denmark, Picmount, Mountferrat,
Pisaure. Of particular places, Lakes, Pondes, Close places, Caves, Sepulchers
and infamous houses.

Pisces governs over the right part of the Septentrion over the water,
phlegm, aquisits, and over the feet, and over the end of winter. And
signifies men of whitish color, delicate, fair foreheaded, fair breasted,
fair bearded, the eyes open and indifferent great, and indifferent sickly:
Fishers, and Nauigators. Of diseases, gauls upon the skin, ulcers and
deformed spots upon the skin pain in the feet. Of Colors, the green,
white and mixtures. Of sauors salt and fresh Of Regions, Lydia, Lycia, Cicilia,
Pamphilia, Calabria, Normandy: Rattisbone: Roane: Compostella, Of particular
places: port of the Sea: heads of Rivers, Pondes and watrish places.

CHAP. III. Of that which the Plannets signify in the said Signs.
Saturn in his signs of Capricorn and Aquarius in Natiuities by day gives
knowledge and love of noble men: and of credit and great riches principally in
the Ascendant: with the part of Fortune: and makes the man grave, prudent:
proud and mellanchollie: and first of all his brethren, or most advanced. In
Natiuities by night gives great pain and travail and many diseases. Jupiter
in the said sign, makes the man of little courage, unfortunate in the goods
of the Church, otherwise of small riches, or always poor.

Mars makes him bold, a great enterpriser of matters, and not in vain, and
makes him see the death of his brethren.

The Sun in the natiuities by day signifies that he shall be perfect and
happy in all his enterprises. In natiuities by night that he shall have
unconstant fortune.

Venus makes him an Adulterer and effeminate, and denotes that his wives
shall not live long.

Mercury causes him to have impeachment in his tongue, and makes the man
evil spoken otherwise, and which haunteth the company of men of knowledge and
of Religion.

The Moon makes the man too slowthfull, and one of evil estimation: and his
mother also, and signifies imbicillitie of the eyes and great coughes.

In the houses of Jupiter.
Saturn in the houses of Jupiter, which be Sagitarius and Pisces makes the
man fayer, rich, mighty and faithful in natiuities by day: In natiuities by
night, strife against men of authority, and near the death of his Father.

Jupiter signifies riches, honor, great creditte and offices.

Mars yields the men noble, governors in wars and friends of Princes.

The Sun makes them beneficed men, prelates, officers and more advanced then
any of their family, they shall be always greatly covetous.

Venus gives them goods of the Church, or of the side of women; and makes
them discreet, honest, among the which they shall have great strife against
their parents, famylies and friends.

Mercury makes them just, men of good estimation, which by their proper
virtue shall come to the knowledge and love of great Lords and Kings.

The Moon yields them chief and most honored among their friends: makes
them also covetous, sound and of long life.

In the house of Mars.
Saturn gives great anger and cruel malice.

Jupiter makes the man happy, and afriende of great Lords, and a Conductor
of wars, principal in the sign of Aries.

Mars within his houses signifies Captains, Governors in wars, and great
Lords.

The Sun, hot diseases, in the sign of Scorpio: in the sign of Aries great
advancement.

Venus denotes luxury and all voluptuous villainy, but against nature, and
evil dealing to women. Always in the sign of Aries she makes him hate
women, principally if the moon be in the same sign, and if the sun be in a
masculine sign.

Mercury, makes the man a liar, an evil person, a deceiuer, a babbler and a
demaunder of unjust things: otherwise eloquent, subtle in his affairs,
diligent, suspicious, a nigromancer, a little false or a thief.

The moon denotes evil companions, in peril of being drowned: and short end
by the sea.

In the houses of the Sun.
Saturn in the sign of Leo: being a house of the Sun: sygnifieth good
Fortune and long life to the father.

Jupiter makes the man wise: of good spirit: of good nature: amiable: which
by virtue shall come to the knoweledge and love of great Kings and princes.

Mars denotes violent death, great sicknesses, loss of goods, infirmyties of
the eyes. and of the Stomach.

The Sun in his said house signifies great and incredible advancement, in
Angles or Houses succedant, when the Nativity is by day: When it is by night
sygnifieth Sadness, Enuies, and a short end of the Father.

Venus, great love, great covetousness, and impudent life, when Jupiter does
not regard her.

Mercury: good writers, men of knowledge, good memory, and of great council.

The moon, honorable companions, and viuacitie of the spirit.

In the houses of Venus.
Saturn denotes impudent life, love of maids and women of small discretion,
diseases by reason of leacherie.

Jupiter honorable companions, love of great lords, profit by the side of
women, or Ecclesiastical goods, or coming by the men of the Church.

Mars, furious men, raueshers of women, shameless in their leacherie, unto the
constraynings of their parents and friends.

In the sign of Taurus, makes the man, false and traiterous.

In the sign of Libra denotes some hurt by iro^ or fire.

The Sun makes him conte^platiue, just, interperter of dreams, curious in
the secreets of nature, and a lover of pilgrimages.

Venus signifies ioyfulnes, great prosperity, happy in effecting his
enteprises, but he shall love women reprehended Mercury gives many good and
profitable friends: and yields the man pleasant, joyful, and a musician.

The moon gives profit by women.

In the houses of Mercury.
Saturn, makes the man very skillful, wise, and of great judgment: which
has envious men pursuing him, an impediment in his speech, his anger violent.

Jupiter makes him also skillful, or a merchant, a man of good faith, and more
rich then his parents.

Mars, slowthfull, prudent, subtle, men of war.

Sagitarius busy fellows, counterfeytors of letters and forgers.

The sun gives abundance of knowledge as well in matters of judgments as in
mathematickes.

Venus companies and love of men of the Church, otherwise she does yield them
very leacherous.

Mercury in his proper houses signifies men of all knowledge, philosophers,
mathematicians: Orators, Advocates, Poets, Rimers Southsayers, and skillful in
knavery.

The Moon good life and long, great understanding in the affayers which he
takes in hand good fortune in merchandises and in love of young maidens.

In the house of the Moon.
Saturn great sickness loss of goods: hurt in the eyes, voyages from the
which he shall never return, or very late with great pain.

Jupiter: love of honorable men good renown and good fortune.

Mars: swiftness of spirit, rash, bold enterprisers, blindness of the eyes,
loss of goods by his mother.

The Sun, good renown, and if he be joined to the tail of the Dragon, or to
Saturn or Mars, blindness of eyes, peril of drowning, frequenting voiages.

Venus signifies, inconstancy, and shamlesse lechery.

Mercury good will, chastity, fidelity, and happy fortune in deeds of
merchandise.

The Moon, holy, and profitable in voiagaes, Traffiques and merchandise when
she is fortunate: or when she is unfortunate, continual sicknesses, hurts in
the eyes, peril of death by land and water.

CHAP. IIII. Of the aspects of the Plannets between them.

THE Coniunctio^ of Saturn and Jupiter gives fair possessions, farms rents,
houses, and charges of the affairs of the king, profitable if Mars do not
behold them.

The conjunction of Saturn and Mars, signifies that the child shall be trusted:
but he shall not accomplish his enterprises without great difficulty, and shall
die sooner then his father and mother, and yet his brethren shall die before
him.

The conjunction of Saturn and of the Sun, loss of patrimony, great
travail to get goods, and most in the natiuities by night.

The conjunction of Saturn and Venus, denote that the man shall have no male
children, that he shall espouse some old woman, or some widdowe, or some of evil
condition, or a bastard: or other stain of his honor, or by the which his
parents have had some discredit.

The conjunction of Saturn and Mercury, does yield him a poor vagabonde,
needy, of no mystery, the which has an impediment in his speech.

The conjunction of Saturn and Luna, weakness of body, loss by the side of
his Parents.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, signifies, riches, rule and government
of wars, and of good renown.

The conjunction of Jupiter and the Sun, poverty and need if it be not
Oriental, for then it promises good fortune to the father, to him, and to his
children.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Venus, good institution, amity of honorable
men, and profit of them, and of the wife and children.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury, signifies Lawyers, Secretaries and
Chauncellers.

The conjunction of Jupiter and the Moon, great riches.

The conjunction of Mars and the Sun, loss of patrimony, damage of goods,
and short life to the father, and great perrill of the child to be burnt.

The conjunction of Mars and Venus, suits, strifes, debates by reason of women,
adulterers with women of infamous condition.

The conjunction of Mars and Mercury, liars, deceivers, eloquent, dilligent,
and bablers.

The conjunction of Mars and the Moon, short life, wounds, blows, danger of
violent death by iron or by fire, or by falls and ruins.

The conjunction of Sol and Venus, praise, good renown, favor of the common
people, especially of women.

The conjunction of Sol and Mercury, wisdom, science, great advancement, and
estimation to be very skillful.

The conjunction of the Sun and of the Moon, short life, government, and
honorable company.

The conjunction of Venus and Mercury, makes the man pleasant, joyful, a
player, a dauncer, musician, well furnished, and brings him damage by the
side of women. If they be conjoined under the beams of the Sun, they make
great hinderance in the parts of generation.

The comunction of Venus and the Moon, makes the man fair, pleasant, proud,
an adulterer: and of whom his wife is an adultresse, if Mars do cast his beams
without aspect of Jupiter.

The conjunction of Mercury and Luna, denoteeh good renown, science, and
inconstancy of manners and of fortune.

The tryne aspect of Saturn and Jupiter, signifies inheritaunces,
possessions, fair houses, riches, meetings with treasures, great gaynes: when
they be infortuate places of the figure.

The tryne of Saturn and Mars, great advancement, dignities, great credit,
rule and government of towns and Countries, and death of brethren.

The tryne of Saturn and the Sun, rule, offices, dignities, great renown,
in natiuities by day: in the night it makes the dispersing of patrimony goods,
and afterward by his deeds and virtue shall recover and obtain more greater.

The tryne of Saturn and Venus, makes the man trusty, mild, honest,
shame-faced, of good conversation, of good renown, the which by men of base
condition shall be pursued with envy, and shall marry late.

The tryne of Saturn and Mercury, makes the man prudent, subtle in all his
affairs, a man of good and great knowledge, ingenious, industrious, an
Arithmetrician, Geomitrician, Astrologian, and a Geographer, President in
matters of accounts and calculations: Chauncellors, Secretaries and Registers.

The tryne of Saturn and of the Moon, favor of great Lords and Kings, glory,
honor and government.

The tryne of Jupiter and Mars, signifies audacity, honor, victory, favor of
Kings, government of towns and great credit.

The tryne of Jupiter and Sol being greatly favorable, to glory, honor,
government, credit, and gives great riches, fair possessions, and fair
children.

The tryne of Jupiter and Venus, denotes beauty, grace, faithfulness, honesty,
and profit of wives and friends, dignities and inheritaunces by their means.

The tryne of Jupiter and Mercury, makes the man ingenious, subtle, forward,
of good judgment and advise, happy in his enterprises, a Judge, Officer, great
Lord, Secretary, well understanding the secrets of nature and Astrology.

The tryne of Jupiter with the Moon, signifies nobleness, honor, glory,
good renown, love of virtue, fidelity, principality and government.

The tryne of Mars with the Sun, great advancement, great credit, dignities,
governments administrations of Commonwealths, and Conductors of wars.

The tryne of Mars with Venus, gain, riches, goods of women, proud, arrogant,
brave and lecherous.

The tryne of Mars and Mercury, prudent, crafty, subtle of spyrite, and
makes the man to study secretly: a good Advocate, President in matters of
account, and rich.

The tryne of Mars with Luna, makes him happy in all his affairs: President
in matters of account, an honorable officer, and a great Lord, with great
renown.

The trine of the Sun with Venus, signifies the same that the tryne of Mars
and Venus signifies, with great honor of the said significations.

The tryne of the Sun with Mercury and Luna, likewise as of Mars, with great
honor and profit.

The tryne of Venus with Mercury, brave, pleasant, grave, beauty, and happy
enterprises with profit.

The tryne of Venus and the Moon, beauty, grace, bravery, pride, and adultery.

The tryne of Mercury with the Moon, makes the man greatly esteemed in his
profession: be it in music, paynting, or other pleasant industry: or in all
knowledge, or in merchandise or office.

The Sextiles aspects, make the same effects which the trynes make; except that
the Sextiles be not of so perfect virtue.

The Quadrate aspect of Saturn and Jupiter, signifies loss of patrimoniall
goods, great adversities, hinderaunces
in all enterprises: vain cogitations, principally when Saturn is elevated
over Jupiter, without receiving him.

The quadrate of Saturn and Mars, signifies as much, and further makes known
the death of brethren.

The quadrate of Saturn and the Sun out of the said significations, brings
great damage to the honor, and spoyleth the body with cold diseases and
contractions of the sinowes; and makes the father die before the mother, and
yields the child not agreeable to his father.

The quadrate of Saturn with Venus, denotes loss of goods, poverty,
miserable fortune to women, vnciuility, when Saturn holds the right part of
the aspect. For when Venus holds it, the child shall be shame faced and of
good manners, and his wives shall love him effectually, although they dissemble
their love and will govern in the house.

The quadrate of Saturn and Mercury, makes the man laborous, a servant, of
poor council, deaf or of ill hearing, stutting or evil spoken, pursued of
envy.

The quadrate of Saturn and of the Moon, makes the man slothful, sickly,
evil graced, full of care, without friends, a disperser of the goods of his
mother and of his wives.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Mars, if Jupiter be mightiest, it signifies that
the child shall be esteemed, praised and honored of Princes and Kings, and
that he shall have perseueraunce in all his enterprises with profit; always he
shall lose and dysperse his inheritances and possessions, and shall see the
death or destruction of his children. If Mars be most eleuate, he signifies
suits, debates and losses, by means of great Lords, and a troublesome life.

The quadrate of Jupiter with the Sun, if Jupiter be the Superior, honor,
profit, and good fortune to the Father. If the Sun be Superior, the child
shall disperse his goods, and shall not be beloved of his neighbors; and shall
go out of his Country.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Venus, profit by women, faithfulness, honesty,
ciuility, when Jupiter is most highest. When he is inferior, lust, deceit by
women, inconstancy, joy incontinently turned into sadness, when Venus is not
received by Jupiter.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Mercury, signifies the man skillful, a
Mathematician, a Sorcerer, Sooth-sayer, abounding in servant, very faithful
and very rich, principally when Mercury is received by Jupiter.

The quadrate of Jupiter and the Moon, of good renown, great honors, in
knowledge and love of great Lords, with a little unconstant of Fortune and of
manners.

The quadrate of Mars with the Sun, signifies many evils, loss of goods,
darkness of the eyes, and in great danger of violent death, or public.

The quadrate of Mars with Venus, great troubles and tribulations by reason of
women of base condition, or impudent, and somewaies defamed, when Mars is in a
moueble sign.

The quadrate of Mars with Mercury, weakness of all the body, prysons,
pursutes, accusations, false nature of the child, with malice and iniquity.

The quadrate of Mars and the Moon, signifies the mother to be weak, and of
a very short life, and the child an evil boy, prodigal, unconstant, poor,
and which shall die myserably: and of the which, the wives shall be proud,
arrogant, and terrible.

The quadrate of the Sun and Venus, signifies that which the quadrate of
Jupiter and Venus signifies.

The quadrate of Sol and Mercury, signifies that which the quadrate of Jupiter
and Mercury signifies.

The quadrate of the Sun with the Moon, augmenteth the dignities and the
honors, and gives enuiousnes.

The quadrate of Venus and Mercury, makes the man diligent and industrious in
his office, and well renowned, but he shall receive some infamy by reason of
women.

The quadrate of Venus and Luna makes him very rich, and happy in his
profession, eloquent, gracious, very happy in wives and children: but he shall
have some loss of good and honor by reason of women.

The quadrate of Mercury with Luna, makes him skillful, ingenious, unconstant
of manners and of fortunes, which in a common sedition shall be taken, or shall
be accused by many of his conspirators.


The Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, signifies great troubles, a thousand
mischiefs and tribulations, deprived of children. If Saturn be in the
ascendant, and Jupiter in the seventh house, the beginning of his life shall
be with pains, trybulations and torments, and the end with repose, profit
and honor.

The opposition of Saturn and Mars without aspect of Jupiter and Venus, denote
great troubles, common seditions and conspyrations against the said man: many
dyseases intolerable, ruins, falls, perrils by water, violent death, or
pestilence, and a miserable father.

The opposition of Saturn and Sol without aspect of Jupiter, makes the man
sickly, sad, full of thoughts, full of tribulations, with great loss of goods,
and danger of violent death.

The opposition of Saturn and Venus, makes him evil disposed, deprived of
beauty and of virtue, lecherous, infamous by reason of women.

The opposition of Saturn and Mercury, an imperfect speech, separation of
brethren, knowledge and science.

The opposition of Saturn and Luna, dispertion of his mothers goods, gryefes
happening to the mother, troubles and tribulations, with great danger of
violent death, according to the nature of the sign wherein Luna is.

The opposition of Jupiter and Mars, rashness, dispertion of goods, enemy to
them which have been friends, unconstant fortune.

The opposition of Jupiter and Sol, makes him disperse his fathers goods, and
sell his offices and his honor.

The opposition of Jupiter and Venus, signifies unconstant friends,
ingratitude of them where he has done good: otherwise sufficient fortune.

The opposition of Jupiter and Mercury, common seditions, enuies,
conspirations, strifes, suits, enmity of brethren, of the which he shall see
the death.

The opposition of Jupiter with Luna, sufficient fortune after long travail.

The opposition of Mars and of the Sun, spoil of the eyes, makes him to be
killed, or fall from on high, makes him disperse his patrimony, and his father
die quickly.

The opposition of Mars and Venus, yields the man voluptuous, an a little
vicious, weak, unconstant, and makes his wife and children to die in signs
tropiques, makes him marry wives of base condition, or otherwise defamed.

The opposition of Mars and Mercury, without aspect of Jupiter, makes the man
a falsefyer, of evil conscience, accompanied with evil children, accused of
many crimes, for the which he shall be a fugitive or banished: principally if
Mercury be in the houses of Saturn.

The opposition of Mars and the Moon, signifies spoil of the eyes and the
body, by blows and hurts and other sicknesses, and gives great adversities,
makes him hate marriage, and causes violent death, and often Canon:
principally when the Moon increases in the angles; with sufficient aspect of
fortunes.

The opposition of the Sun, of Venus and of Mercury, signify that which we
have said of Jupiter.

The opposition of the Sun and of the Moon, changes the fortunes of goods
and honor, poverty after riches, dishonor after honor, weakness of body
after health; mutation of good to evil, and great inconstancy of manners.

The opposition of Venus and Mercury, enuies, quarrels, enmities by reason of
women; otherwise grave eloquence, beauty and bravery.

The opposition of Venus with the Moon, unfortunate marriage, injuries by
women, depryuation of children.

The opposition of Mercury and of the Moon, conspyrations against him, enuies,
treasons, fear and lecherous.

Likewise you must regard the part of Fortune, the part of the Spyrite, and
of their aspects with the said Planets; you must judge as of the aspects of
the Planets with the Sun and the Moon. For if the part of fortune be part
of the Moon, and part of the Spirit and part of the Sun, which would
consider the aspects toward the other parts and houses of heaven, he may judge
as of the Planets of the which the proiections of the said parts shall be made.
etc.

CHAP. V. Of the significations of the twelve houses.
THE first house signifies the life, nourishment, and disposition of the body
of the spirit, and complexion, and represents the head, face, brain, ears,
and nose, and is called, Horyscope angle, adorning and ascending.

The second house signifies goods, traffic, riches, gain, companies to
get profit and gain men that help to gain. It signifies also gold and
silver, and al moveable goods, and is called, The house succedant to the
ascendant, and beneath the earth; and reigns over the neck.

The third house denotes the brethren, sisters, Cosins and allies, and little
voyages, and the liver, and diuinations of dreams, and is called, The house
cadant of the ascendant, otherwise goodness: and has government over the
shoulders, legs and arms.

The fourth house signifies the Fathers and Parents possessions,
inheritaunces, houses, fields, Orchards, vineyardes laboring, wood, and
other goods and moueables, treasures and goods hydden, and mynerall matters,
prysons and obscure places, and in the end all things; and that which comes
after death, as the grave and good report. etc. and is called, The angle of
the earth, and the depth thereof: and reigns over the breast and lunges.

The fifth house signifies infancy and Daughters, Nepheues, gyfts, presents,
pleasures, voluptuousnes, ornanaments, bravery, dancing, plays, banqueting,
messages, gold and silver, and the riches of the Father, the profit of
inheritaunces, possessions, tyllage, and is called, The house succedant to the
fourth, and otherwise good fortune: and reigns over the heart and stomach.

The sixth house denotes servant, sickness, wild beasts, ryding, hunting of
and by dogs: sheep and muttons, Goats and Pulleine, and has some
signification over prysons, injustice, and false accusations, and is called,
The house cadant of the fourth, and otherwise evil fortune, and has government
over the belly and bowels.

The seventh house, denotes marriage, wives, suits, quarrels, strife, debate,
known enmity, and men appertayning to gain and profit, and signifies
agednesse, and strange places, and is called, The angle of the occident, and
reigns over the reins.

The eight house signifies sadness, envy, long torments, the quality of death:
dowery with wives, inheritance and other benefit, provided by Parents, and
those that belong to gain, riches of the which one has not greatly thought,
and is called, The house succedant, to the angle occidentall, and otherwise is
entered on high, and governs the parts of generation.

The nynth, long viages: long pilgrimages and nauigations: faith: religion:
sacrifices: ceremonies: science: wisdom: divination of dreams: prodigious
interpretations: new sects: paradoxes: signs of heaven: divine punishment: and
is called, The house Cadant of the angle occidentall, and otherwise the house
of God, and governs the buttocks.

The tenth, signifies honor: dignities: offices: Magistrates:
administrations: government: Rulers: Conductors: good renown: estimation:
profession: action: and the mother: and is called, The middle and heart of
heaven: the Merydian point and angle Merydian. It gardeth and governs the
knees.

The eleventh house, signifies friends: companions: hope: confidence: favor:
help: succor: praise: estimation and renown: counsel of friends: and is
called, The house succedant to the angle Meridional, and otherwise called the
good angle: and governs the legs.

The twelfe house signifies hidden enemies: prison: captivity: bondage:
sadness: torment: complaynt: lamentation: tears and hate; treasons: villainies:
horses and great beasts of like and just proportion: and is called, The house
cadant of the angle Meridional, and otherwise an evil spyrite: and governs
the feet.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lords of the Triplicities of the said Houses.
THE first Lord of the tryplicitie of the first angle, denotes the nature and
life of the child, and his cogitations and will: that which he loves and
hates, and that which is to come, health or sickness: good or evil
entertainment, perrill of his life in the first age. The second, Lord of the
tryplicitie of the said angle, signifies force and strength of the body, and
the midst of the life.

The third, the end of the life.

The first Lord of the tryplicitie of the second house, betokens riches, the
second the manner of the same riches, the third the intent and confidence in
getting.

The first Lord of the tryplicitie of the third house, denotes the most
ancient and first brethren, the second the middle, the third the least.

The first Lord of the fourth, denotes the Parents, the second lands
possessions and houses, the third imprisonment and end of things.

The first Lord of the fyft, denotes children, the second love, pleasure,
grace and bravery, the third, messages and embassages.

The first Lord of the sixth house, denotes sickness, trouble, the second,
servant, the third, Cattle, prison, and the profit of the significations of
the said house.

The first of the seventh house, women, the second strife and suit, the third
division.

The first Lord of the eight house, death, the second, antiquity, the third,
inheritance.

The first Lord of the ninth house, denotes pilgrimages, long viages,
nauigations: the second, faith, religion, and devotion: the third, science,
deuination, dreams, prophecies, sorts of cross and prodigal sects.

The first of the tenth, denotes profession, honor, dignity and
aduauncements: the second, audacitie, and the means to work in his profession:
and the third, preservation in such fortune.

The first of the eleventh house, denotes constancy, hope, the second,
friends: the third, the profit of the eleventh house.

The first of the twelfe house, denotes enemies: the second, pain and
travail: the third, beasts of like proportion: and other that be appointed to
charge and labor.

CHAP. VII. What the Plannets signify in the twelve Houses.
IN the first house, Saturn out of his principal dignities, signifies that
the child shall have short life, unfortunate, deformed, euill-fauoured: and
shall dye because of other lands and possessions: nevertheless, he shall be
first of his brethren.

Jupiter in the said house signifies long life, good fortune, beauty, honesty,
love of virtue, fear of God, honor, and favor, and makes him the first of
his Brethren.

Mars in the said place, signifies hurt always in the head or face, and
makes him dispende a part of his goods, and makes him intermeddle in many
dyscordes and contentions: if he be in his house or exaltation, it makes him a
mighty and valiant man, hardy, fortunate in arms. out of his principal
dignities, it does yield him evil, mischievous, furious, seditious, mutinous
and quarrelsome: principally when the fortunes do not intermingle their beams.

The Sun gives honor and praise, and estimation, credit and great
advancement: favor of great Lords, riches by the means of Princes, and
makes the child first borne, or most advanced of all his brethren.

Venus gives him grace, beauty, bravery, ciuility, love of women, healthful
and prosperous: and yields the man lecherous, joyous, loving music,
dancing, and something unconstant.

Mercury, makes him ingenious, skillful, dilligent, Apprentice, of good
judgment, of good memory, a good Reader a good Writer, a great Mathematician;
and apt to all knowledge.

The Moon yields (...) constant, vagabond, which takes diverse affairs, and
(...) to many viages, a man healthful, fortunate, fair, (...) ^^mething
spotted in the face, and shall be numbered among great Lords.

The head of the Dragon lunarie, honor, dignity and favor of great Lords and
Prelates. The tail of the Dragon, loss of goods and honor, deformity,
obscurenes of eyes, and great danger of the loss of life.

In the second house Saturn out of his principal dignities, destroys the
man, and makes him spend and scatter his goods, and yields him poor and
unprovided of succor. And in his house or exaltation, makes him rich, proud,
and with all his goods miserable.

Jupiter gives great riches by honest means.

Mars makes him spend his goods, and in the end does yield him poor many
ways.

Sol makes him honorable, a great man, liberal, brave, which in his
magnificence shall spend his goods.

Venus gives aid and succor, and greatly enricheth by women and men of the
Church.

Mercury, profit in merchandise, and in Scripture, and very industrious in the
Mathematiques, and a thousand means to become rich.

Luna, riches, advancement by embassages, messages, and employments when she
is fortunate; unfortunate, signifies pains and travails for the goods of the
world, without going forward, and hynderaunce in whatsoever he does.

The head of the Dragon, riches, great gains, profit, inheritance, or goods
of the Church.

The tail of the Dragon, destruction, prodigality, folly, dispense in
playing, and falling from on high, without expectation.

In the third house, Saturn destroys brethren, and makes them see their
death, and intermedleth stryfes and suits among brethren. Yields a man
unfortunate in small viages, an hypocrite, supersticious, rash, fearful
astonished at prodigious dreams.

Jupiter signifies peace and concord amongst brethren, not without profit,
makes a man prudent, happy in viages near hand, and that his dreams shall be
true.

Mars signifies great injuries, strifes, and suits among brethren, and
causes the brethren to die quickly: and yields the man a terrible
blasphemer, forsworn, a deceiuer, not fearing GOD, which shall be unfortunate
in all his ways, and after in danger of Thieves and Robbers, and shall be
tormented in many terrible and vain dreams.

Sol, honor, dignities, offices, out of his Country, long pilgrimages,
honorable brethren, and true dreams.

Venus, love among brethren, happy viages, fear of God, and true dreams.

Mercury, profit in traffic and viages, in fair markets, and gives good
fortune at all times and places, concerning the good of the Church.

In the sign of Gemini or Libra, it makes the man a good Musician, and a
sounder of musical Instruments, principally in conjunction or good aspect of
Venus.

The Moon makes him given to go here and there on pylgrimages, so that he
rests not long in a place: nevertheless, in his deeds he shall be honored
and praised, and meet with good fortune, and friends, and great Lords, that
shall employ him in embassages, in messages and other voyages: and he shall be
loved and praised of his brethren.

The head of the Dragon signifies, that his brethren shall be of greater
estate and authority then he: nevertheless, it denotes some Ecclesiastical
goods.

The tail of the Dragon destroys the brethren, and makes them die quickly.

In the fourth house, Saturn out of his principal dignities, makes him
scatter his patrimony, and yields the man poor and unfortunate in
immovable goods, as in houses, lands and possessions, plowing and sowing: and
signifies that the mother shall be of an infamous condition, and shall not live
long.

If he be within his house or exaltation, he gives inheritance, houses,
lands, possessions, and signifies the mother honorable, and of long life.

Jupiter, yields him happy in immovable goods, and gives him great store
of inheritance, and sometime causes him mere with treasure and goods, of the
which he never greatly thought. And signifies the Father of long life and
happy: and signifies his child shall be esteemed after his death: and he
shall be honorably laid in his grave.

Mars, loss of goods by fire and wind, and houses, lands and possessions,
destruction of trees, dispending of his goods, evil end by wounds: effusion of
blood, evil renown after death, and short life of the Father.

The Sun denotes fair possessions, lordships, government, inheritance and
fair houses, praise, honor and good fortune in his old years, and good
renown after death, an honorable sepulcher, and makes him given to
divination, and to prevent things to come.

Venus denotes the same that Jupiter does.

Mercury fortunate, yields the man industrious, providing and foreseeing
things to come: a buyer of rentes, houses, and possessions, a planter of trees,
and curious in Husbandry assayres: inclined to gather gold and silver.

If it be unfortunate, it yields him quarrelsome, stryuing, and hated of his
neighbors, always angry and full of dispites, and little esteemed.

Luna signifies that which is said of Mercury, except that she is given to
Mylles, Pondes and watery places, and yields the man in the beginning
unfortunate, and in the end happy, principally when the nativity is by day.

And when the head of the Dragon is in ayrie and fyerie Signs, it signifies
that which Jupiter does, and in earthly and watrie, that which the tail of
the Dragon does.

The tail of the Dragon makes the Father die quickly, and scatter his goods
immovable.

In the fifth house, Saturn signifies sadness, necessity, rudenes, uncivil,
euill-faced, evil entertainment, deprivation of death of children
unnaturally, going in evil and filthy clothing.

Jupiter, gives grace, honesty, prudence, ciuility, bravery, riches, profit
in messages and embassages, abundance of fair children, well nurtured, and
well instructed and beloved, good fortune by Churchmen, gyfts, and a dealer for
gold, jewels, precious stones, sweet and precious savors.

Mars destroys and makes the children die, or wholly depriueth them of
children: makes a man happy in all significations of the fifth house, when he
is out of his principal dignities; Within his house or exaltation, he yields
him very lecherous and impudent, timorous, a scoffer, abounding in bastards and
evil children.

The Sun, denotes fair children, honorable companies, good renown,
messages, gifts of great Lords, and a dealer with Jewels and precious stones,
and sweet perfumes and savors.

Venus makes a man pleasant, delectable, joyful, dancing, vaunting, playing
and laughing, Gentleman-like, a Musician, happy in children, lecherous and
jealous.

Mercury makes him a merry iester, a mocker, brave, to write well, a good
Painter, industrious with his hands, ingenious, a Musician, voluptuous, not
caring greatly for his affairs or tribulations, indifferent happy in children,
and given to embassages and messages, and to go on viages.

Luna makes him an Attorney and of Council, a Bencher, a Legate, an Ambassador
by election of the people, and had in great account with the people, abounding
in banqueting, and happy in children.

The head of the Dragon signifies as Jupiter does.

The tail signifies what Mars and Saturn signify for children.

In the sixth house, Saturn signifies pain of the belly and teeth, much
sickness, an ill servant, unlucky to sheep and like beasts.

Jupiter, good servant, health of the body, good Fortune in bringing up
beasts.

Mars within his house or exaltation, good seruitours in wars, profession of
physic. Out of the same places, hot sicknesses, pestilence, evil
impediments, and evil servant to be rebels, and thieves.

Sol, sickness of the heart, imbecillytie of the body, hurtes by his servants.

Venus, imbicillytie of the Reins and parts of generation, otherwise soundnes
of body, good and faithful servant, good fortune in nourishing beasts, and
commonly impudent love of maids, and in natiuities of women makes him love
servant, and signifies peril of death in child bearing.

Mercury signifies him to be a deceiuer of women, and to be deceived by them
and his seruauutes, and yields him a deceyuer, a dissembler, a detester, of
evil memory. If he be with Saturn or Mars, he threatens death by prison,
a conspiracy of servants or in prison.

Luna denotes weakness in the eyes and brain, great and fervent, sickness,
strife against parents, enmytie of women, a company of men il condicioned, when
she is unfortunate. When she is fortunate, gives health and profit in
nourishing young beasts and good servants.

The head of the Dragon preserves from sickness, gives good servants, and good
luck in keeping beasts.

The tail unfaithful servants, loss of cattle.

The seventh, Saturn out of his principal dignities signifies marriage of
an evil wife, blotted with some infamy, proper to himself or parents, ruin
of enemies, and peril of evil death. In watrie signs it denotes Emrods,
Phistyloes, Constitution of the sinews, and diseases of the back.

In his house or exaltation, he signifies the woman to be rich, and enemies
mighty.

Jupiter, happy marriage, the woman honest, shamfaste, virtuous, fair, rich,
victory against enemies, and fortunate in age.

Mars in his house or exaltation, or out of his dignities always signifies
mighty and terrible Adversaries, brute of women, or husbands in Natiuities of
women, impudencye of the man, timorous, leacherous, in danger to be killed, to
have blows on the feet and hands.

Sol, mighty enemy, rich, wise, well brought up, and honorable age.

Mercury, leachearous, strife and debate between man and wife, evil by
reason of impudent desire, crafty knowledge in numbering, love of virtue. If he
be with Saturn or Mars he shall kill his wife, and shall be killed or put in
prison, and put in exile, or condemned to dye by sentence of a Judge.

Luna, profit of wines, thousand strifes and suites, desire of change of
Countries. If she be fortunate, she signifies all well in all significations
of the said house, and unfortunate the contrary.

The head of the Dragon signifies as Jupiter.

The tail makes the woman dye quickly and destroys the enemies.

In the eight, Saturn out of his principal dignities, sygnifieth strange
Death, Sorrows, Complaints, Lamentations, long Torments, Sadness, Anguish and
Poverty in his house or exaltation, inheritance and goods unlooked for,
death by flyxe or plague, or of some cold or long sickness.

Jupiter, long life to 72. years, inheritance, goods by women, happy death.

Mars, out of his principal dignine, signifies hastye death, pestilence,
impediment, slaughter, and other sorts of violent death.

If he be with the head of the Dragon, he shall be hanged, if in his house or
exaltation he gives goods not without great striefes and suites.

Sol, causes death presently after honor, short life to the father,
inheritance to the child, loss of goods by vyolence of great men, except
when he is oppressed with evil fortune, for then in an ayrie sign it
signifies strangling by force, burned in fire, and killed, and buried in the
earth, death by a fall, ruin, drowning in water. Except in Scorpio, where it
often causes death by poison, mad dogs, or of venomous beasts.

Venus, good death, inheritance, riches, long life, short life of mother and
Nurse, and his wife more ancient then himself.

Mercury, enmytie of neighbors, vain hope of inheritance, death by over
study of his affairs and business.

Luna, inheritance, riches by women, long life if she be fortunate, short
life, imprysonment, slander by false witness, strife, suites, quarrels, and
vexation of spirit, as mad or distraught of wits.

The head of the Dragon, inheritance, riches, honor liberallitie,
prodigallitie, and good death.

The tail, horrible death, small endeavor, no goodness in the signification of
this house.

In the ninth, Saturn betokens horrible dreams, terrible visions,
hypocrisy and superstition, ceremonies, preachers, Friars, men of Religion,
and a thousand troubles, by the way and perturbation of spirit.

Jupiter, gives faith, constancy in his religion, profitable journeys, fear
and love of God, and knowledge of divine mysteries, interpretations of dreams,
revelation and profit in the state Ecclesiastical.

Mars, out of his princypall dignity, danger by the way, unfaithfulness,
shaking of the Faith, and terrible Opinions and more then an Herytique,
Timorous, Violent, Impudent: horrible Dreams, and false dexterity in Arms
and Valyantnesse, when he is otherwise fortunate in his house or exaltation, it
makes the man very terrible, a Nigromancer, happy in his journey or
pilgrimages, hardy, ventrous, and of great courage.

Sol, Benefices, Abbeyes, Bishoprics, Ecclesiastical dignities, Cardinals,
Popes, Legates, principaly in a masculine sign, good faith, constant,
religious, a reuerencer of holy things, a lover of God and virtue, true
dreams, profitable journeys, and honor in his profession.

Venus, true dreams, except in the imagination of women, ecclesiastical
dignities, constant Religion, love and reverence of God, long pilgrimage by the
World, profitable journeys, honor in profession which takes away the desire
of marriage.

Mercury, goods Ecclesiastical, high knowledge, divine mysteries, admyration
of justice and providence of God, cogitation of God and Angels, and of
Spirits, profitable journeys, great knowledge in divinity, Astrology, and in
all other philosophy, interpretation of Dreams, Oracles, and strange things,
profit in trafique, in far Countries good renown.

Luna, long pilgrimage, perverse cogitations, unconstant in manners, and
fortune, true dreams, knowledge of stars: When the ix house is the house of
Mercury, or of other things answerable to the nature of the Lord of the ix.
house.

The head of the Dragon, variable dreams, honor and profit in travail,
Ecclesiastical goods.

The tail, lack of Faith, terrible Dreams, perilous journeys, and full of
envy, and little honor in his profession.

In the tenth house, Saturn out of his principal dignities signifies short
life of the mother, many ill fortunes, Sighs, Playnts, and imprysonments. If
the tenth house be in the sign of Leo, and any of the Lumynaries be with
Saturn, he shall die in prison. If Saturn be with Jupiter in the houses of
Jupiter, he shall be condemned of wrong: If he be with Mars in the houses
of Mars, he shall be condemned according to his crime. If he be with Mercury
he shall dye a very shameful death by false witnesses: If with Venus and
Mars he shall be whipped and racked, and condemned to dye. Saturn in his house
or exaltation in the tenth house, does license dignities, pre-eminence, and
government.

Jupiter great honor in his profession, ecclesiastical dignities, and great
renown.

Mars out of his principal dignities, makes a man terrible, cruel,
seditious, quarelsome, arrogant, a despiser of his goods, usurper of the
goods of other, hated of Father, mother, brethren, and other, and many times
to be imprisoned and punished by justice. In his house or exaltation it makes
him valyant, hardy, courageous in feats of arms. In the houses of Jupiter
well disposed, and regard of Fortunes, makes him a Presedent, Councellor, or
sovereign Judge.

Sol gives honor, offices, dignities, preheminences, rules, governments,
great credit and favor of many great Lords, in estimation of the common
people, honor in profession, with riches and great goods, principally if he
be in fiery Signs, and if the child be poor and of base condition, he
lifts him up to honor and great dignities.

Venus honor in his profession, goods of Princes, and great Lords, great
credit, and long life of the mother, with prosperity and honor.

Mercury makes him a Chauncellor, Secretary, Councellor, President put in
great dignities, skillful in Arithmaticke, Geometry, and, Astrology well
renowned, rich and abounding in goods. If he be unfortunate by Mars, he
shall come to an evil end, for having taken too much upon him, or for taking
quarrels against his betters.

Luna signifies praise and honor of great Lords, and shall be happy in all
enterprises, and esteemed in all the World.

The head of the Dragon signifies as Jupiter.

The tail makes him receive dishonor and loss of his calling, and falling
from an high, and denotes the short life of the Mother.

In the eleauenth house, Saturn out of his principal dignities betokneth
acquaintance, and to be a companion with men defamed and of base condition,
mischievous: sadness of friends: vain hope to come to things undertaken:
difficulty in affairs: loss of frindes, if he be in his house or
exaltation, he gives love of Saturnityes as by great and ancient Lords.

Jupiter makes him happy in all his deuoyres: gives favor of great Lords:
great creditte: abundance of friends: advancement by friends: riches and
fair children: of the which the first shall be a Mayor.

Mars in his house or exaltation, love by men of war and fortunate in feats
of arms, and out of those places signifies despair, unhappy enterprises,
loss of friends, and enmity with his friends, he shall not be loyal to his
lords and friends: by which shall ensue great damage.

Sol, happy enterprises, goods, honor, dignities by means of friends which
shall be men of authority and great lords.

Venus gives good friends which shall be honorable men: and of good
authority: and of good will signifying good fortune: happy enterprises: and
many children.

Mercury knowledge: and company: and love of men of knowledge and virtue: and
good renown among friends: happy enterprises.

Luna gives good riches, honor, good renown: good friends which shall be great
lords: and happy enterprises.

The head of the Dragon, that which Jupiter signifies.

The tail, that which Saturn and Mars signifies.

In the twelfth Saturn out of his principal dignities makes unhappy in
Horses and other great Beasts, from the which he shall fall and receive hurt
and signifies fear of justice, imprysonment or exile. In his House or
Exaltation, victory against his enemies, good Fortune in Horses and other
Beasts, fit for burden and labor.

Jupiter out of his principal dignities, mighty enemies and Adversaries of men
in authority, imprysonment, exile, condemnation, poverty, well dignified he
signifies the contrary.

Mars the fall from Horses, hurt or other damage by beasts, abundance of
enemies, imprisonment, slanders, and a thousand persecutions, great evil in
legs and feet.

Sol, good fortune in Horses and other great Beasts, great persecution by
enemies, great Lords, and mighty confiscation and loss of goods,
imprysonment, exile, slander, false witness, evil report, condemned to a
great fine, deprivation of his estate, by perverted traiterous and how should
servants.

Venus, gives good Fortune to Horse, strife and enmytie to Women, disprayse in
marriage, mischievous and evil renown because of Women: principallye if they
be evil condicioned and defamed, an impudent Lover of Women defamed, for the
which he shall be imprisoned: and suffer great dishonor. If she be in the sign
of Virgo or Capricorn, or of Aquarius, joined with the Sun and Saturn, or
to Mars signifies great peril of death by love.

Mercury gives great knowledge, principally in sciences that shall bring
small profit, makes a man a philosopher, mathematician, and ready in all
knowledge, a little foolish by reason of the lightness of the spirit, having
many enemies, given to voluptuousness, evil fortune: hated by men of
knowledge, likely to be slaundered and imprisoned. If Saturn be well disposed
he gives good fortune in horses and other beasts.

Luna gives many enemies which daily shall grow and increase, if she be
unfortunate signifies imprisonment and exile, if she be burnt and joined with
Saturn or Mars, the child shall be ever miserable and of a short life, which
shall receive hurt by beasts of like proportion: and dies by plague, to be
killed or drowned: If she be fortunate it betokens escape from all these
evils.

The head of the Dragon betokens that which Jupiter.

The tail, damage by beasts of like proportion and ruin by enemies.

And generally when a Planet is well dignified or otherwise well disposed and
regarded of fortunes within the said houses, it signifies good luck in all
significations of the said houses, but when it is unfortunate, it yields
mischief in all the said significations.

CHAP. VIII. The significations of the Lords of the houses by the places of
the figure.
THE Lord of the first house within the first Fortune, betokneth long life,
health of body, goods, and riches by his own proper means, honor of his
parents. In the second, riches: In the third, often voiages, agreement and
concord with his brethren. In the iiij. inheritaunces houses and goods
immovable. And it notes that he shall be a great builder, a planter of vines and
trees, a medler with mines of gold and silver, and other things according to
the nature of the said planet: In the v. betokens many children which he
shall love greatly, to be given to banquets, plays; dancing, bravery and to
all voluptuousnes and pleasure, and shall have many friends to enrich him. In
the vi. a buyer of small cattle, abounding in servant the which he shall
teach and make dilligent, he shall be sickly: In the seventh, quarrelsome,
given to strife and suites in matters of marriage, unfortunate in all his
acts. In the viij. sad, fearful and of short life. In the ix. an
interpreter of Dreams, of Oracles, secreate things and visions, given to know
divine mysteries, to travail, and to abide in strange Countries. In the x.
goods, riches, dignities, and honor by the means of Princes and great Lords,
good fortune in his profession. In the xi. happy enterprises, good friends,
honorable companies, prosperity, few children. In the xii. evil manners,
perverse nature; great enmity, good fortune in cattle. If he be unfortunate
in the first, the child shall not live long, if in the second, he shall be
destroyed and poor. If in the third, he shall receive great evil by his
brethren. If in the fourth, he shall be unhappy in lands, inheritaunces, labor,
and possessions, and die in prison. In the fifth, it denotes sadness and
tribulation, be cause of children, and of messages and gifts, and shall many
times die by too much drink, or by too much pleasure. In the sixth, signifies
great sickness and piteous death. In the seventh, by means of the wife by
poison, if he be in the sign of Capricorn, by fire, if he be in a fiery
sign, by fall from on high, if in an earthly. In the eight, short life,
danger of death in travail. In the ninth, in peril to be slain by thieves.
In the tenth, imprisonment, wrack, condemnation, and death by means of
princes. In the eleventh, a thousand evils, and mischiefs for friends. In
the twelfth, death in prison. The lord of the second in the first house
signifies much gain and to be rich; In the second, that he shall have much
goods and be very rich and auaricious. In the third, loss by brethren, and
profit in small voiages. In the fourth, innumerable inheritaunces, augmentation
of patrimony. In the fifth, profit in all things of pleasure and magnificence,
children to come to honor, and shall be rich giuers. In the sixth, profit by
means of servants, and of keeping beasts. In the seventh, goods of women;
and by suites. In the eight, great dowries: some inheritaunces, otherwise
scattering of goods. In the ninth, goods of the Church, fortunate in long
pilgrimage. In the tenth profit, profit in his profession, goods by great
Lords, and offices, and dignities. In the eleventh, goods, riches and honor
by friends. In the twelfth, profitte in horses and beasts, otherwise loss
and injustice by the means of gayning. The lord of the third house in the
first signifies greater riches and praise then his brethren, that he shall
make many voyages. In the second, he shall have suit with his brethren for
goods. In third, he shall often go abroad for pleasure, and his brethren and
friends accompany him. In the iiii. he shall go often to visit his lands and
possessions, and his brethren shall leave him, and with-holde part of his
right. In the v. his brethren shall be brave, pleasant, and gracious, and
given to voluptuousness, and make agreement with his Children. In the vi. that
he shall hold question of injuries with his brethren and that they shall not
answer him. In the vii. suite against brethren and friends, a voyage to be
married. In the viii. short life to brethren flying for fear of plague or
murder. In the ix. pilgrimage of friends, and voyages to obtain pardons. In
the x. voyages by reason of profession, and for dignities and death of brethren
and friends. In the xi. good friendship among brethren, voyages to meet with
good fortune. In the xii. enmities of brethren, and voyages because of enemies.

The Lord of the fourth in the first house, signifies good disposition and
honor, richer then other of his kyndred, a great man in buylding and
possessions, and shall build houses, plant vines, trees, and a diligent
husband in his grounds. In the second a good Traffiquer-in corn Oil, Wine,
and Fruits, a dear seller and a good cheap buyer, and a buyer and seller of
Lands and Houses. In the third, he shall have the goods and inheritance of
his Brethren: in the fourth, he shall have great Fortune in goods, Lands,
Houses and labors, and happen upon Treasure. In the fifte, the riches of the
Father, Children happy in their inheritance. In the sixth, signifies no great
estimation of the Father, but physic, Surgerie and government of sick
Folks, and a Nourisher of Beasts: in the seventh, inheritance by Women,
enmity between the Father and Children, a good huswife of his wife: in the
eight, the father of short life, inheritance, death out of his Country: in
the ninth, lands, and possessions joined to the Church or in subjection to the
Churchmen, and the father a stranger: in tenth, the father to be known of
great Lords, by the which shall come great profitte to the Child, and shall
have lordships, Lands, and possessions by means of great Lords. In the
eleventh, short life to the Father, inheritance by friends: in the 12. the
father a stranger and of base condition, and shall hate his son, and shall
have some mouable goods of his enemies, not without long suite and great
difficulty.

The Lord of the fifth, in the first house signifies feasting, bankquetting,
dancing, voluptuousnes, and fair children. In the second rich children and
joy of their gayning. In the third, voyages for pleasure: in the iiii. goods
of parents and alies: in the v. feasts, bankets, plays, bravery, daunces,
pleasure and fair children: in the vi. witness that he shall be a peacemaker and
not greatly given to pleasure: but in servants and keeping cattle: in the vii.
the children shall hate the father, and shall have suites one against the
other, yet always contentment by his wife and rejoice in her. In the viii
joyful, because of unlooked for inheritance, and short life to children. In
the ix. joy in pilgrimages, vows, holy religion, good children that fear and
love God. In the x. pleasure in honor. In the xi. pleasure in friends and many
children. In the xii. short life of children, enmity between the father and
the children, pleasure in horses.

The Lord of the sixth in the first signifies many sicknesses of the said
Lord, and that his servants, and beasts shall dye quickly. In the second
that he shall be rich by keepinge of cattle. In the third, sickness and
going here and there from home, a poor kindred. In the iiii. that his Father
shall be of very base condition. In the fith, Sickness by over much
pleasure, Children of more base condition then their father In the vi. health
if the Lord of the Ascendant do not regard him, otherwise sickness by
ouer-labour. In the seventh, sickness by Women, of strifes, and suites and
strife between his servants and him. In the eight, death by reason of
servants. In the ninth, sick out of his Country by travail. In the tenth,
sickness by ouer-trauayle in his Profession, or by ouer-labouringe for honor.

In the xi. acquayntaunce of men unknown; and sickness by means of friends. In
the xii. sickness by means of enemies and of imprisonment, and enemies of his
own Servant.

The lord of the vii. in the first signifies gavne by traffic, peace and
agreement, by exercise of physic and Astrology, and that he shall be well
loved of his wife, and have goods with her: but he shall be quarrelsome and
have suites. In the ii. short life of his wife, suites for her goods and
riches: in the iij. strife and suites against friends, kinsfolks: and they
shall love his wife impudently. In the iiij. inheritance by women, suites
against parents. In the v. a young Wife, honest and virtuous, beloved of her
husband, and suite against his children. In the vi. strife for cattle and
servant, marriage with some woman of base condition, or noted of some infamy
proper to himself and parents. In the vij. suits for women, housholdestrife,
profit, and to agree and communicate his goods. In the viij, strife for
inheritance, great goods by women. In the ix. strife and accusations for
matters of faith, marriage with a strange woman: In the x. trouble for offices
and honor, an honorable wife, and dignity by the wives frindes. In the xi.
suites against friends, or by their means, and shall be married by his friends.
In the xii. controversy against enemies, marriage with women of base
condition, and not long love together.

The Lord of the eight in the first signifies ire, sadness, angry for that he
cannot bring to pass, and shall not be of long life. In the ii inheritance:
in the iij. death of brethren: in the iiij. death in his house, and shall see
the death of his parents, and shall have inheritaunces: in the v. death of
children: in the vi. death of his family before him, and shall be unfortunate
in cattle: in the vij. death of wife by whom he shall have iuheritaunce, and
thereby become rich: in the viij. that he shall think suddenly to die, and yet
sound of body, trouble in spirit, and shall have dower by his wife and
inheritance, and other goods. In the ix. that he shall have evil courage,
and shall dye out of his Country: in the x. honorable death, or othertherwise
by the means of great Lords, and of judges, or because of his honor: in the
xi. death amongst his friends: in the xii. death amongst his enemies, or by
reason of themselves.

The Lord of the ninth in the first signifies prudence, religious, virtuous,
divine, a lover of Churchmen, and shall make many voyages: in the ii. that he
shall make many voyages, by the which he shall become rich: in the iij.
marriage out of his Country, or take a stranger, and shall make iourneys
because of his brethren: in the iiii. death from home, pilgrimage by
persuasion of parents. In the v. have children from home out of his Country
and shall make iourneys for them: in the vi. marriage of a maid or woman of
base condition, sickness from home, and shall travel for his servants and
cattle: In the vii. voyages and suites by reason of women and their goods,
and signifies the woman to be devout, moderate, and well ma^nered: In the
viii. desire of riches, travel for his wives goods: In the ix. good
understanding, a lover of virtue, fearing God, knowledge in divine mysteries,
oracles, secret things, and true dreams, travel for devotion: In the x.
travel for profession and honor: In the xi. good friends from home: In the
xii. evil courage, and enemies out of his Country, travel by reason of
enemies.

The Lord of the tenth in the first signifies that by his industry he shall
come to great honor, and shall have dignity, offices, and governments. In the
second honor for his wealth: In the iii. honor by his brethren, or by
travel: In the iiii. immovable goods, sumptuous houses. In the v. honor by
his children: In the vi. little honor, except of his household and servants,
or in governing of the sick. In the vii. honorable marriage: In the eight
goods by marriage, inheritance, and peril of death to the mother at the time
of her travel and delyuetie. In the ix. Ecclesiastical dignity, honor in
strange Countries, and estimation by his travel. In the x. dignities,
offices, and great honor by his own means, and favor of Princes. In the xi.
prosperity, honor, and favor of friends. In the xii. honor by his enemies,
honor and estimation of men of evil condition.

The Lord of the eleauenth, in the first signifies good fortune, happy
enterprises, good friends, and many children. In the second, goods, and
riches by friends. In the third, amity of brethren, journeys and trauayles for
friends. In the fourth, good fortune in immovable goods. In the fifth,
abundance of children, bankquets, joy and good fortune. In the sixte, fortune
in good husbandry. In the seventh, rich and fortunate marriage, and good
friends, strifes and debates against friends, and that he shall be poor in
his youth, and rich in his age. In the eight, inheritance, death of friends.
In the ninth, profitable iorneyes, friends out of his Country, and good
fortune in strange places. In the tenth, goods and honor by means of men of
authority, and dignity in youth. In the eleauenth, abundance of friends, and
children, great goods and honor, and favor of men in authority, good renown
and prosperity. In the twelfth, small friends, few goods, and debate with his
friends.

The Lord of the twelfth, in the first signifies poverty in youth, sadness,
long travel, enmytie and conspiration against him. In the second evil
manners, quarrels for goods. In the third, quarrels with friends and
kyndred. In the fourth, strife and suites for inheritance and mouable goods,
and discord with the father. In the fifth, rebellious children to the father,
and strife among themselves. In the sixth, strife and anger among the family.
In the seventh, that he shall take wives of base condition, and not love them
long, and by their means shall have great pain and travel, and shall be in
grief for them, and his friends shall conspire against him, and his enemies
shall take away part of his goods, and in the end of his days be poor and
miserable. In the eight, hatred and treason for lyuelyhood and goods of women,
death of enemies. In the ninth, quarrel with Churchmen and mischiefs by the
way. In the tenth, quarrel with great Lords, persecution by reason of his
profession, of his offices and honor. The eleauenth, signifies that his
friends shall be his enemies, and shall have great mischief for his friends.
In the twelfth, many enuies and enemies that shall imagine many mischiefs
against him.

Likewise, you must judge of all the parts of the xii. houses, as the part of
fortune in the first signifies: that he shall be rich and fortunate by his
industry. In the second, that he shall be come rich in all that is signified by
the second house, etc.

All these be the foundations and roots of the judgments Astronomical, from
the which you may not swerve or depart: Except in as much as be mittigated,
prohibyted, or augmented by the Concurrences and aspects of the Planets, and
conjunction of the fixed stars.

The end of the second book.
Of Judgments Astronomycall upon Natiuities, containing the directions and
reuolutions. The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of Directions.
THE art of Directions so dilygently entreated upon by John de Regiomount, that
their is no more place fitly to speak of the same. Except that with the aid
of God we have purposed to translate into French his problemes and documents
appertayning to the said matter. Nevertheless we will here touch the the
principal point. To direct (which term I use being being most commonly used
and of long time received, although it be not proper) it is no other thing
then to stay the meeting of one place of the heavens with another consequently
following, acording to the natural order of the signs, and that the moving of
the first mobile. The first place is named the significator, the second the
promittor: as if the ascendant were in the xx. degree of Sagittarius and
Saturn in thex of Capricorn, one might direct the ascendant to Saturn and
the ascendant shall be significator of life, and Saturn promittor of death or
sickness, and the^ the judgment shall be danger of death, there is another form
of direction attributed to the parts and planets retrogrades, which do make
following the natural course of their mobile, to the contrary of the
consequence of the signs, of the which the craft is like to the 1. and there
is no difference but that we have called Significator, which is here
promittor, and the Promittor is here Significator.

The point meridionall of the tenth house, you must direct by the right
ascentions. The point of the ascendant, by the ascentions obliques, found in
the Table of the latitude of your Region. The points and stars that shall be
between the Merydian and the Horrizon, by the oblique ascentions under the
circle in the which they be, the which you call, The cyrcle of Position, the
which for to find, and likewise to have the ascentions of every place having
latitude or no, you must follow the method following.

First, you must take the longitudes of Plannets, fixed stars, and other
places that you would direct (that is to say) the sign, degree, and mynute
that they ^olde in the Zodiac and in the Ephemerides, or other tables
Astronomicall. etc.

Secondly, you must calculate their latitudes, in degrees and mynutes placed in
the Ephemerides.

Thirdly, their declination by the first probleame of the book of directions
of Regiomont.

Then, their right ascentions by the third probleame of the said house.

Then again, the distances of the circle Meridional by the nineteenth
probleame.

Incontinent, the circles of their positions, by the twentieth probleame,
consequently the dyfferences ascentional by the Table expressed.

And finally the oblique ascentions by the tenth Canon, if the said stars be
between the point meridionall of the tenth house, and the point of the fourth,
or the discentions of obliques by the eleventh probleame, if they be between
the point of the fourth and the tenth.

This done, take out the number of the oblique ascentions of the Significator,
of the number of the oblique ascentions of the Promittor, take to the Table of
the position of the Significator, or the contrary, if you direct the parts and
Planets retrogrades; that which rests of degrees and minutes, turn into
years, months and days: and by this means, you shall have exactly the time
of good or evil that shall happen unto you by direction, intending that one
degree is here signified a year, five mynutes a month, one minute 6. days
and some od hours, he that would help the seconds he shall touch the end
more perfectly.

For to know the sicknesses and danger of death, you must direct the five
vital places that we have considered, searching the gyuer of life, in fixed
stars of violent nature in the point of the fourth, sixth, seventh and eight,
and the tail of the Dragon, to the ill fortunes and their evil aspects in the
parts of death, and by and by to the Sun, and to the head of the Dragon.
Likewise for the same consideration, you must direct the said pernicious
places to the five vital places. And they meeting, they judge that the man is
in great danger of death, when the Fortunes do not show forth their
favorable beams.

For the goods, honor, dignities, friendships, and other considerations, you
must direct the one significator of goods with the other, and the one
significator of honor with the others, of the which we have made mention in
the first Book, following the particular judgments of the natiuities.

CHAP. II Of the Seperator or Burner, called of the Arabians, Algebuthar.
THE Seperator or Burner, is the Planet which has dignity of term and
degree, to the which the year is aunswerable, mutiplied with the ascentions of
one Significator.

For to find the Seperator of the like, you must take the Oblique ascentions
of the ascendant, and add unto the same the years of your age, and search it
all in the Table of the latitude of your Region, to look to which sign and
degree the said number answers, for unto that point shall come the
perfection of your life. Look afterward which is the Plannet which has
dignity of term in the said degree, for of the self same shall be the
Seperator of the life.

By the same means you may seek the Seperators of the honor, goods, gaynes,
friends, and of other like, upon the circles of their positions. The which is
convenient to seek following the aforesaid method of directions.

CHAP. III. Of the Lords of the Triplicities.
YOU must also note all the Lords of the Triplicities, in places which
signify good and evil, as well in significations of life, as of goods,
friends, honor, marriages, pylgrimages etc. If they be well disposed in the
revolution, they shall signify well, touching the signification of the place
of the which they be Lords. If they be unfortunate, they signify evil. That
is to understand, the Lords of the tryplicities of vital places, will signify
of the life: of the places of fortune, riches and profit: of places of honor,
of the honor, good or evil, according as they be fortunate or unfortunate at
the hour, of the revolution.

CHAP. IIII. Of Reuolutions.
THE Sun returning to the same point in the which he was at the hour of the
nativity, makes the revolution every year. He therefore that would know the
hour and mynute of the revolution, he must look in the Ephemerides, at what
hour and mynute the Sun began to enter into the degree minute and second,
in which he was at the hour of the nativity.

If the Ephemerides do not suffice you for this matter, go to a Table made
for the same purpose, by Peter Pitat, in the beginning of the same Ephemerides,
by him corrected and augmented. Jerome Cardin uses another, which I find very
exact: the which he has written in his book. Of the restitution of times and
celestial motions, in the fyft Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of the judgments upon the reuolutions.
FIrst look how the Seperator of life is disposed in the figure of the
revolution: for if he be unfortunate, he denotes sickness and other dangerous
accidents; If he be fortunate, he holds him healthful and glad all the
year. So likewise you must judge of the Seperator of goods, friends, dignities
and other effects. It is to understand, that they give good fortune in the said
significations, if they be well disposed: or else loss and evil fortune if
they be unfortunate.

In the second place, look if the Lords of the Tryplicities of the vital
places be well disposed: and of places which signify riches, honor,
travails, brethren, Parents, wives and children, do so much. For in the same
significations the man shall be happy or unhappy, according as the said Lords
shall be well or evil disposed. And principally you must consider the Lord that
shall reign over your age: for the first Lord of one tryplicity governs the
first age; the second, the midst of the life; the third, the latter year.

Thirdly, you must consider which is the Planet which governs over the year
of your age, that which the Arabians call Fridate.

Fourthly, the Lord of the Sign in which shall come the same year of
perfection.

In the fifth place, the Lord of the circulation, accounting by the Lord of the
hour of the nativity.

Then the Lord of the circulation, accounting by the Lord of the ascendant of
the nativity.

And if in the ascendant of the nativity there be any Planet, you must
likewise make circulation.

Furthermore, you must look if any Planet return to the same sign and house,
in the which it was at the nativity; for then it intends the same effect
which it has signified in the nativity, principally when it returns to the
same sign. You must also have regard to the aspects which are made in the
revolution, if they be like to them of the nativity: for that shall be a renewing
of the effects of the said aspects.

And you must not forget the changing of the places. For if a happy Plannet
be in the revolution in the place where an evil Planet was in the nativity,
the evil signified by the said evil Planet in the nativity, shall be
deferred that year by the presence of the happy Planet. To the contrary, if a
Planet promise any good fortune in the nativity, and in his place in the
revolution be any unfortunate Planet, the same good signified in the nativity,
shall be diminished in the reuolutio^, or lost by reason of the said ill fortune.
The misfortune in the places of misfortune augmenteth the evil, the good
fortunes in the places of good fortune, augmenteth the good fortune.

For to judge of the said considerations, you must have recourse to that which
we have said in the two former Books of general and particular
significations of the Houses, Signs, Planets, aspects, and particular
situations of the Planets in signs and houses: having always before your
eyes, the disposition of stars in the figure of the nativity. For if a
Planet be in the nativity greatly unfortunate, and in the revolution well
disposed, it cannot much profit because of the first infelicity.

Likewise you must judge of those which be fortunate in natiuities, which
being unfortunate in reuolucions, do no great damage. There be some that
contemplate hereupon, many other things, the which by experience I have often
found unprofitable, false, and superfluous.

CHAP. VI. Of the years governed by the Planets, called of the Arabians
Fridarie.
IF the natiuite be by day, then the Sun governs the first ten years,
Venus eight years following, Mercury thirteen years after that: then the
Moon, the nine following. Saturn eleven years, Jupiter twelve, Mars seven,
the head of the Dragon three, the tail of the Dragon two. When it is by night,
you must begin at the Moon, the which governs the first nine years, then
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, the head of the Dragon, and the
tail, the numbers by order as we have said before.

Many by great curiosity, have added to this company other Planets to every
government, the which I find by good reason to be reprehended by the
Chaldeans. For experience has often taught me and other very expert in this
Science, that this subtlety is too curious, vain and superfluous.

The Table of the Fridaries by Day.
Years. Months. Days. 1 5 5 2 10 9 4 3 13 5 8 17 7 2 22 8 6 26 10 0 0 11 1
22 12 3 13 13 5 4 14 6 26 15 8 17 16 10 9 18 0 0 19 10 9 21 8 17 23 6 2 25 5 14
27 3 13 29 1 22 30 0 0 32 3 13 33 6 26 34 10 9 36 1 22 37 5 5 38 8 17 40 0 0 41
6 26 43 1 22 44 8 18 46 3 14 47 10 16 49 5 6 50 0 0 52 8 17 54 5 4 56 1 21 57
10 8 59 6 26 61 1 22 63 0 0 64 0 0 65 0 0 66 0 0 67 0 0 68 0 0 69 0 0 70 0 0 73
0 0 75 0 0

The Table of the Fridaries by Night.
Years. Months. Days. 1 3 13 2 6 26 3 10 9 5 1 22 6 5 5 7 8 18 9 0 0 10 6 26
12 1 22 13 8 18 15 3 14 16 10 9 18 5 6 20 0 0 21 8 17 23 5 4 25 1 21 26 10 8 28
6 25 30 3 13 32 0 0 33 0 0 34 0 0 35 0 0 36 0 0 37 0 0 38 0 0 39 0 0 40 5 50 42
10 10 43 3 15 44 8 20 46 1 25 47 7 0 49 0 0 50 1 2 51 3 13 52 5 6 53 6 26 54 8
20 55 10 8 57 0 0 58 10 9 60 8 17 62 6 26 64 5 4 66 3 13 68 1 21 70 0 0 73 0 0
75 0 0 76 3 13 77 6 26 78 10 9 80 1 22 81 5 5

CHAP. VII. Of profections.
FOR the profections you must resolve the twelve houses of your nativity in
equal parts upon the Eclipse, so far as the ascendant is in the first
degree of any Sign: the second house shall be in the first degree of a sign
following, and the third, in the first degree of a third sign: and to
conclude, that every house begin by the first degree, as the first house.

Also, every house will contain thirty degrees, and the first thirty degrees
of the first house, shall appertain to the first year wherein the infant is
borne; the thirty of the second, to the second year: the thirty of the third
to the third year, and so consequently until twelve. Twelve years passed,
you must begin again at the first, and then come to the second, third, fourth
etc. and so from twelve to twelve you must renew the same circuit.

If you find the revolution within the thirty degrees serving to your year,
it signifies some good or evil, according to his nature or good or evil
disposition, and signification of the place, of which shall be the said
profection; that is to say, of the places of life, sickness, death, or good
health; of the places of goods, riches, loss, or poverty. etc. Commonly they
seek the profection of five places of one nativity, that is to say, of the
place of the Sun for honor; of the place of the Moon for the qualities of
the spyrit, toward the body and external goods; of the place of the part of
Fortune, for gain and profit; of the tenth house for the actions; of the
ascendant for the life.

If the Sun be gyuer of life, it must be considered as gyuer of life and
giver of honor likewise, the which you must do also in other places, when they
import many significations. If then you find any Plannet within the thirty
degrees of your profection, and would know what month or day the accident by
him signified shall happen.

Look what distance you have between the first point of your profection, and
the said Plannet, if there be xv. degrees between them, the said accident
shall happen out in the end of six months: if there be twentie-fiue degrees,
at the end of ten months, for here two degrees and a half, value one
month, one degree valueth twelve days and four houers, thirty min^^es value
six days, five minutes one day.

Of this there is a very exact table among the documents of Peter Pytat upon
the Ephemerides. Example of the profections. Suppose that the ascendant of a
nativity was the fifteen degree of Scorpius, I would know where the
profection shall light of the ascendant at the end of ten years after the
childborne. I account ten signs from the ascendant, after that, I find the
fifteen degree of Virgo serving after ten years, accomplished to xj.
current. I say then that in the said time, the profection of the ascendant is
come in the fifteen degree of Virgo; and shall end that year in the fifteen
degree of Libra: and also shall contain thirty whole degrees, within the which
if any Planet be found, it shall signify good or evil of the life, according
to the nature and disposition as if in the said time.

Mars being to the fifth degree of Libra, I would say that the infant should
be troubled that year at the end of eight months, because that Mars was in
the place profectionall of life, distant from the first point twenty dedrees.
We have showed before that two degrees and a half value one month, five
degrees two months, and fifteen degrees six months, and by course twenty
degrees eight months. You must note, that the profections ought to fit to
the years current or complete. It is to be understood the tenth sign, as for
incontinent after nine years complete, which is ten years current, etc.

CHAP. VIII. The Lords of the circulations from the hours of the Natiuities.
THE Babilonians hold for a great secret, the Circulation of the Lord of the
hour of the nativity? It is to be understood, that the Lord of the said hour
signifies of the life as the ascendant, and the Lord of the hour following,
of goods as of the second house: and the Lord of the third hour of brethren
as the third house, and so consequently of others.

In Reuolutions, they give the Lord of the hour of the nativity to the first
year, the Plannet following to the second, and so consequently following the
natural order of the Planets. As if one were borne in the hour of Venus, that
Planet should reign the first year, the second year, Mercury, the third,
the Moon, the fourth, Saturn, the fifth, Jupiter, the sixth, Mars, the seventh
Sol, the eight, Venus, the ninth, Mercury, and so by order. And you must note,
that we take here the years current, and not complete, for to fit the said
circulation of the Planets.

CHAP. IX. Of the circulation of the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Planets
which are in the Ascendant.
THE circulation of the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Planets and parts which
be in the Ascendant, they be even as we have said of the Lord of the hour of
the nativity, and by the same order you must place them. The years of the age
of the Child, by judgment, we have made mention and proof of Reuolutions.

CHAP. X. Of Eclipses and great conjunctions appertaining to Reuolutions of
Natiuities.
THE Eclipse of the Sun, and the conjunctions of the Superior Planets,
causes commonly many evils, after the congruence of the stars, and nature of
the signs and Plannets reigning in the said places, to men causes
sicknesses, when they be within the five next degrees of the Ascendant, or to
the gyuer of life: if they touch the other parts, Plannets or houses, they
pronounce evil fortune, appertaining to the significations of the same places;
principally, if in the same time of the nativity, any such constellations were
in force. If they touch the places perfectionals, they do almost the same
effect as in natiuities.

CHAP. XI. Of the particular meetings of the whole year.
COncerning the particular meetings of all the year, Ptolomeus, John de
Regiomonte, Ganrique, and many others, do rest hard upon the Profections,
Mensturnes and Diurnes, of the which you have a perfect Table in the Book of
Directions of John de Regiomonte, having more subtlety and curiousnes then
truth, as I have often found by experience. It answers better my opinion
Schonor, which every day considered, if any Planet touch the places of the
Planets, parts and houses, of the nativity or their good or evil aspect, that
I do apply to the places profectionall. As for example, let the ascendant of a
nativity, or the place of his profection be the twelfe degree of Libra, the
Sun in the fifteenth of Gemini, Mars in the fifteenth of Leo: always, and as
often as the Sun or the Moon do pass over the xv. degree of Leo, the man
shall be moved by angry accidents, as of displeasure, of some alteration,
pain of the head, Fever, hot Impostumes, Tetters. etc. Likewise when it
touches the fyft degree of Scorpius, or of Taurus, there where the quadrate
aspects be within the place of Mars, or the fifth of Aquarius, which is the
place opposite to Mars. If any Planet touch the fifth degree of Libra, or of
Gemini (there where the Sextile aspects be) or the fifth of Sagitarius and of
Aries, (which make the Tryne aspects of the said Mars) it shall signify some
favorable meetings of Captains and men of war.

If the ill fortunes touch not the said twelfe degree of Libra, as we have
said in the Ascendant, that shall be sign of some evil meeting, as well to life
as to the body. Likewise you must judge of other attouchments, according to the
nature of the aspects, by us explained in the second Book. You must
contemplate the places profectionals. For I do apply every degree and minute
to the days in the which their signification fall, and regard the good and
evil aspects of the Planets every day, if they touch the degree profectionall.
As for example, of the said nativity in the which was the Ascendant Libra,
suppose that the profection was come to the twelfe degree of Cancer, in the
ninth year complete and the tenth current. The thirteenth degree of Cancer,
serves to the twelfe day after the proper day of the revolution.

Wherefore I consider then the aspects of the Planets toward the said
thirteenth degree. Likewise so I do of other degrees and minutes, fitted to
those days in the which they govern. And so much for Reuolutions.

FINIS.

