Here after ensues two fruytfull Sermons, made and compyled by the right
Reverend father in god John^ Fyssher* Doctor of Dyuynyte and Bishop of
Rochester.



Here begins the first Sermon.
Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra plusquam Sribarum et Phariseorum non
intrabitis in regnum celorum. Mathee. 5.
THese words be written in the Gospel of Matthew, spoken by our savior Christ.
which be thus much to say in Englyssh. Oneles your ryghtwyse life be more
habundaunt than was the living of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heuyn.

what the lives and Justyce of the Pharysees was, and what our Justyce that be
christen men ought to be, I intend to speak of at some other layser. Now for
this day, because it is the feast of all Saints, it is conuenyent somewhat to
speak of the soueraygne Joys and pleasures which be above in the kyngedome of
heuyn / where these blessed Saints be present now with our savior Christ. And
for asmoche also as many blessed souls which are ordained to come thither into
the same kyngedome, be let and tarried by the way in the greuouse pains of
Purgatory (of whom the church as to morrow makes special remembrance: we
shall also by the grace of god somewhat speak of tho greuouse pains which be
there. Thyrdly as concerning our own souls, which as yet be abiding in this
world: we may by the remembrance of both those two places, somewhat quycken
and styre them so to live here, that after our departure hence we be not
arested by the way, and so cast into the prison of Purgatory, but straight to
be receyuyd into that most gloryouse place and kingdom of Heuyn, wthouten any
great delays.

These three things by the leave and grace of almighty god I intend to speak of
by order / but first of all we shall call for grace and say a Pater noster.

NIsi abundauerit iustitia vestra plusquam scribarum et Phariseorum non
intrabitis in regnum celorum. Mathei. 5. First than we shall endeavor our self
somewhat to speak of the marvelous Joye and pleasure which now the blessed
saints have above in the kingdom of heaven / which is so great that no tongue
can tell or express, nor heart can think the same. That Joy, that pleasure,
that conforte, passes all other / not only such as can be spoken of man, but
also such as any man can think or deuyse in his heart of this matter. Oculus
non vidit, nec auris audiuit, neque in cor hominis ascend it, que preparauit
deus diligentibus se. Neither the iye of man has seen the like, nor the ere of
man has herd the like, nor the heart has thought the like. Duriyen has seen
many pleasures, many gay sightes, many wonderful things that has appeared and
seemed unto us Joyous and confortable. But yet all these were but countrefeytes
of the true Joys / all these were but dull and dark images of the perfyte
confort which the blessed saints have now above in the kingdom of heuyn. I
doubt not but ye have herd of many goodly syghtes which were showed of late
beyond the sea, with much Joy and pleasure worldly. was it not a great thing
within so short a space, to se three great Princes of this world? I mean the
Emperor, and the king our master, and the French king. And each of these
three in so great honor, she wyng their ryalty, she wyng their richesse, she
wyng their power / with each of their noblesse appointed and apparellyd in
rich clothes, in sylkes, veluettes, clothes of gold, and such other
precyouse araymentes. To se three right excellent Queen's at ones togider, and of
three great realms. That one, the noble Queen our mastresse, the very exampler
of virtue and nobleness to all women. And the French Queen. And the third
Queen Mary, sometime wife unto Lowys French king, sister to our souereygne
lord, a right excellent and fair Lady. And every of them acco^panyed with so
many other fair ladies in sumptuouse and gorgeouse apparel / such
daunsynges, such armonyes, such dalyaunce, and so many pleasant pastymes, so
curyouse howses and buyldynges, so precyously apparayled, such costely welfare
of dyners, souppers, and bankettys, so delycate wynes, so precyouse meatys,
such and so many noble men of arms, so rich and goodly tentys, such
Justynges, such tourneys, and such feats of war. These assuredly were
wonderful syghtes as for this world / and as much as has been read of in
many years done, or in any Chronicles or Hystoryes here tofore written, and as
great as men's wits and studyes could deuyse and ymagyn for that season.
Nevertheless, these great syghtes have a far dyfference from the Joys of
heuyn / and that in five points.

First, the Joys and pleasures of this life, be they never so great, yet they
have a werynesse and a fastydyousenes with them adjoined, whereby men at length
of time be weary of them, as thus. There is no meat nor drink so delycate, so
pleasant, so delectable, but if a man or a woman be long accustomed therewith,
he shall have at the length a lothsomnes thereof. Take the most delycate and
pleasant fysshe or flesh that thine heart stands unto, and use it
customably and none other, and thou shalt be full soon weary thereof. And in
like manner it was of those goodly syghtes which were had and done beyond the sea. I say not the contrary but they were very pleasant syghtes. But yet
doubtless many were full weary of them at length, and had a lothsomnes and a
fastydyousnes of them, and some of them had much lever have been at home. And
verily in such a condycyon are and shall be the pleasures of this world. For
the which king Salamon the which past all other kings of Israhell that
reigned before him / gyuynge his heart and study to follow all manner of
pleasure, finally said that all pleasure, all mirth, and all Joye worldly, was
but only Vanitas, labor, et afflictio spiritus. That is to say, vanytye,
werynesse, and dyspleasure. And such a king that had tastyd so many
pleasures, and of the most exquysyte, and had such a great wysdom to deserve
them did thus say: we may well be assured that there is no pleasure of this
world so perfyte, but that finally it has a werynesse, a fastydyousnes, and a
very displeasure adjoined thereunto.

But contrary wise it is of the Joys of heuyn / for they be pure, clean, and
parfyte withouten any admyxture of dyspleasure or werynesse. The Joys of heuyn
never shall make one weary. They have in them no lothesomnes, no fastydyousnes,
ne no werynesse, at all / but ever they be lusty, ever new and new, ever
alyke fresshe, and never does wydder. For the which saint Peter calls it (
Immarcessibilem) The pleasure of heuyn wydderyth not nor corruptyth not for any
long time. And therefore the Prophet Dauyd spekyng of the Joys of that
kingdom, says ( Melior est dies vna in atriis tuis super milia). Better is one
day within thine entresse, than many thousands else where. This is than one
great difference of the Joys of heuyn fro the Joys of this world.

THe second dyffere^ce is this. The joys of this world have adjoined with
the^ many dredes. we be certain that ones we must forgoo these pleasures here,
we know it well, and therefore we can not but always dread to forgo and lose
them. And the more dear they be unto us, and the deplyer we set our hertes
upon them, the more we shall dread to forgo the^. A little sykenes, a little
trouble, a nigh lykelyhood of death, dysapoynteth all these pleasures. we must
needs therefore dread and fere sikenes, fear trouble, and fere the sodeyne
coming of death, and fere every thing that may let or break our pleasures.
And verily of such pleasures aryseth their own dystruccyon at the end / the
which did right well appear in the pleasant syghtes whereof I spoke before.
For by the reason of them, great money was spent, many great men's coffers
were emptyed / and many were brought to a great ebb and poverty. This ebb
caused a greater flow of Couytyse afterward in many men's hearts. Sumof them
were the syker and the weker in their bodies, and diverse took their death
thereby. Sum by reason of their sumptuouse apparelment, lernyd so great pride,
yt hitherto they could not shyfte it fro them. Never was seen in England such
excess of apparelment before, as has been used ever syns. And thereof also
must needs arise much heart brennynge and secret envy amongst many for the
apparel. They which had the leest, did envy the other which had rycher
apparel than they had or might reche unto. Thus, many for these pleasures were
the worse, both in their bodies and in their souls. But the pleasures of
heuyn be after another manner. No man is enpayred by them. There is no dred of
poverty / there is no gredynesse of Couytyse / there is no wekenes of any manner
of sykenesse, nor fear of any manner of death. There is no pride nor envy, nor
desire of honor / but charity, concord, peace, tranquylyte, and perfyte rest
/ and every person Joyeth as well of his neighbors furtheraunce as of his
own / as glad of his neighbors wealth as of his own. Oh, what Joyful place
is this? Oh, how confortable it were to dwell in this kyngedome?. For these be
the things which we all desire / we fly pouertye, and we would have richesse
/ and there is plenty. Gloria et diuitie in domo eius. we fly sykenes and
death, and would have contynuaunce of health. Here we get it not / there we may
have it. Mors vltra non erit. After that we be entered thither, we shall no more
feel death, nor any cause or occasyon thereof / we fly trouble and busynes, and
would have rest / which can not be gotten nor had here. There we may be sure to
have it / and therefore it is called ( Eterna reqies) everlasting rest. And
saint Paul says ( Festinemus ingredi in requie^ illam). Let us make speed to
enter into that rest / for as it is written in the Apocalipsis ( Neque luctus,
neque clamor, neque dolor erit vltra). There shall never be mourning, or
complaynyng of any manner of sorrow. For these causes the Joys of heaven
incomperably passes all the Joys that can be devised in this wretchyd world,
or conceived by mortal men's wits.

THe third dyfference is, that the pleasures whereof I spoke, had many
interrupcyons. For that little while that we were there, sometime there was
such dust, and therewithal so great wyndes, that all the air was full of
dust. The gowns of velvet, and clothe of gold were full of dust / the rich
trappers of horses were full of dust / hattes, cappes, gowns, were full of
dust / the here and faces of men were full of dust / and briefly to speak,
horse and man were so encombred with dust, that scantly one might se another.
The wyndes blewe down many tents / shakyd sore the houses that were builded
for pleasure, and let diverse of them to be builded. Sometime again we had
raynes and thunders so vnmeasurably that no man might styre forth to to se no
pleasures. Sometime when men would longer have dysportyd them at the Justes, came
the night and darkness upon them, and interruptyd their pleasure. In Heuyn is
no such interrupcyons. There is no dust nor droughtes / there is no raynes nor
no wetes / there is no blastes nor storms of wyndes / there is no thunder ne
tempests. There is no night nor darkness, but a contynuall day, a contynuall
temperau^ce, a clear air without mystes and clouds. wherefore the Joys of
that place be never interrupted, abated, nor mynyshed in any point.

THe fourth, the pleasures aforsayd were sone done / they did not abide / where
be all tho pleasures now? they were but shadows, and like shadows they be
past, like shadows they be slyd away, like shadows they be now vanysshed away
from us. Ye se sometime a cloud that is alofte in the air between the son
and the ground, make a shadow vpo^ye ground and tarieth not but slydeth away,
and even so slydeth away ye pleasures of this life. But the pleasures of Heuyn
contynually abide. They pass not, they slide not, they vanyssh not away, they
never less, but rather e^crease / they never enpayre ne dye, but wax better
and fressher. Therefore the Prophet Dauyd said ( Cu^cupiscit et deficit ai^a
mea i^ atria dn^i). My soul couetith and faiteth for desire to be within the
house of my Lord /. that is to say, within the kingdom of heuyn.

THe fyft and last difference is, yt all the glorious syghtes worldly yt can be
devised of men, be but cou^trefeytes in co^paryson of the Joys above in heuyn.
All the glory which is showed i this world and of worldly princes, be borrowed
of other creatures / it is not their own natural glory. First the cloth that
they were. it comes only of the poor shepes backs. The fine and costely
furs, from other unreasonable beestes. The sylkes wherewith they cover their
bodies, were taken of the intrales of worms. The fresshe colors both of
clothe and sylke, be made by the craft of diynge, and by the myxture of diverse
things taken of right vile creatures. The gold which by craft is turned
into their garments / what is it else but earth?. The precious stones likewise,
be gadered, some out of beestes, some out of fysshes, some out of the sea, some
out of the earth. In these things stand all the glorious sight of man / and
this is not his own natural glory which he has by nature / yet for sin,
remains in us the wound of shame, that we dare not show our own natural
glory, but cover it with a borrowed glory, taken and begged of other creatures /
which is not natural unto us, but may be laid aside and removed when so ever
we list. And when this apparel is removed fro us, where is than our glory?
Take away the glysteryng garments, take away the cloth of gold, take away the
precyouse stones, and the other richesse of apparel, and what dyfference is
betwyxt an Emperor and another poor man? Take from the ladies their gaye
clothes, cheynes, and other Juels / and what dyfference of them as concerning
this outward glory, and of a pore woman?. The Acts of the Apostels tellyth of
King Herod, that he in rich apparel showed him self upon a time unto the
people / and they for his glysteryng apparel and goodly ornacyon, magnyfyed
and praised him soueraynly, as though he had be^ a god / but because he
referred not that honor due unto god, but took it unto him self, almighty god
forthwith stroke him with a soore sykenesse, whereupon he dyed / and so dyenge,
he said ( En ego deus vester morior). Loo said he, I your god must dye. Kings
and Emperors, all be but men, all be but mortal. All the gold and all the
precyouse stones of this world, can not make them but mortal men. All the
rich apparel that can be devised, can not take from them the condycyon of
mortalyty. They be in them self but earth and ashes, and to earth they must
return / and all their glory well considered and beholde^ with ryghtiyen, is
but very miserable. But the glorious apparel of the blessed angels and of the
blessed saints, is not after this manner / for their glory is so annexed and so
adjoined unto the^, and it is so fastened unto their substance, that it can
not be taken away / they neuerley it aparte / they never put it of / nor they
need not / for it never fades nor widereth / nor may in no wise enpayre. It is
the garment of glorious immortalytye, more bright than the son. In the which
also shall be clad all the bodies of them that shall be sauyd. O what marvelous
Joy shall it be to se that glorious sight of that court, where the leest grome
is clad so rychely above all the Kings and Princes of this world / and than
to se so great a multitude of them, to se so many orders of angels, and in
every order such innumerable companyes / not a seven or eight thousands, but
many hundred thousands, ye many thousands thousands. And than to se so many
diverse orders of other blessed saints, Patryarkes, Prophets, Apostels,
Martyrs, Confessors, vyrgyns, wydowes, and such as have trewly kept their
bond of matrymony. To se there our special friends and acquayntaunce which we
had here before in this life / to se the other saints which we did choose for
our aduowrers and patrons here in earth, and whom specially we did worship in
this world. To se our own good angels that were our guyders in this life.
Specially to se the gloryouse vyrgyn Mary, the mother of Christ, and the Queen
of that most gloryouse kyngedome. But above all other things to se that
glory, that worthynesse, that excellency of that gloryouse Trynytyte, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The father, which is the father of all
mercyes, and his most blessed son our savior Christ Jesu, and the holy
spyryte, which is the fountain of all graces.

These three, though they be three diverse persons, yet they be but one god
perfytely knyt to gyder in a perfyte amytye, in one love, in one will, in one
wysdo^, in one power inseperably. Tho three Princes of whom we spoke of before,
were not so / but they had diverse wylles, diverse councels, and no perdurable
amyty, as after that did well appear. These Princes were mortal and mutable,
and so their wylles did change and not abide. But in the glorious Trynyty*
among tho three most excellent persons has be^, is, and ever shall be, a very
stabylnes, a sure co^corde, and perfyte / and their realm and governance ever
perdurable. wherefore in their kingdom be the glorious sightes yt make a man
blessed to behold the^. And all the other syghtes worldly, be but as
cou^trefeyt images in comparison of these, as ye would say mydsomer games,
Chrystmas games and plays. In these syghtes is the very true Joye, the most
blessed and excellent glory that never shall have end. Thus much than we have
spoken as concerning the kingdom of heuyn / whereby ye may co^ceyue some little
glymyryng of the joys and pleasures yt the blessed saints being delyueryd
from the myseryes of this world, be now most ple^tyously refreshed with.

SEcondly, I said yt I would also speak of the other blessed souls which
likewise be departed out of this miserable world / but they for their dettes
lie now deteyned in the prison of Purgatory, and let, as it were to com unto
the presence of the gloryouse Trynytye, and to be made parteners of the Joys
and pleasures inestymable of that most noble kingdom. And therefore our mother
holy church as this night and tomorow, remembrynge their grievous pains makes
special intercessyon unto almighty god for their delyueraunce out of that
paynfull place. And truly many consyderacyons should move us effectually to
remember them / but in especyall five.

First, the nighnes which they have to us and we to the^ by manyfold bo^des /
we have all one father, almighty god, the which made us and them after the
lykenes and image of himself. They be his reasonable creatures and children as
we be, and our spyrytuall brethren in him. He has prouysyon and cure of
them, like as he has of us / for them our Savior Christ Jesu shed his most
precious blood upon the cross, like as he did for us. They be of the same
faith, hope, and charity, that we be of. They have been made parteners of the
same sacraments. Wherefore when there is so great a lykenes between us and
them, and in so many qualyties, this should move and styre us greatly to have
some tender compassyon upon them. we may se the unreasonable creatures how soon
they be moved to have ruthe, pytie, and compassyon of their rese^blaunce, of
such as be like unto them in nature only. The hog, which is but a very
churlysshe be, yet when one of their kind cries, all the resydew nygh
there about, gader to the relief of the same. when one Sparow or other bird is
taken in a gylder or with a lyme twygge / all the other nere about gadereth
about her to save and socour her life. And if this the unreasonable beestes and
fowls do, for the lykenes only of nature and kind: how much rather should
we (being reasonable creatures) be moved to have pytye, and styred to take
compassyon of the blessed souls / which not only be like us in nature, but
also by so many spyrytualll bonds be Joined unto us. This is the first
consyderacyon.

THe second consideracyon, and that which peradventure ye will the more
regard, is this. Every one of us has some of his friends and kynsfolke there /
either father or mother / sister or brother, neuew or nece, or some of his nygh
acquayntaunce. There is non here, but he has there sum of his kynrede, or some
of his alyaunce, or some of his friends to whom he had in this world here
tofore some favor and frendeshyp. And when is this frendeshyp most to be
showed, but when his friend is in great dystresse? for than has he most need
of his help / and specially when he is in that condycyon that he can not help
himself. Now doubtless they be so, as I shall show unto you hereafter. Now
therefore if our frendeshyp be a true frendshyp and not feigned nor simulate (as
god knows much semblyd frendshyp reigns now in this world) now let us do
like fre^des, now let us study to releue them by our prayers and almose deeds /
now let us be loving unto them as we pretentyd love before unto them whiles
they were conuersaunt with us in this world here. For as scripture says. Omni
tempore diligit qui amicus est. Not only for the time of prosperyte (as many
do now adays) but also for the time of aduersyte. They that only for the time
of prosperytye show their frendeshyp, they be like unto the Swalowes / which
all the time of Somer abide with men / but as soon as any blast of winter or of
cold wedder does appear, they shrynke away and prately convey them self, and
leave the other to suffer the storms. In like manner does this feigned frendshyp
/ so long as any man has prosperytye and possessyon of goods, honors, and
pleasures in this life, so long they be his friend. But when the storms of
aduersytye begin to blow, they shrynke and convey themself away quyckly. For
as much than as unto many of them that be now in Purgatory, we did pretend
favor and amyty, either by the reason of kyndred, or of alyaunce, or else by
some other famylyar acquayntaunce of the same: let us now be glad in this time
of their suffraunce and trouble, to socour them with our prayers. And this is
the second consyderacyon.

THe third consyderacyo^ is their necessyte. They be now in that condicyon
that they can not help them self. They be the prisoners of almighty god, and
lie there in prison for their dettes. Great is the pains that they there
endure. First they have no pleasures of this life for to conforte them
withal, nor any resort of such as were their friends here. It is a great
refresshynge when a man or a woman is in sykenesse or trouble or any pain,
that may have some refresshyng though it be but right little / and that their
friends will vysyt them and offer some kyndenes unto them. But they want both
these two confortes / for no friend of theyrs in this world can resort unto
them for their conforte / nor yet any worldly refresshynge can be mynystred
unto them.

Furthermore they be deferryd from the pleasures of that other world / they be
delayed from the Joys of heuyn and fro the gloryouse company and from the
blessed sight of their father. And so long they shall be delayed and kept
therfro, till time they have paid the uttermost ferthyng of their dettys. Donec
reddideris nouissimum quadrante^. Oh, this is no little pain to them that be in
the state of grace, and know that they shall come unto the kingdom of heuyn,
and have such a longyng desire to be there, and is thus delayed for lack of
help. Spes que differtur animam. Hope, when it is delayed it tourmentyth a
soul / and specially this hope of so great a matter and so certainly believed.
Beside this, the sencyble pains that they feel, is greuouse. Saint Austyn
says in a sermon. Ille purgatorius ignis durior erit, quam quicquid potest in
hoc seculum penarum videri, sentiri, aut cogitari. That is to say, the fire of
Purgatory is more greuouse than any manner of pain that can be seen in this
world, or felt, or yet thought. Oh, we se many pains in this world, and we
feel many / and yet our thought may deuyse many moo. It is a great pain of the
hedache / it is a great pain of the tothe ache / it is a great pain of the
gowte. It is a great and dolorouse pain of the stone, colycke, and strangury /
who may know or think his friend to be in any of these pains and be not sorry
for them, nor take any compassion upon him, or have will to releue and help
him if he might so do.

when than the pains of Purgatory be many times much more greuouse than any
of these that I have rehercyd, or that ever were felt or thought in this world
here tofore: we should the rather in this their great necessite be ready for to
help the^ after our power. For doubt less the pains of that place (as saint
Austyn says) be so great, that one day there, seems to be a thousand years
for pain. And as many Doctors hold oppynyon, the pains of Purgatory have no
dyuersyte in greuousnes (save only they be not everlasting and perpetual) but
as the pains of Hell be.

THe fourth consyderacyon is, that they cry unto us for help / they cry
pytyously, they cry lamentably, they cry myserably, Miseremini mei miseremini
mei saltem vos amici mei. Each of them says unto us, friends have pytye upon
me, have pytye upon me. Oh merciful lord, if our eres might here that
sorrowful, pyteous, and lamentable cry of so ma ny persons endurynge so
grievous pains, It would meue us to pytye if any pytye were lodged in our
breasts. But though we here it not, we must nevertheless think that troth it
is yt the holy doctors have assured us of by their holy doctrynes. There the
faders that have sore labored and swet for their good which they left unto
their children, cry now for help upon them. There the husbands that has
left unto their wynes their substance, and put them in trust to do for them,
now cry upon them for socour. There the wives which in this life did bear true
love and faith unto their husbands, now cry upon them for relyef. There
every person as they loved and showed frendeshyp and kyndnes in this world,
now look for kyndnes and frendeshyp again, and cries unto their friends for
conforte, and says ( Miseremini mei miseremini mei saltem vos amici mei). Oh
if the children being alive might here their fathers cry in tho grievous
pains, and the fathers the children in likewise / and the husbands being
alive might here their wives / and the wives again their husbands / and so
every friend that now is living might here his friends co^playnt in tho fell
and bitter pains: I suppose his heart would somewhat erne, or else he should be
very hard and cruel both, if he would not thereby be moved to some pytye. For
as I said, the pains there be wonderful great / and the bles syd souls lie
there only for the payeng of their dettes / wherein we might ease them either
with procuryng of masses to be said for the^, or prayers of devout persons / or
fastings / and wylfull pains sufferynge of our own bodies / or doing of
almose and charytable deeds. Of the which because I have spoken unto you in
other years past, I shall not need now to reherce the same again.

THe fyfte consyderacyon is, for that our own profit and our own wealth han
geth thereby. who that will have mercy of god must show mercy first into other,
if thou wylt that almighty god shall have pytye on the / begin thou and have
pity of other which have need and be in that necessytye / and than almighty god
will have pytye upon the. Our savior christ says in the Gospel. Eadem
mensura qua mensi fueritis remecietur vobis. In like measure as ye have pytyed
other, so shall pyty be measured unto you. Show your charity upon these
prisoners of god / take some pytye and compassyon upon them / study to releue
them in their necessytye by your prayers or other good works / and than
almighty god shall have pytye of you again / and else it shall be said unto
every of us that will have no pyty, that that is written in a parable. Serve
neque nonne oportuit te misereri conserui tui, sicut et ego tui misertus sum.

Secondly you shall be rewarded of these blessed souls for whom thou prayest.
For wha^ they shall be delyueryd out of that paynfull prison and set above in
the kingdom of heuyn, they shall there again be as myndefull of the, and a
mean for thy delyuerau^ce, either fro the lust of sin in this present life,
or else from Purgatory, if peraduc^ture thou shall com thither. Scripture tellyth
that Joseph was benefycyall to one being Sargeant of the Celler to king Pharo
/ and the said Sergeant and he were in pryso^ / and as it chanced after the
sergeant was delivered and restored unto his office again / and he so
delivered, would not forget the gentylnes of Joseph, but was so myndefull of
him, that by his wisdom he gate him also delivered out of prison.

Do thou likewise / be thou now benefycyall unto these blessed souls in this
time of their most need, whiles they be in this prison of Purgatory, and they
in the same wise shall be benyfycyall again to releue the when thou shall
peradventure be there.

THyrdly thou shall hereby do a great ple asure unto their good angels that be
appointed there to give their attendau^ce upon these blessed souls in
Purgatory. For these good angels never leave them yt shall be sauyd from the
first hour of their birth into this world, till they bring them before the
face of almygh ty god above in heuyn. Therefore wha^ these sou les be delivered
out of that prison, it is to their angels a great Joy and conforte. And so by
the same benefyte which you do exhybyt unto any blessed soul there, thou
byndest his good angel to have the, the rather in remembrance, and like wise
to pray for the at thy necessyte.

Now wha^ we have spoken, first of the joys that the gloryouse and holy
saints have above in the kingdom of heuyn, that we may Joy with them in this
feestfull day, and secondly of the souls being in the miserable prison of
Purgatory, which so desyrously look after ye confort of our prayers: let us not
forget our own souls as yet living in this wretchyd world, but speak also
somewhat concerning the profit of them.

The remembrance of these two places should greatly move and styre our hearts
and minds / that one to withdraw our appetytes from this world, whereby we
daily gather the dust at the leest of venyall sins, and to make us to couyte
and desire that joyful kingdom of heuyn, where is all conforte and pleasure.
That other, should quycken us to live so for this little while that we have to
abide i this world that we be not tarried nor arested by the way, and so
peradventure cast into that ferefull prison of Purgafory, till time we have
paid every ferthynge of our dettys / which hang as yet upon our hedes for our
sins past.

First here I say that the remembrance of the Joys of Heuyn, should greatly
styre us to forsake the false pleasures of this life, and to desire to be there
where be the very sure abiding pleasures. which of us would not gladly be in
that place where is never werynesse, nor lothsomnesse, ne fastydyousnes / where
there is no pouertye, no sykenes, no fear of death, no manner of trouble, no
envy, no malice, no hatred, no pride, no couertise, but true peace and perfyte
rest. where there is no intertupcyon of pleasures, neither by hetes nor coldes,
neither by dustes ne by raynes, neither by wyndes ne by tempeslys, neither by
night ne by darkness / but ever a fair bright clear air, ever a still goodly
calm, ever a sweet pleasant attemperaunce. where the pleasures vanysshe not
away as do the shadows, the smokes, the blases, the dremes, and other
fantasyes / but ever still abide a like fresshe, a like new, a like confortable
/ where be no countrefeyt ymagys or dysguysynge for a time: but the very
things, the true joys, the sure pleasures, the very glory that ever shall
endure and never shall end. where we shall se face to face, not him that is a
king but for a few years, and upon a Realm that is subject unto many
myseryes: But him that is the king of all kings, the lord of all realms,
the Emperor of heuyn and of earth, the governor of all the world.

Halas, what mean we? Oh miserable dullness of our hearts? Christian men, what
do we? what think we?. Oh hearts so sore congelyd in the frosty cold of
sin, that can not warm nor delight in the remembrance of these most
comfortable Joys. Oh Jesus, we can take pains, we can take labors to get the
transytory pleasures of this life, which we be not sure to keep the space of
half an hour / and tho Joys and pleasures that be so excellent and that ever
shall endure and abide, and that also which with much less pains and labors
might be gotten, we nothing study for to get.

Halas, what cursed blyndenes is this? how be men thus deceived, ye thus
wretchyd, thus inchaunted and charmed with subtle crafts of the devil, that
they clean forget their own most welthe, which they might attain unto with
much less labor and pain than they now take?. And yet they weary them self,
toylynge and labourynge with much care, trouble, and study for the wretchyd
pleasures and vanytes of this transytory world, that not only will not abide
with them, but also led them to everlasting werynesse and to perpetual
travail and labor in the most extreme pains of hell, which ever shall
endure.

SEcondly, the remembrance of Purgatory should make us so to live here, that
when we depart hence, we be not tarried by the way and be arested for our
dettes, and so be cast into that paynfull prison / from the which, no man
shall be delyueryd, till time he have paid the uttermost ferthynge.

Mark well what Saint Austyn says of this fire / that it is more greuouse
than any pains that thou can se, feel, or think in this world / whereby thou
may be sure that it far passes the common fire that we have here in this
world.

Take than a proof of this fire whether thou may endure to suffer thy finger
in it by the space of half an hour. Consider whether thou may endure that
pain ye or nay. And if thou may not endure that pain which is a thousand
parts less. what vnwysdome is it for the to Jeoparde thy soul unto the fire
of Pur gatorye, where thou can not tell how many hours, how many days, how
many years thou shalt there abide.

Do therefore as did a right good father an holy man / when he was tempted to
sin, and was almost overcome by temptacyon, he said unto him self, let me
first prove and assay when there I may endure the pain that is ordained for
sin, before that I do take any pleasure or the same. And forthwith into the
fire that was before him, he put in his finger. But when the pain of brennyng
waxed so great yt he might no longer suffer his finger in fire, he cried / say
eng. It is a great madness to take that pleasure yt needs must have so grievous
pain following. This gracious man used a synguler wysdom. If we shall do well,
we must do in like manner / we must follow the same wisdom. Before we enter
into sin, let us first assay how painful that fire is. And than I suppose we
shall deuyse and study with our self how that we may escape the fire of
Purgatory.

THyrdly for a conclusyon of my tale, I would advise every christen man and
woman that has begone a new gracious life in christ, to reken with them
self as though their own souls were now in that same grievous prison of
Purgatory / and that they must lie there for the satiffaccyon of their sin
till time every parcel of their dettys be fully contendyd and declared, how
long that shall be no man can tell.

Saint Bernarde, which was a man of great and synguler holiness, says in a
sermon, that if after this life he might be delivered fro the pry son of
Purgatory at any time before the dreadful day of Jugement: he would reken that
he were well and mercyfully dealt withal. And if this synguler holy man thought
within him self thus long for to abide in Purgatory: what shall become of
us, whose lives be far from the great holiness of this man? Let us than study
to deliver our pore souls from that paynfull prison by prayers and good works
while we live here. Do this christian man thy self, while thou have space for
thyn own soul, and trust non other with the doing thereof after thy death. Be
now thine own friend in this urgent and necessary cause. Thou ought most
specially to do for thy self. Thou should do this most effectually / and thou
may do the same most merytoryously.

First I say thou ought to do this most specially for thine own soul. Thine
own soul under god should be most dear unto the. Our savior Christ says in
the Gospel. ( Quid proderit homini si vniuersu^ mundu^ lucretur, ai^e vero sue
detrimentum pacietur. Aut qua^ commutationem dabit homo pro anima sua?. what
shall it profit any man to win all this world* and for the same to suffer an
harm in his own soul?. Or what thing has a man more precyouse or
acceptable for to give for the recouerynge of his soul again, when it is in
peril, than is it self?. By this than every man may learn how dear his own
soul ought to be unto him self. So dear was every of our souls unto our
savior Jesu Christ, that he for the wealth and salvation of them, did shede
all the precyouse blood of his most noble and blessed body. And for this cause
doubtless our souls ought to be much more dear unto every one of us / that
is to say because they be so dear and precyouse in the eres of our savior
Jesu Christ. For this derenesse, every one of us should endeavor him self more
largely to deliver his soul from this paynfull prison. Oh christen man for thy
works, for this wretchyd pleasures taking, and for thine offenses, thy bear
soul must suffer tho greuouse pains. Thou art the cause of suffraunce / and
therefore of right thou ought most specially to labor for this delyueraunce.

SEcondly I say you sholdest do this most effectually. Supposest thou that any
friend of thine will do this more studyously and more effectually after thy
departure hence, than thou thine own self will do?. If thou do so thynk I
fere me that thou shall be sore beceyued / and that for two reasons especyall.

The first is this. If thou to whom thine own soul ought to have been most
dear (as I have said) forget the wealth thereof and made it to follow thy vain
desires, and take no care ne study for this present time here for the
delyuerau^ce of the same out of Purgatory, what marvel is it if other do
forget the same after thy death. For how may thou think that any other shall
be more dylygent for thy soul than thou thy self was? Thy soul can not be
more dear to any other, than it was unto thy self. And therefore if thou be
thus neglygent thereof, think not that any other shall be more dylyge^t than thy
self was for thine own soul.

The second reason is this. Thou may right well and easily perceive that
other of thy friends have souls of their own which of right must be more
dear unto them than is thy soul / and that of their own souls they must be
more myndefull than of thy soul / or else they be right unwise.

Forthermore thou may consider that every man has enough to do to satysfy
for his own sins. And therefore as our savior tellyth in a parable. when the
five folyssh vyrgyns would have borrowed some oil of ye other five vyrgyns for
their lamps against the coming of their great spouse. The five wise vyrgyns
a^swered, and bad them provide some where else, Ne forte nonsufficiat nobis et
vobis. That is to say, leest peradventure it can not suffyse both for you and
for us. Every man's good works there shall be little enough for his own soul
/ and therefore thy friend shall have enough to do to provide for him self.

THyrdly I say that any man may more merytoryousty help and comfort his own
soul when that he is here living, than any other friend of his after his
death. For now is the time of merytynge. And after this life when the nyghnes
of death is come, thou can meryt no more. And therefore our savior says (
Veniet ante^ nox qua^do nemo potest operari). when death is comen ones, farewell
the time of merytoryouse workynge.

I will not say the contrary but thy friends prayers after thy death may much
profit the: Nevertheless I say that thine own prayers as devoutly said for
thy self here in this life, should have profyted unto the much more. For as
all the dysputers agree, the highest degree of fruit in every man's prayer
retourneth unto him self. And it is but a secondary fruit that retourneth into
other.

Now therefore christen man whiles thou art in this life, and while thou haste
time and space. Study to make amends for thy sins. Study to store thy soul
by true contrycyon and sorrow for thy sins. Study here for to wasshe the same
often with the gracious water of tears. Study to cleanse thy soul with often
renewynge of thy confession. Study here by thy good and gracious works to pay
thine own dettys before thy departure hence. Study to keep the commandments
of god* without the which thou can not enter into the kingdom of heuyn. Be
now ready to forgive al iniuryes and wrongs done unto the, that there by
almighty god may the rather forgive the such trespasses or iniuryes as thou
haste before time committed unto him. Pray for thy self fast. For thy self
give alms. For thy self pray, and procure other to pray for the like wise.
Better is now one penny spent for the wealth and salvation of thy soul when thou
may keep it unto thy self, than a thousand after thy death when thou may
no longer have the use the use thereof. Do thus, and by the grace of god thou
shall eschew that paynefull prison. Do thus* and thy soul shall be clensyd and
stored against thy departure out of this world, that thou shall without any
long delays or taryenge by the way, be received into the Joyous kingdom /
where thou shall se the gloryouse syghtes of that most wonderful country, and
be made partyner of the most excellent Joys and pleasures which there every
where does abound, and ever shall endure / to the which he bring us that for
us all dyed upon the cross, our savior. Christ Jhesu. Am^.

Finis.
Thus ends the first Sermon, and here after follows the second.
Here begins the second sermon.
Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra plus quam Scribarum et Phariseorum, non
intrabi it is in regnum celorum. Math. 5.
I Did remember unto you in my first Sermon this other day, somewhat of the
Joys that be above in the kingdom of heuyn. And to that intent I labored to
bring into your minds an image of that glorious court, by a comparyson of
the plesures that we have seen in this life here. I than declared unto you that
the pleasures of this life, be they never so great: they have five manner of
dyuersytees from ye pleasures of heuyn. First, the joys of this world, have
at length a werynesse. The Joys of heaven never have werynesse / but a. M.
years is there but one day. Secondly, the Joys of this life, have fears
adjoined unto the^ / either of sykenesse, of death, or of trouble. In heaven is
no fere of any of these. Thyrdly, the Joys of this world, have many
interrupcyons / by hetes and coldes, by storms, by tempests, by night, and
darkness, by sleep, and dulnes. In heaven is no interrupcyon at all / but a pure
contynuall Joy without any myxture of dyspleasure. Fourthly, the joys of this
world vanysshe away like the smoke, and abides not / the joys of heuyn shall
never pass. Fyftly the Joys of this world, be like myd somer games / and
Chrystmas games / or plays. The Court of king Edward, the Court of king
Richard, and the court of the king that now is ded / where be they now? all
they were but counterfeyt images and dysguysynge for a time / it was but a
play for a time. But the court of heuyn is always stable in one point / where
the officers change never. There is the true nobleness, the sure honor, the
very glory. This glory, this honor, this noblenes, we shall never se, we shall
never come unto it, oneles our life be more ryghtwyse than was the lives of the
Jews. A sore word, a sore threte, never theles it is true. These be not my
words, these be not my thretes, I wrote not these words in the Gospels. The
holy Evangelist wrote them, our savior Christ Jesu spoke them / they be his
words that can not lie / they be his words that may perform them.

Oh christian soul, mark well these words, ponder them, wey them / think
what it is to be excludyd from that place of all pleasure, and to be thrown
into the most horrible dongeon of hell, from the which thou shall never be
delivered. This life is short, and the Joys of this life be but as dremes and
fantasyes.

They be like to the pleasures that a poor man has in his dreme / when he
dremeth that he has gotten a fair wife and innumerable good with her, he
thinks him self cladde in precyouse garments, and that he does handell the
gold and silver and the goodly plate / some of silver, some of gold / he sees
houses, gardeyns, feldes of his own, and has many pleasures. But when he
does awake out of his dreme, and fyndeth none of all these things, he is a
sorry man. Such dremes many men have had before this.

Francys Petrarke wrytyth him self that he had such a dreme / and that he had
found a great heavy hurde full of gold / and he had great sorrow and care for
the conueyaunce of the same / but as soon as he awaked out his sleep, his
treasour was gone. So long as such a dreme lastyth, who is more ioyouse than
such a man is, in his own oppinyon? who is more joyous than he is in his own
fantasy?. But all that is but fantasye in deed / it is but a very dreme. And so
when he is awakyd out of his sleep, he fyndeth it in very truth / and than
perceyueth he right well that all that, was but a fantasy.

And in like manner, scripture calls all this life of man but a dreme and
fantasy. Dormieru^t somnium suum, et nihil inuenerint omnes viri di uitiarum in
manibus suis. These wise men says scripture, when they be awaked out of their
sleep, none of all these fantasayes whereof they dremyd before, they than find
in their hands. For when death shakes them out of their dremes, and makes
them to awake: they must than depart hence with empty hands / and neither
they shall have these pleasant fantasyes of life with them, nor yet they shall
find before them the Joyful pleasures of the life to come. Better it is
therefore to wake bytymes, according to ye words this dayred of laynt Paul (
Hora est iam de somno surgere). Now it is time for us to arise out of our
sleep. A wake man out of these dremes, and fantasies / and lose not for these
dremes and fantasyes which be full uncertain / and how sone we shall for goo
them we know not / lose not I say for these transytory fantasyes, the Joys
everlasting. For when we shall be shakyd out of this sleep: if tha^ we have not
the ryghtwysnes of good living, we shall be excludyd from the kingdom of heuyn
according to the words above rehersyd. Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra
plusquam scribarum et phariseorum non intrabitisin regnum celorum. Onelesse
your ryghtwysnes be more large than was the ryghtwysenes of the scrybes and the
pharyseys, ye shall not enter in to ye kingdom of heuyn. Scripture tellyth how
that the first man Ada^ was put into a place all of pleasure, named paradyse.
In ye which was much pleasant and delycate fruit / but especyally there was
two trees, that is to say the tree of life, which was assygned unto him to
eat upon, and the tree of knowledge of good and bad, which was for bod unto
him. Almighty god gave unto him under pain of death that he should not eat of
this tree. But not withstanding this commandment, Adam following the mind of
his wife, left the tree of life which was assigned unto him, and*ate of that
other which was forbed him. For this dysobedyence, for this vnryghtwysnes, and
for brekynge of this commandment, almighty god excludyd him out of paradyse,
out of yt place of excellent pleasure, and put him into this vale of mysery,
this wretchyd world. And fynyally to the intent that the way of entresse into
that place should be kept he set before him an angel of the order of
Cherubin, and a bre^nynge swerd two egged that neither he nor yet any other of
his posteryty, should have entresse there, oneles he were justified. This,
Scripture euydently declaryth the words of our savior christ above rehersyd
(that is to say) that no man shall enter in to the kingdom of heuyn, yt has
in him any spot of sin or of vnryghtwysnes. For the which more clearly to be
showed* I will here touch three things by order. First, how the demeanor of
Ada^ represents the demeanor of every sinner in this world. The second, how
that for the brekynge of justice and dysobedyence unto the commandment of
god, we be excludyd fro the pleasure of heuyn, like wyle as he was from the
pleasures of paradise. The third, what those lettes do mean which he set in
the entresse in paradise, that no sinner can enter thither oneles he be
justified before.

Every man and woman that lives in this world, has in them by a manner of
representacyon, these two persons Adam and Eve / for they have a soul and a
body / and the soul represents Adam, and the body, Eve. For as the man
should order his wife, so should the soul rule and govern the body. And as
the wife should be ruled by her husband, so the body should be governed and
be obedyent unto the soul.

where the soul governs, there wysdom governs, there reason governs,
there Adam is master, and there is all well. where the body governs, there
folly governs, there bestelynes governs, there Eve is maystresse, and all is
amysse.

But here we shall declare three points necessary to be known. First, what
these fruytes do mean and betoken unto us. The second* when we sin by
tastynge of this fruit, and when not. Thyrdly, the great folly of Adam, and how
all sinners be in like folly.

Three manner of fruits there was i Para dyse. One that was called the fruit of
ye tree of life. This, Adam*ate not of, all the time he was in Paradyse / as
apereth. Ne forte mittat manum suam et sumat etiam de ligno vite and viuat
ineternum. Than was there another fruit of the tree, that was called the tree
of knowledge of good and bad. And the taste of this fruit, was to Adam the
fruit of death. Beside these two was the third manner of fruit / the which
neither gave life nor death / but only refresshed the eater, and was as ye
would say, Indyfferent. These three fruytes betoken three kind of pleasures that
we men taste in this would. Fruit, may well betoken unto us pleasure / because
that fruit is pleasant for to taste. And therefore these three fruytes betoken
three diverse manners of pleasures which be offered unto us in this life.

THe first manner of pleasures be the pleasures of life / which fruit comyth of
the tree of life / that is to say (of Christ Jesu) which is called in Scriptutes
(the tree of life). Out of this tree spryngeth much dylycyouse fruit. whereof
to taste is to be made partyners of ever lasting life. we taste of this fruit
when we delight in his words, when we conforte us in his doctrine, when we Joy
in his most blessed birth, passion, and Resurreccyon, when we take pleasure in
redyng of his most gpacyous life. And generally all pleasures in god and godly
things, is the fruit that spryngeth of this most gracious tree. For by him
and of him aryseth all these gracious pleasures unto us. And for the tastynge
of this fruit, we shall have the reward of everlasting life.

we taste and ete of this fruit when for the love of Christ we give alms
unto the nedy, and do forgive iuiuryes done unto us. when we pray, fast, watch
/ any of these to do for the love of Christ, is to taste of the fruit and of
the tree of everlasting life.

THe second manner of pleasures, be the pleasures of death, and bring our souls
to everlasting death. And these be such pleasures as be forbed by the law of
god. They be forbed by the commandments of god. who that follows these
pleasures, and taste of this fruit: breketh the commandments of almighty
god. Such be they that lyuyth in auowtry / the man that takes an other woman
beside his wife, and that woman that takyth an other man beside her husband /
they that beleuyth not trewly of almighty god and of his doctrine / they that
commyt periuryes and wyllyngly for swear them self upon a book or other wise /
they that break their holy days, and commyth not to the service of god, and to
here the word of god as other christen people do. They that brybe and stele,
and by wrongful means get other men's goods / they that do not not due
honor to their fathers and mothers / they that commyt, assent, or council to
any murder doing. They that bear false witness, or bring up false slanders
of their neighbors. All these be dedly pleasures and be the fruit of death.
And the synall reward of these pleasures and of this truyte, shall be
everlasting death.

THe third manner of pleasures be those that be indyfferent / so that neither
we shall have great reward for them, ne yet great punysshment. And these
pleasures, be necessary eating, drynkyng, keeping, walkyng, and speaking, and
necessary recreacyon. For these we shall neither have everlasting punysshme^t,
nor yet the reward of everlasting life. These pleasures be common to all folk,
and indifferent to good and bad / without these pleasures no man may continue.
Every man must eat, drink, and sleep. And in these, so long as they pass not
ye bonds of necessytye, neither make a man good ne bad, nor make it to deserve
other ponysshme^t or any reward by them. Thus ye perceive what is meant by
these three manner of fruits.

Now secondly I will show unto you when the tastynge of this fruit is dedly
sin.

Look man or woman, when thou folowest the desires of thy body: Eve is the
ruler.

When thou folowes the desire of thy soul and of thy reason: than Adam is
orderer. Therefore saint Austyn says. when you begynnest to feel in thy self
any unlawful pleasure arise: there Eve he says, tastyth of the apple, and
offreth it unto Adam for to eat / yet Adam is at his lyberty whether he will
taste of this apple, ye or nay. That is to say, after that the body be styred
to uncleanness, the ^^reasonable soul is at his lyberty whether it will assent
to the styrynges and unclean delytes of the flesh ye or nay. But if it
assent, than Adam eteth of the Apple.

Also if thy reason and thy will do assent to this unlawful pleasure: than
doste thou taste of this dedly fruit of death. For by this fruit is betokened
(as I said before) all unlawful pleasures / specially those which be contrary
unto the commandment of almighty god. wha^ so ever for our pleasure to be
done, we break ye commandment of almighty god: than we taste of this
myscheuous fruit. Our flesh and carnal desires, are prone and ready to taste
of this fruit of death, and of all yt naught is and perilous unto our souls.
Our flesh would have ye carnal pleasures, the worldly richesse, the
co^modytees and honors of this life. All these desires arise in us by the
reason of our flesh / and no man lives, but he felyth in him self some
desire of these. Nevertheless, if his soul and will assent not unto these
desires: yet Adam has not tastyd of the fruit of death, nor has as yet broken
the commandment of almighty god. Many a good man, and many a good woman,
felyth in them self great temptacyo^s, great mocio^s, and styringes / now to
lechery, now to pride, now to couetise. But if they be sorry for them in their
souls, and resyst and wrastyll against them, and keep them self so, that they
do not asse^t inwardly by their wylles to follow these same mocyons, Yet they
keep them fro the eating of the apple. This is no sin in them / but it shall
be greatly to their meryt. These batailes which they make against the sterynges
and desires, so long as Adam is not wyllyng to take and follow this pleasure,
all is well. So long as the reason of man is content to forbere, and stryueth,
there is no sin. But when Adam (that is to say man's reason and will)
agrees to the eating of this apple, when he does assent and is content to take
any pleasure contrary to the commandment of god: than is sin done, than is
sin committed in thy soul, though thou never made further in doing the deed.
This consent is syn. Mark what I say. Thou man see peradventure a fair
woman, and thou haste a carnal liking of her, and a pleasure to behold her /
so yt thy body is styred and moved with an unclean desire to have her at thy
will / if thy soul do not assent unto this steryng and mocyon of thy body, yet
art thou safe front any certain syn / except thy negligence to repel this
thought fro the, and ye suffrau^ce of it to abide in thy mind without any
resistance / which by the fathers is thought to be sin. But if thy will ones
asse^t to this desire of thy flesh, though they never go any forther, or
though thou never come to the actual deed, thou do offend and sin deedly
by this only consent of thy self. Nevertheless, if thou revoke this consent
betymes, and repent thy self, it is much less offece, and more pardonable,
than if thou performed thy desire with the actual deed. By this that I have
said, thou may perceive when thou do sin by tastyng of this fruit. Now
let us here the great folly of sinners.

Many there be which follow the steps of the old Adam / they leave the most
profitable fruit and take the worse. Adam left the fruit of life, and tastyd
of the fruit of death.

Adam, all the while that he was in Paradyse, he never touched the tree of life
/ as plainly it does appear by the words written in the same storye. Ne forte
sumat etiam de ligno vite et comedat et viuat in eternu^. That is as much to
say, leest peradventure he eat of the tree of life, and so live for ever.

Almighty god would betymes have him excludyd out of paradyse, leest he should
have etyn of the tree of life, like as he had done before of the tree of death.
Adam tasted of the tree of death, and so brake the commandment of almighty god
thereby / whereby he became mortal, and was assured for to dye. But if he had
absteined therfro and kept him self to the fruit of the tree of life: he
should never have dyed, but have lived ever lastyngly. Thus all sinners do /
they leave the gracyous fruit whereby they might meryt the life everlasting, and
boldly taste and eat of the pestylent fruit, whereby they deserve the death
everlasting. If Adam had had any like example before him of some punysshment
taken for sin, as was taken upon him self for brekyng of this co^maun
dement: it is full like that he would have esche wed that offense / but he
never saw example of such ponysshement. And for this co^syderacyon the madness
of sinners in tastyng of this unlawful fruit is much more grievous and odyous
bebefore the tye^ of god / for wha^ they have not only ye example of this sore
punisshment, but many other mo before their iyes: yet they will not beware, but
still co^tynue in their folly and madness. This one example, if there were no mo
written in all scripture, might suffyse to make the sinner to repress and leave
his wretchyd pleasures that be against the laws and commandments of
almighty god / seeing so grievous punysshme^t was taken upon the first man Adam
for so little a defaut. This grievous punysshme^t was taken upon him for eating
of an apple. Thus he yt was so perfytely created and made by the hands of god
not many hours before and was lifted up to such a dygnyty. Yet for the first
faut yt ever he made, and for so little a faut, he was spoiled of his dygnyte:
and cast out of Paradyse, the place of excellent pleasures, into mysery and
wretchydnes / and finally stricken with death / and not only in him self, but
in all his postorytye. If this one defaut in him that never herd ne saw any
example of punysshment before, were thus sore punysshed / how grievously shall
in other men the multitude of defautes be toutmentyd, which has herd and
seen many great and grievous punysshmentes taken for sin, and for brekyng of
the commandments of almighty god?. If this little defaut was thus roughly
entreated / how roughly shall be punysshed the horrible and abhomynable
trespasses that stynke before the nostrels of god, and cry vengeance at his
ears, when so openly without any change, they be committed and done before
the face and iyen of god, and provoke him to be reuengyd of them. For what may
ye suppose or thynk, when this first defaut of man which never offended before,
nor saw any correccyon done before for sin, was thus straytly correctyd, but
yt much more straightly the contynuaunce and long living in syn, hepyng syn
upon syn from day to day / and after so many examples of correccyon done and
showed before, shall at the last be grievously correctyd and punysshed, if
betymes they will not repent the^ self and sue for remedy.

The great folly of Adam, apereth many wise.

First in that, yt he would prefer the pleasure of his life before the
pleasure of god, Secondly in that, that he left the fruit of the tree of life,
and tastyd of the fruit of the tree of death. For by this means he left the
Joys of Paradise, the which he might have kept, and also was thrown out
thereof into the myseryes of this life, which he endured by ye space of. M.
years almost. And at the last he suffered death, which he might have eschewyd.
And finally after his death was kept in the prison of darkness, called ( limbus
patru^) from the face of almighty god, and fro the joys of heuyn by three
thousand years. And all this ponysshme^t fell upon him for the tastyng of an
apple. was not this a wonderful folly?.

But yet greater is the madness of them that follow his steps / in the which
condycyon be all sinners that breketh the commandment of almighty god. They
prefer the pleasures of their flesh, before the pleasure of god. They taste
of the fruit of the tree of death, and leave ye fruit of life vntastyd of. And
therefore as Adam lost the Joys of Paradyse: so they lose the Joys of a clear
conscience. As Adam was cast into mysery: so they ever after endure mysery, and
suffer the frettynge and gnawynges of their troubled conscience, which has a
contynuall remors and a corsy of their sinful dealing. Adam suffered temporal
death / and they shall suffer everlasting death. Ada^ was kept in dark prison
fro the face of god, and fro the Joys of heuyn by three. M. years / and they
shall be kept in the prison of hell from the face of god and all the gloryouse
court of heuyn, by innumerable thousands and thousades of years / that is to
say, for ever.

By this than ye may learn to know the great folly of sinners, that for a little
transytory pleasure, they do exclude them self from the place of ever lasting
pleasure, and for the same also they must needs be thrown into ever lastyng
mysery. Adam, as ye have herd, might have continued many years in Paradise /
and finally at the last should have been translate into the Joys of heuyn / but
for the casting of an apple contrary to the commandment of god, he was soon
excluded from thens, and so lived in this world in pain and mysery almoost.
M. year / and after his death, yet was he kept fro the sight and face of
almighty god by the space of three thousand year and more.

But ye will say unto me after this manner. Sir we were borne and ordeynyd for
to have the Joys and pleasures of heuyn for our inherytaunce / and it was
derely bought for us by the bitter passion of our savior Christ Jesu, and by
the same it was assuredly promised unto us.

To this I answer and say, that no man's inherytaunce is so sure unto him,
but he may lose it by his folly. we have herd of many noble men, and great
Earls and Dukes, that for their mysbehauour against their Prince, for their
treason and traitoury have lost their inheritance, and yet they were borne
unto the same, and their au^cetours many years before, had possessyo^ thereof.

And you christian man, when so ever you co^myttest any dedly iyn, you deest great
treason unto thy Prince ye, unto ye prince of all princes our savior christ
Jesu / for to him yy have promised to keep thy faith and treuth, and to forsake
the devil and all his works. This promise thou made when thou becam a christian
man and received the sacrament of Baptyme. But contrary to this promise thou
haste done many times you have falsed this promise, thou haste vyolate this
promise, and betrayed thy prince. Thou have folowyd the council of his enemy
and set at naught the commandment of thy most gracyous and loving prince.
That strong hold which he most specially desired, and with blody sweet
labored to have gote^ and kept unto him self (yt is to say thine heart) you
have betrayed into the hands of his enemy the devil, and let him have
entresse there, and suffers him to reign there, and there to make his
do^ghyll against thy promise, against the commandment of thy prince, and
therefore ryghtwysly thou shall be excluded from thine inheritance. And where
thou say that our savior christ Jesu bought this inheritance with his most
bitter passion for the it is of a troth. But this is more to thy
condempnacyon. For the more pain yt he has taken to bring the to this
inheritance, the greater is thine unkindness, and the more odyous and
detestable is thy treason and traytory toward him But know this for a certain
/ he nether bought this inherytau^ce for the, ne made promise thereof, but with
condition / which condicyon if thou keep, you shall be sure to have this
inherytaunce / and if thou break it, than shall thou be sure to forgoo the same.

Ye here daily of promyses and of leases that be made with certain condycyons
/ that he that takes this lease, shall do thus or thus as the case requyryth.
And if case be that he observe these condycyons, well / this lease is good and
sure. But if the condycyon be broken, the lease is of no value.

Oh christen man, the very condycyon of thy lease, is this. Si vis ad vitam
ingredi, serua mandata. If thou wylt enter into the kingdom of life, thou must
observe and keep the commandments of god. This condycyon obseruyd, thou
shall enter. But if this condycyon be broken, than farewell, thy lease is
broken.

And therefore man, if thou wylt not observe this condicyon (that is to say) if
thou wylt not keep the commandments of our Savior Christ, neither look for
to have this inherytaunce, nor that any promise shall be performed unto the,
or that any benefyte shall arise unto the by the passion and precious blood of
our savior christ Jesu.

Oh wretchid sinners, Oh most stynkyng lechours, that live thus synfully
against ye laws and commandments of our savior Jesu that so waste your
bodies and dystroye your souls in the foul sin of Lechery / to you this
answer appertains. And you most horrible bawdes, the which keep this
foul bawdry and brodelry in your houses, stynkynge both in the sight of god
and also before the world. And you that use these blasphemous oaths and great
periuryes, and that break your holy days ordained by the church. To you and
unto all other such that breketh the laws and commandments of our lord,
this word appertains. I say unto you that ye shall never enjoy that
inherytaunce above in heaven, because ye will not endeavor your self to keep
the condycyons thereunto belonging. Ye will not labor to get a ryghtwyse life
/ and therefore not I, but our savior says unto you the words above rehersyd,
Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra plusquam Scribarum et Phariseorum no^
intrabitia in regnum celorum.

NOw thyrdly we have to speak of ye stopnes that be in the way, that (without
suffycyent Justyce) shall let many to enter / and these three be they. First,
the double two edged sword. The second, the brennynge flambe.

The third, the angels of the order of Cherubyn. Every one of these three, if
there be not in us perfyte Justyce, shall let us from the entresse into the
most gloryouse kyngedome.

Shortly to say if there be dedly sin in us, it must take punysshemente by
the two edged sword / the which of that one side sleeth the body, and of that
other, the soul / and both at one stroke. If there be any venyall sins
abydyng in us, they must be clean scoured by the flambe of this said fire / and
they shall be swyn gedere they pass. If there be neither deedly sin nor
venyall sin in us remaining / Yet if our souls be not apparellyd
accordyngly with good works, we shall not enter there. For the angels shall so
duly and streyghtly examyn and make search of every such person that shall
covet or prese to enter there, that nothing can escape ne pass with out their
straight examynacyon.

First the sword betokens that terryryble punysshment, that most dreadful
punysshment, that punysshment of everlasting death both in soul and body.

There is a great dyfference betwyrte this sword and the sword of temporal
Princes / and especyally for two causes.

This is a wonderful sword / for at the first stroke it sleeth both soul
and body. A kings sword does not so. Quum occiderint corpus, non amplius
quid faciant. when that sword has slain the body, it can not rage no
further. But this sword sleeth both the body and the soul. And in a token
thereof it is two edged. Forthermore the death stroke that this sword does
give, takyth not away the feeling from a man / neither of the soul nor of the
body. The kings sword takes away the feeling from the body forthwith / for
pryck it, beat it, bounche it, brenne it / it felyth none of all these pains.
But contrary wise, this sword gives rather a more perfyte selynge, and a more
clear perceiving of the pain than had the persons before they were stryken
with it. And therefore our savior tellyth of the great pain that the rich
glotton felt, which lay dampened and broyled in the fire of hell. Amongst
other of his pains, he felt so great and so paynfull a dryenesse in his
tongue, that he was feign to beg one drop of lycour to refressh his tongue,
and could not get it in his thyrst. Many sinners peradventure would be glad yt
they should have neither feeling nor being, neither in soul nor body, after
this life / for than they should feel no pain. But that can not be so / for
they shall have perfyte feeling, and very perfytely feel the grievous pains
that they shall be in / which shall be as greuouse as though they were in the
contynuall pains of death every month. desiderabu^t mori et mors fugiet ab
eis. Their pains shall be so excedyngly grievous, that they shall wysshe to dye
a thousand times, and death shall always flee from them. They shall never dye,
but live ever in the contynuall pains of death. Our savior says of Judas,
considering the pains that he should suffer for his offense, Melius ei esset
si natus non fuisset homo ille. It had been better for him that he never had been
borne. which word may in like wise be said of all them that shall be excludyd
from the heuyn celestyall* into the dongeon of dampnacyon / for it had been
much better for them that they never had been borne into this world, than to
endure that grievous stroke of that two edged sword.

By this than ye may conceyne, that this sword meanyth everlasting ponyshment
/ and that it shall be a stop to all the^ that shall be found in dedly sin
(that is to say) that has broken the laws and the commandments of
almighty god and has so commyt any dedly sin, of the which here before
their death and departure hence out of this world, they have not suffycyently
repe^tyd them. Nevertheless, who that either has taken sufficyent repentance
in this life, or else has trewly kept the commandments of almighty god / to
the^ this sword shall be no stop nor any impedyme^t. The stroke of this sword
can not anoye them, nor they shall not be stryken with this sword.

THe flambe of this sword betokenyth unto us the fire of purgatory / ye which
is ordeynyd for them that be found in any venyall sin / for every venyall
lynne must be scouryd out of our souls, ere we can be suffryd to have any
interest. But here peradventure ye will ask me what venyall sins be. To this
quest yen saint Austyn says that venyall sins be these sins that we daily
commyt / without the which the fraylty can not co^tynue in this life. In to
these manner of sins we daily fall and offend / when we eat and drink more
than very necessytye requyryth / when we speak more idle words than nedyth to
be spoken / when we hold our peace and le just cause to speak, as in telling
other folks their fautes, and so forbere for lothnesse of dyspleasure / wha^
we be more neclygent in prayer tha^ were profitable for us / when we be slack
in having pytye and compassyon upon the pore / when we cheryshe and nourysshe
our bodies to delycatly without cause / wha^ we let the time pass from us
vnfruytefully / when we iangle ydelly and vnfruytefully / wha^ we be dull and
slepy in the service of god / when we speak more roughly tha^ the cause
requyryth / or again flater more than is expedyent. These and other like unto
those (as says saint Austyn) be such as must be scouryd in the fire of
purgatory. But ye will say again / Sir no man lyuyth so parfytely but yt he
daily fallyth in some of these. A troth it is / and therefore the same saint
Austyn says, that the holy saint lyuyd not without many of these. But when so
ever they fell in any of these, they were sorry and knew their offense. And so
must we do when we so fall in any of these, we must be sorry therefore, and
knowledge our offenses / and almighty god will than be merciful unto us if we
so do. But in no wise we may repute them as naught, and rekyn them to be no
sins, for tha^ we shall find them great sins. And especyally when we shall
approach into that fire, we may not therefore I say reco^pt them as nothing /
for than they shall increase upon us daily more and more, and that so largely
that the number of them shall be importable. These during this life may be
lightly put aside by betynge of our breasts, and by oste^dynge the words in
the Pater noster, Dimitte nobis debita uostra, forgive us father our dettes, By
vysityng also of the^ that be seek / by co^fortynge of them that be in trouble
/ by forgyuynge of our iniuryes / by pacye^t suffrynge of aduersytye and by
many other such. But we may not account them as naught / for saint Austyn
says / though they be little, yet many lytels makyth a much. It is but a little
thing he says one corn of gravel / but yet thou may ouerlade thy bote
with many of them. Thou may put so many corns in to thy bote, that it shall
be ouerchargyd / and finally drowned. And so like wise if thou be neglygent of
these little sins / you may hepe so many of them together, that finally they
shall drown thy soul. And in another place the same saint Austyn does like
them to little blaines and scabbes / and the dedly sins to great mortal
wounds. Many blaynes or scabbes in a man or a woman, though they slay not, yet
they defourme and dysfygure the face and the body of man, and makyth it lothsom
to be lokyd upon. And so says he, these little sins defourme our souls, and
makyth them ungoodly to be looked upon / and unworthy the presence of almighty
god. They may be also lykenyd to the rust of a knyfe, and the dedly sins to
the cancre. The rust that is not cankeryd may more easily be removed with a
little rubbing and scouring, tha^ may the very cancre, And so likewise these
little sins, albeit they cancrenat the soul like as does the great sins:
yet they rust the soul. And therefore they must have a scouryng / either in
this world, or else in the fire of purga ory. we shall not escape nor pass by
that flambe, till time we be clean scoutyd from all venyall sins. A troth it
is, the two edged sword can not harm the, if thou have no dedly sin in thy
soul. But if the brennynge flambe shall swing away thy venyall sins ere
thou pass that way.

THe third stop that we shall find before us when we shall covet to enter,
shall be Cherubyn. Cherubyn betokenyth the straight examynacyon that shall be
made of every person the which shall pass and enter into that kingdom / for
these angels shall give head that all such as shall enter there, be
accordyngly aparelled with the justice of good works. Ye se that in the kings
court, the porters standing* before the gate, will not suffer any person to
enter that is not in honest apparel. For if his garment be raggydor torn, he
shall not enter there. In like manner these blyssyd angels of Cherubyn, which
is as much to say as ( plenitudo scientie) that is plentye of conning and
knowledge, and nothing can escape their iyes, but that they will anon perceive
if we want our apparel (that is to say) the ryghtwysenes of good works. For
it suffysyth not to them that shall enter there, if they be scouryd of their
evil works / but they must have also many good works. For of their apparel
ye prophet says, Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo? My lord who shall
inhabyt in thy tabernacle? And he answers, Qui ingreditur sine macula, et
operatur institiam, He that enters without any spot, and works rightwysenes.
we must both be clean of al scabbes of sins, and also be apparellyd with the
works of ryghtwysenes. And our savior says of him that was not apparellyd
accordyngly, that he should be bound hand and foot, and so throwe^ out into
outward darkness, where shall be weeping and gnastynge of teeth. Thou must
therefore have thy garment made of ryghtwyse works, or else thou shall not enter
into that kingdom. when thou art clensyd from dedly sin, and purged from
venyall sin / yet if there be found in the no good works, thou shall not be
suffryd to enter there. Thou must bring with the a clean garment of justice /
which was betokenyd by that white garment that was taken unto the at the
Sacrament of baptysme by the priest when he said unto the, Accipe veste^
candida^ qua^ perferas ante tribunal dn^i nr^i Jesu christi, Take here this
white garment, to the intent that thou may bring it before the trone of our
lord Jesu christ. This garment if thou have lost, or torn, or sold, thou
must study bytymes to repair it again by / some good works. But alas I fear
me that this garment be far to seek with many persons. Some has smodged this
garment with the smoke of worldly affection / some has male it and spot it
with many venyall sins / some has foul blottyd it by dedly sin / some has
made it vggly by pride / some by wrath and envy has torn it / some has made
it horrybly stynkynge by lechery / some by couytyse has clearly cast it from
them. But none of these as saint Paul says, Regnum dei possidebunt, Shall
have possessyon of the kingdom of god. we must therefore study to recover this
clean white garment again by ryghtwyse living, and keeping of the
commandments of almighty god / of the which my purpose is to speak at large
for the time that I inten^^ to be occupied with you / for doubtless as I (...)
^^hersyd unto you the words of our sauy^ur, (...) ^^etyng us all, Nisi
abundauerit, etc. Onelesse your ryghtwyse lyse be more amyle, than was the life
of the scrybes and pharyseys: ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. and
Thus than I suppose ye conceive those three things that I promised to declare.
First, how after the example of Ada^ and Eve which brake the commandment of
god: every other sinner fallyth unto sin. The, second how that for the
vnryghtwysnes of sin, and brekynge of the commau^deme^tes of god: all sinners
not amendynge their life, shall be excludyd from the intresse into the kingdom
of heuyn. The third, that there stands such stoppes in our way, that oneles
we begin ones to enfouime our life by the true keeping of the commandments
of god, to recover again this vnryghtwysnes that we have lost, we shall never
have entresse into that kingdom.

wherefore it shall be expedyent for every true christen man and woman to learn
to know the commandments of our lord / to the entente that he may endeavor
him self to keep them / and so by the keeping of them, he may recover again
the possybylytye to enter into that joyful and glorious place / the which he
grant us, qui cum patre et spiritu sancto viuit et regnat deus.

Amen.
Finis.
Newly Enprynted at London, by me w. Rastell, the. xxviii. day of June / the
year of our lord. M. CCCCC. xxxii.

Cum priuilegio.

These books be to sell at London in Southwarke by me Peter Treuerys.


